
                              1 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                     December 1, 2016 Thursday 8:18 PM GMT

It won't be easy to stop Brexit. But here are four ways to do it;
Chip away, every day. This is a long game but, as harsh reality bites, time will
be on the side of the remainers

BYLINE: Martin Kettle

SECTION: OPINION

LENGTH: 912 words


Those of us with only a smattering of knowledge about the ancient world know one
thing about Cato the Elder. During Rome's long wars against Hannibal, Cato ended
every speech in the senate with the same words: "Carthage must be destroyed."

" Brexit must be stopped" is unlikely to last as long as Cato's catchphrase has
managed to. But it focuses the mind. Those who think Brexit must be stopped are
not the majority. But they have a case and a cause, and they are right. So how
might stoppage be achieved?

Probably not by a political movement headed by Tony Blair. The former prime
minister is not heading back into frontline politics. But he is one of the
biggest names to insist that Brexit is not yet irrevocable. He told the New
Statesman last week that Brexit " can be stopped if the British people decide
that, having seen what it means, the pain-gain cost-benefit analysis doesn't
stack up". And on that he is absolutely right.

When inflation rises and growth slows next year, make sure Brexit's role is
clearly spelled out

Blair carries so much baggage that it is inconceivable he either could or should
play the leading role in any campaign. The Iraq war was wrong and it is no part
of my argument that the past can be brushed aside. But Blair has serious things
to say about Brexit that serious people ought to listen to. It's time his
critics were big enough to give him a break. The 439-70 House of Commons vote
this week against the SNP's effort to sanction Blair for the events of 2003 may
suggest there is some space for the former Labour leader to at least be heard.
But don't hold your breath.

If Brexit is to be stopped it will require time, a change of public mood, and an
alliance. The SNP, Greens, Liberal Democrats, significant parts of the Labour
party and a minority of Tories would all have roles to play. People from outside
politics are crucial too. This week's joint press conference by Nick Clegg,
Chuka Umunna and Anna Soubry was a start. But as Clegg says, to turn the
referendum around needs the people's consent, not a procedural trick. This will
only happen if the public mood changes. Anti-Brexit campaigners should try to
change it, and here's how.

The first point is to be clear who they need to be talking to, rather than
squabbling about which of them is entitled to do the talking. The name of this
game is changing minds. So there is absolutely no point crafting a campaign that
is aimed at fundamentalist Eurosceptics who never wanted Britain to be part of
the EU in the first place. Nor is there any point in focusing on racists and
xenophobes. People who don't like foreigners or people with coloured skin are
not going to change their minds.

But that leaves a lot of people who voted for Brexit, in hundreds of thousands
of cases, on the basis of their own experience. They were sold a false
prospectus by the leave campaign; but they need a better one, which offers them
hope, support, material improvements in their lives, and confidence. Theresa May
gets this, though she is doomed to promote Brexit and not to stop it. Those who
want to stop Brexit need to learn this lesson: the aim of any campaign must be
to persuade these voters that there is a better way of getting the things they
want than leaving the EU. Don't berate, persuade. And get out of the bubble.

The second key principle is to accept that this is a long game. Brexit won in
June 2016. It won't be turned around quickly. Stopping Brexit is on the margins
of political possibility right now. It could be that Brexit will be slowed by
the supreme court's ruling, due in January. But that's just the start. Opponents
of Brexit should settle in. Time is on their side.

The negotiations with the EU will take a minimum of two years - longer if there
is a transitional phase. The pressure to bring things to a head will be enormous
and will grow, both in Britain and in the other 27 EU countries. British
opponents of Brexit must be EU reformers too.

Related:  Tony Blair: Brexit could be stopped if Britons change their minds

The third point is to remember Cato. Chip away, every day. Every time something
new and troubling happens, make it clear that things would be different if
Brexit were stopped. This week's immigration figures showed a pre-referendum
surge. Without Brexit this wouldn't have happened. Hate crimes have
proliferated. Brexit shares the blame for that. When inflation rises and growth
slows next year, make sure Brexit's role is spelled out. If ministers abandon
the single market in favour of migration curbs, make Brexit's responsibility
clear. Unless anti-Brexit campaigners have established in the public mind that
there is a clear and viable no-Brexit alternative, they won't be in a position
to make the most of their opportunities.

The fourth point is the other side of the same coin. The leave campaign lied
through its teeth about the benefits of Brexit. It said there would be £350m
extra every week for the NHS. Last week the chancellor said precisely nothing
about any extra NHS spending in the next four years. And look what is actually
happening to the NHS. The leave campaign landed the May government with a huge
promise that it cannot deliver. The opposition parties need to link the two at
every opportunity.

Stopping Brexit will not be easy. Recovering from a big defeat is hard. The
campaign is more likely to fail than to succeed. The Brexiteers will fight very
dirty. But the prize is immense - and Hannibal was defeated in a day.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2016 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                              2 of 1000 DOCUMENTS



                                  The Guardian

                      January 10, 2017 Tuesday 7:00 AM GMT

Brexit weekly briefing: May unclarifies strategy as EU converges;
PM hints at leaving single market, then insists hard Brexit is not inevitable,
amid turbulence of Sir Ivan Rogers' resignation

BYLINE: Jon Henley and Peter Walker

SECTION: POLITICS

LENGTH: 1623 words


Welcome to the Guardian's weekly Brexit briefing, a summary of developments as
Britain edges towards the EU exit. If you'd like to receive it as a weekly
email, please sign up here (and check your spam folder if you don't see it in
your inbox).

Producing the Guardian's independent, in-depth journalism takes a lot of time
and money. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters - and it
might well be your perspective, too. If you value our Brexit coverage, become a
Guardian Supporter and help make our future more secure. Thank you.

The big picture

Maybe we should all start taking this "full Brexit" - or, as my colleague Dan
Roberts called it - "train crash Brexit" idea seriously.

Or, of course, maybe not.

Theresa May gave what many said was her clearest hint yet that Britain will
leave the single market when it exits the EU, telling Sophy Ridge on Sky News
that immigration control (incompatible with single market membership) would be
her top priority and that she was not interested in keeping "bits of membership
of the EU".

The prime minister said she wanted "UK companies to be able to trade in and
within the EU and European companies to operate and trade in the UK", but
stressed that Brexit was about "getting the right relationship" with the EU from
outside the bloc:

Often people talk as if somehow we are leaving the EU but we still want to kind
of keep bits of membership of the EU. We are leaving. We are coming out. We
will... have control of our borders, control of our laws.

A report from the thinktank Civitas gave the "full Brexit" idea legs, saying
that while without a trade deal UK firms might face £5bn on their exports,
Britain could levy £13bn on EU imports - leaving £8.8bn for an industrial policy
including research credits and cash for disadvantaged regions.

But May being May, no sooner had everyone responded to what they thought she'd
said - including sterling, which dipped to its lowest level since October - than
she denied it, insisting on Monday it was wrong to predict a "hard Brexit" :

I'm tempted to say the people who are getting it wrong are those who print
things saying I'm talking about a hard Brexit, that a hard Brexit is
inevitable... I don't accept the terms hard or soft Brexit.

All this followed an already turbulent week in which Britain's highly regarded
(in the EU and the Foreign Office, at any rate) man in Brussels, Sir Ivan
Rogers, resigned, accusing the government of "muddled thinking" and "ill-founded
arguments".

Rogers, who reportedly criticised May to her predecessor, David Cameron, before
resigning and warned of the danger of a "disorderly Brexit" (in which the UK
walks away from the EU without any kind of deal), was promptly replaced by
another career diplomat, Sir Tim Barrow.

The view from Europe

At the start of the year in which Britain will, if all goes according to May's
plan, trigger article 50 and begin the process of leaving the EU, Joseph Muscat,
prime minister of Malta - which holds the EU's rotating presidency - said the
bloc had never been more unified than in its policy towards Brexit.

I spoke and visited basically all other 26 member states and there's a...
convergence on the attitude towards Brexit. I have never seen such a convergence
within the European family.

The European commission paid tribute to Rogers, saying it regretted "the loss of
a very professional, very knowledgeable, while not always easy interlocutor and
diplomat" as EU observers predicted his departure would be a major loss for the
UK.

Marine Le Pen, the anti-EU Front National leader who is widely expected to make
it to the second round of France's presidential elections this year, said that
if she won she would demand control of France's borders, laws and economic and
monetary policy from Brussels, and then call an in/out referendum.

In news that will have little impact on the UK's exit talks unless he actually
wins (in which case he will resign as the European parliament's chief Brexit
negotiator), the veteran federalist and former Belgian prime minister Guy
Verhofstadt said he would run for the presidency of the 751-seat assembly. He is
though unlikely to get very far.

Meanwhile, back in Westminster

With May's government visibly struggling over its approach to Brexit, surely
this would be the time for the main opposition party to take full advantage? Not
when that party is Labour, seemingly.

Interviewed on Sky News on Sunday immediately before May, Labour's deputy
leader, Tom Watson made the slightly eye-opening claim that it was unfair to be
asked what his party's position was on immigration after leaving the EU.

Watson did argue this was mainly because Labour - along with the rest of the
country - still has no idea what sort of post-Brexit future May is seeking to
chart. But his comments underline the fact that Labour is divided on what it is
seeking from the Brexit process, especially over the free movement of EU
nationals.

While Watson indicated he would support some new if undefined controls over
immigration - a stance also espoused by Labour's shadow Brexit secretary, Keir
Starmer - that position is by no means unanimous, with the party leader, Jeremy
Corbyn, still refusing to endorse any limitations on free movement.

At least the Liberal Democrats have a united front on this, though. Well, not
quite any more. Party grandee Vince Cable has said he now believes a "more
rational" post-Brexit immigration policy will involve controls on movements from
the EU.

"There is no great argument of liberal principle for free EU movement; the
economics is debatable and the politics is conclusively hostile," Cable wrote in
the New Statesman. (A Lib Dem spokesman was brutal: "Vince's views are his own;
he is not a member of parliament and does not speak for the party.")

You should also know:

     ·    Scotland's PM, Nicola Sturgeon, reiterated that she would hold a
          second referendum on Scottish independence in the event of a hard
          Brexit.
     ·    Norway's PM predicted a "a very hard Brexit" because the UK's 40-year
          membership of the EU has left it lacking negotiating experience.
     ·    Senior civil servants disillusioned over Brexit preparations are
          considering stepping down amid growing tensions with Downing Street.
     ·    A top Canadian trade negotiater said the UK risks a "catastrophic"
          Brexit because the government is so dismissive of trade experts.
     ·    The UK services sector grew at its fastest pace in more than 18 months
          in December as the economy continued to shrug off Brexit worries.
     ·    The Bank of England's chief economist said his profession is in crisis
          after failing to foresee the 2008 crash and misjudging the impact of
          the Brexit vote.
     ·    The environment secretary, Andrea Leadsom, promised a bonfire of
          regulations for farmers after Brexit.
     ·    Lord Wolfson, pro-leave chief executive of clothes retailer Next,
          urged the government to lay out some of the core principles of its
          Brexit strategy.
     ·    Britain risks losing (EURO)40bn of direct EU funding once it leaves
          the bloc, according to UK parliament figures.
     ·    Some 42% more people applied for Irish passports in 2016 than in the
          year before the Brexit vote, Irish government figures showed.
     ·    A 32-year-old man born to German parents in Britain who has lived here
          all his was told to take a citizenship test.


                   Read these:

Leading Brexiter Michael Gove argues at BrexitCentral that Britain must get on
and leave the EU as cleanly and quickly as possible because "the sooner we
leave, the more we can do to deliver the change people voted for". Anything less
would be a would be a "fake Brexit", he says:

Those supporters of the EU who still haven't come to terms with the referendum
result... want to complicate and obfuscate the process in the hope that the
public appetite for change will dissipate so they can secure a relationship with
the EU which is as close as possible to the status quo. That's why we mustn't
miss the wood for the trees. That's why we need to deliver a Full Brexit, not
settle for Fake Brexit.

In the New Statesman, George Easton says 2017 will be the year the other EU
states take back control of Brexit, showing up the sovereignty conferred by the
referendum for the illusion he believes it is:

It was Britain that voted to leave, but it is Europe that will decide how it
does... For this reason, Westminster, rather than obsessing over what the UK
wants, should devote greater attention to what Europe wants. The irony of Brexit
is that the internal affairs of EU member states have never mattered more: in
2017 it is not Britain that will take back control - it is Europe.

And for Brexit aficionados, Alex Barker's anatomy of a Brexit transition deal -
why it is necessary, what it must contain, when it must be agreed, how it could
become the crunch issue, and why Rogers quit over it - in the Financial Times
(paywall) is essential reading.

And if you're in need of a little light relief after all that, my Guardian
colleague Phil Daoust devised a splendidly tragicomic A-Z of Brexit that you can
read right here. A brief sample to whet the appetite:

Ja Obsolete German expression.  Overwhelming majority Previously known as a
"slim majority".  World Trade Organisation A remote and unwieldy multinational
bureaucracy - but our kind of remote and unwieldy multinational bureaucracy.

Tweet of the week:

Peter pretty much nailing it here...

Fearing her position on Brexit was starting to emerge, Theresa May has decided
to un-clarify it again. https://t.co/fCxIixzjQw - Peter Walker (@peterwalker99)
January 9, 2017

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


