
Treasury 'talking down Brexit ' ; Officials are fixated on negatives of leaving EU , says May ally Nick Timothy Hammond accused of being 'on manoeuvres ' as well as Johnson Both ministers warned to 'stop their games ' or risk bad deal from Brussels Brexit rivals urged to stop squabbling and support PM
THE Treasury 's reluctance even to `` mention the positives '' of leaving the European Union risks Britain receiving a bad Brexit deal , Theresa May 's former chief of staff warns today . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Nick Timothy says that Philip Hammond 's department has failed to emphasise the `` opportunities of Brexit '' and accuses the Chancellor of being on `` manoeuvres '' . Ahead of a key speech by Mrs May in Florence tomorrow , Mr Timothy says that the Prime Minister `` deserves the full support of her ministers , Leavers and Remainers alike '' . Boris Johnson was accused of undermining Mrs May 's Brexit strategy when he set out his own vision in an unauthorised 4,200-word article last week . But Mr Timothy 's article suggests that Mr Hammond 's failure to promote the positives of Brexit has been equally damaging to the Prime Minister . Mr Timothy says : `` Boris Johnson and Philip Hammond ... must understand that the surest route to a bad deal , or no deal at all , is to go on behaving as they are . They must stop their games now , because the stakes for Britain are too high . '' Mrs May 's Brexit speech in Florence is intended to break the deadlock in negotiations with Brussels . The Prime Minister will discuss the speech with her Cabinet this morning after securing a truce with Mr Johnson over the country 's future payments to the EU . She is expected to tell her ministers she will try to resolve the deadlock in Europe by bypassing Michel Barnier , the European Union 's chief Brexit negotiator , and liaising directly with European leaders including Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron . She said ahead of her trip to the UN this week : `` The negotiations are structured within the European Union so of course the council has delegated a mandate to the commission , the commission has appointed Michel Barnier , but the decision will always be one taken by leaders . '' Mr Johnson , who was said to be prepared to resign as Foreign Secretary over concerns that Mrs May was moving towards a `` soft Brexit '' , before he stepped back from the brink , will now appear alongside her when she speaks in Florence . He will be joined by Mr Hammond , the Chancellor , after a summer of bitter fighting between the two men over Britain 's post-Brexit future . Last night , Mr Johnson and Mrs May appeared together in public for the first time since the Foreign Secretary 's article . They awkwardly greeted one another at the UN General Assembly . Mr Johnson was last night expected to join Mrs May on her flight back from New York , with the two planning to hold talks during the journey . The Prime Minister is expected tomorrow to announce plans to pay ( EURO ) 20billion to Brussels during the transition period up to 2020 before ending substantial payments . However , even before she had made the speech , senior EU officials told the Telegraph that they expected the UK to make more significant commitments to a Brexit `` divorce bill '' on top of the transitional payments . A senior EU diplomat involved in Brexit talks said : `` Goodwill gestures are not enough - it is very doubtful that EU member states would consider that offer [ ( EURO ) 20billion ] to be sufficient progress on its own . '' Writing in this newspaper , Mr Timothy says Mrs May must use her speech to set out the broad outlines of Britain 's post-Brexit relationship with the European Union . He says : `` The Prime Minister does not need to set out the exact solution tomorrow , but she can set out the Government 's parameters . These details are important but they are inherently technical . That , together with the Treasury 's reluctance to even mention the positives of leaving the EU , such as the Brexit dividend , is why the Government has not talked positively often enough about the opportunities of Brexit . `` In that respect , the Foreign Secretary was right in his Daily Telegraph column last Saturday . But this negotiation is complex , and we can not wish our way to future prosperity : we need a serious plan to cut through the complexity . '' Mr Timothy says it would be `` unacceptable '' for Britain to have to seek the agreement of the EU to change its laws after Brexit . Mr Timothy says Mrs May needs the support of both Mr Johnson and Mr Hammond , who are bitterly at odds over Brexit . Mr Hammond favours a `` businessfirst '' Brexit , with a lengthy transitional period , after which the UK will stay as close to the Single Market as possible . He is thought to want a version of the `` Swiss model '' , in which the UK would mirror EU regulations and continue to pay into the EU 's budget in order to access the Single Market . By contrast , Mr Johnson and other eurosceptic Cabinet ministers believe the UK should follow the `` Canada model '' , which would remove tariffs on goods without the need for future budget contributions . The conflicting visions of Brexit have led to high-profile public interventions by both men to promote their views . The Daily Telegraph understands that Mr Johnson has secured the support of four other eurosceptic Cabinet ministers if Mrs May appears to be moving towards a soft Brexit . It came as Marina Wheeler , Mr Johnson 's wife and a QC , said in the Spectator that Britain must leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice after Brexit , warning that the issue of sovereignty had `` mysteriously disappeared '' from the Brexit debate . Meanwhile , a senior EU official accused Mr Johnson of being `` completely out of the loop on Brexit negotiations '' . Phil Hogan , the Irish EU agriculture commissioner , said the Foreign Secretary had become a `` diminished figure '' who was acting `` strangely '' . He added that the `` signs will not be good '' for future EU relations if Mrs May was as `` vague '' as Mr Johnson in negotiations on issues such as the Irish border .
City ignores Whitehall charm offensive as Brexit patience wanes ; Despite the best efforts of politicians , many banks have moved closer to the exit door , says Lucy Burton
When Brexit Secretary David Davis made a speech at the London headquarters of Swiss bank UBS earlier this month , there was one message he wanted the City of London to hear loud and clear - it is not possible to recreate , or duplicate , another leading financial centre in Europe . It was not the first time financial institutions have heard that message since the EU referendum . One of Britain 's most successful sectors , making up 10.7pc of the UK economy , the industry has been subject to a charm offensive from senior government figures for months . Chancellor Philip Hammond used his Budget last week to reassure Britain 's £7 trillion asset management sector that it was going to get more attention after Brexit , while Theresa May met with Jamie Dimon , the boss of US bank JP Morgan , two weeks ago . But it is n't enough . JP Morgan has now begun to tell staff whether or not they will be relocating to the EU , while Goldman Sachs confirmed last week that its post-Brexit hubs would be in both Frankfurt and Paris . Lloyd Blankfein , one of the most powerful bankers in the world , has been publicly airing his Brexit concerns and support for the two EU cities on Twitter . `` Brexit is forcing us to decentralise our activities , '' he told French newspaper Le Figaro last week . `` We are getting closer to a critical moment when decisions will have to be made . '' The charm offensive is expected to ramp up in the coming months as more institutions are forced to trigger their contingency plans due to a lack of clarity on a transition period or a deal that works for them . Although European Council president Donald Tusk said last week that `` sufficient progress '' could be made on the Brexit talks when EU leaders meet on Dec 14 , many in the City have already made their plans for life after March 2019 . `` Whatever the outcome of Brexit negotiations , the EU27 have already won business from the City and now it is just a question of how much , '' says Stephen Burke , director at consultant Cordium . Many are frustrated by the lack of detail so far tabled . The Bank of England warned last month that as many as 75,000 UK finance roles could be lost without a trade deal , a number that could rise if the City does n't find an alternative to the so-called passporting rights currently enabling firms to offer services across the bloc . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , made clear last week that those passports will not be valid post-Brexit . These are the issues Hammond and May will likely address with the sector in the coming months , aware that financial institutions have run out of time . In a report sent to policymakers across Europe last week , think-tank New Financial said it was hard to see how an agreement on a transitional period could be reached before next summer . `` Perhaps we have moved through the denial and anger phase into acceptance and action , '' says Steve Grob , who is in charge of strategy for trading technology firm Fidessa . `` Nearly all firms are anticipating moving some of their operations to Europe . '' Some of these moves might be bigger than necessary . London is one of the most expensive cities in the world , and for years banks have looked to relocate support staff out of the City or cut roles altogether as machines get more sophisticated . With these issues rumbling in the background , Brexit could be a handy excuse to make unpopular changes . `` Brexit means that question [ over costs ] is being asked more frequently and with greater urgency , '' says New Financial founder William Wright . `` Brexit could be a political excuse for restructuring . '' Indeed , Brexit is not the only trigger for change . Peter Cruddas , the founder of online trading firm CMC Markets , said if it was n't Brexit it would be something else weighing on chief executives ' minds , while one banking head said his clients were looking to move business out of the UK not because of Brexit but over fears Jeremy Corbyn could become prime minister . Others are focusing efforts on Mifid 2 , a regulatory change . `` Given the number of Mifid 2 issues this side of Christmas , regulation is overshadowing Brexit at the moment , '' says Paul Mumford , a fund manager at Cavendish Asset Management . `` While there is some sound and fury regarding moves to Paris and Frankfurt , everything is still very cautious and exploratory . It 's no small thing to simply set up in another city with 500 or however many people . '' 'Perhaps we have moved through the denial and anger phase into acceptance and action '
Scotland May : I 'm sticking to my Brexit blueprint ; PM wants to keep pre-election plan to leave single market despite threats to soften exit ; May adamant Brexit talks stay on course
THERESA MAY has signalled she will not compromise over Brexit despite growing demands for a change in approach in the wake of last week 's election result . The Prime Minister is understood to be determined to enter talks in Brussels next week with a threat that Britain is prepared to leave the EU without securing a trade deal . She also wishes to stick to the preelection Conservative plan for the country to leave the single market and customs union to allow the UK to negotiate free-trade partnerships around the world and control immigration . The Daily Telegraph revealed yesterday that senior Conservative and Labour figures had begun private talks over a new cross-party plan to soften Brexit . However , within hours of details of the meetings emerging , the Prime Minister appointed Steve Baker , the leader of Parliament 's most prominent Eurosceptic group , to a key ministerial post in the Brexit department . The decision to push ahead with the original Brexit blueprint delighted Leave campaigners in the Cabinet , but caused disquiet among some junior members and other senior Tory figures . A senior Brexit minister was sacked and another resigned reportedly because of concerns that Mrs May 's plan would face stiff opposition in the Lords . Lord Bridges , a Remain-supporting minister , quit on `` policy grounds '' because he became `` convinced Brexit could n't work '' , according to reports . Sir John Major urged the Prime Minister to seek a cross-party consensus , saying : `` I think the concept of what we crudely call a hard Brexit is becoming increasingly unsustainable ... a hard Brexit was not endorsed by the electorate in this particular election . `` It would be very wise indeed to bring in much wider parliamentary opinion so that when the Prime Minister has a deal , she can be certain that she 's going to have parliamentary and public support for that deal . '' In public , Mrs May and her ministers are toning down the rhetoric they use to describe Brexit . Mrs May used her first Commons appearance since the election to call for MPs to `` come together in a spirit of national unity '' , while ardent Leave campaigner Michael Gove , the new Environment Secretary , said the hung parliament meant the Government would have to `` work with everyone '' . Guy Verhofstadt , the lead Brexit negotiator for the European Parliament , said that Brussels was `` impatiently waiting for the negotiating position of the UK Government '' . He added : `` The current uncertainty can not continue . '' Meanwhile , Germany 's finance minister , Wolfgang Schauble , mischievously suggested it was not too late for Continued on Page 5 Iain Duncan Smith : Page 18 Editorial Comment : Page 19 Continued from Page 1 Britain to reverse its decision to leave the EU . He said : `` If they wanted to change their decision , of course , they would find open doors . '' Speaking after a meeting in Paris with France 's President Emmanuel Macron , Mrs May said Brexit talks would begin next week and that `` the timetable for the negotiation remains on course '' . Asked about Mr Schauble 's comments , Mr Macron said : `` Of course the door remains open , always open until the Brexit negotiations come to an end . '' Mrs May , however , told ministers yesterday that she would not be scrapping the Brexit White Paper , published in February , which promised to withdraw from the single market , tackle immigration and leave the customs union . Brexit talks , however , may face delay if the Conservatives have still not reached an agreement with the Democratic Unionist Party that will enable Mrs May to lead a minority government . A delay to the Queen 's Speech , which had been scheduled for Monday , also appears inevitable because there is no agreement between the two parties on what should be in it .
'How we kept our property fund open ' ; INVESTING FUND OF THE WEEK ; Brexit caused many to shut their doors - but not Kames Property Income . Its manager tells Laura Suter why
The commercial property market was hit hard after the EU referendum , leading to many large funds closing their portfolios , effectively locking investors in . The Kames Property Income fund remained open , however . It went into the Brexit period with 33pc of the fund in cash to meet redemption requests . It also imposed a `` fair value adjustment '' - in effect , an exit fee - of 10pc at its peak . It removed this adjustment at the end of September . An investor who remained in the fund throughout the Brexit period to the present would have lost 1.8pc , according to FE Trustnet , the investment analyst . However , if they had sold at the end of September , just before the adjustment charge was scrapped , they would have lost 8.8pc . David Wise runs the fund with Alex Walker . However , Mr Walker is leaving the company in December , to be replaced by Richard Peacock , who joins from Aviva Investors . Mr Wise told Telegraph Money about his views on the property market , how holding high levels of cash will affect performance and the hardest month of his working life . How did you manage the fund through Brexit ? We escaped the worst of it and were one of the few that stayed open through the post-Brexit period . But July was one of the most challenging months of my working life . While , in general , we are very focused on the individual assets , we 're not afraid to make some big calls when we need to . One of those was on June 23 : we were sitting on 33pc in cash and other liquid investments , by contrast with very low levels at one or two major competitors . However , those cash levels went from 33pc to 15pc at our lowest point in the Brexit aftermath . But about 50pc of the money that went out of the door in that panic period has actually come back in from those same investors . Have you sold any properties since Brexit , and what were valuations like ? We sold four post-Brexit , all either at or above the valuations we had pre-Brexit . I 'm not saying we could have sold every asset above pre-Brexit levels , but we believe smaller assets are more resilient , and those four sales are the hard evidence of that . What 's the outlook for the UK property market ? Brexit does cast a shadow . Across the market as a whole valuations are down by around 5pc , but that masks some variation . If you look at London , perhaps the area most exposed to Brexit , valuation falls have been greater , although there has been some underpinning from the fall in sterling . London tends to lead the cycle in real estate , and London is getting pretty late in the cycle , so one ca n't see rents rising much further . London is a very expensive place , but it is likely to get cheaper , although I do n't see it falling off a cliff . In general , we are buying in locations that are fundamentally cheaper and can give us higher income returns , typically in big northern cities such as Manchester and Leeds . How does your investment strategy differ from your peers ? We invest in properties worth around £5m-£20m , so smaller assets than our peers . The returns and liquidity at the lower end of the market are more attractive . It means we will never be able to take the fund beyond £1bn , so we ca n't become one of the big funds , but we do n't want to . Do you worry about the effect of high cash levels on performance ? Our cash level is currently 30pc . If I were holding hefty cash levels for five years it would be very damaging to returns , but I do n't anticipate that we will have 30pc cash well into next year . I am happy with that cash level . It provides some buffer if there are any more Article 50 bumps in the road , but it also gives us firepower to take advantage of opportunities . We tend to do a lot of buying around Christmas , when other people in the property market put their feet up . Do you have your own money in the fund ? Yes . I do n't want to say exactly how much , but a reasonably significant sum . What would you have done if you had n't become a fund manager ? I did a degree in zoology and before I got into real estate I had a position to research the malaria parasite . The fund has a total cost ( the `` OCF '' or `` TER '' ) of 0.96pc a www.year.Be sure to buy the right `` share class '' , which is `` B '' . The investment shop through which you buy the fund will also levy a charge . Some will charge a percentage of the amount invested , others will apply a flat annual fee . Our colour coded tables at www.telegraph.co.uk/ investing will guide you to the cheapest fund shop for your circumstances .
'The Chancellor is trying to thwart Brexit ; his priorities are perverse ' ; Politics Interview Jacob Rees-Mogg on how Brexit is more important than anyone other than the Queen , while issuing a pointed warning to the PM
For Jacob Rees-Mogg , the gloves are finally off . The newly appointed leader of a group of a 60 Eurosceptic Tory MPs is intent on ensuring that Theresa May delivers the Brexit that the public voted for . He tells The Daily Telegraph that both Brexit and the Conservative Party are more important than the Prime Minister 's leadership and warns that Britain risks heading for `` Brino '' - Brexit In Name Only . `` The less of Brexit you get , the more likely you are to get Jeremy Corbyn , '' Mr Rees-Mogg said . `` If you get a good , clean Brexit , and get the advantages from it , then the chances of getting Jeremy Corbyn are much diminished . `` If everything is delayed for two years and then there 's 'high alignment ' , you will find that by 2022 no one will have noticed any difference from having left . Then what will be the point of voting for the party that 's implemented it ? I 'm against Brino . '' The Old Etonian insists that he backs the Prime Minister despite the mounting calls for her to quit . `` The PM has my full support , he said . `` May the PM live forever , Amen , Amen , Hallelujah , Hallelujah , Amen . '' But in a pointed warning , he added : `` If the Conservative Party does n't deliver the Brexit that the British people voted for , the Conservatives will not win the next election . The leader is important , but the party is more important . Brexit is more important than anyone other than the Queen . '' The Prime Minister , he said , must be bolder on Brexit . Mrs May has repeatedly refused to say whether she would back the Brexit she is delivering in the event of a second referendum . `` My personal view is that if you are in favour of something , and if that is your policy , it 's helpful to say so , '' Mr Rees-Mogg said . `` That 's what I would encourage her to do . It always makes sense to argue for the policy you believe in . Otherwise why on earth are you implementing it ? But she does have to contend with other members of the Cabinet that do n't want to do it . '' He reserves his strongest criticism for Philip Hammond , who he says is intent on `` thwarting '' Brexit and does n't actually want Britain to leave the European Union . The Chancellor 's priorities are `` perverse '' . He 's jealous of Boris Johnson 's `` charisma '' , and the Treasury he leads is a `` bruised '' institution that is still struggling to come to terms with the result of the EU referendum . Last week Mr Hammond attracted a furious backlash from Eurosceptic MPs and Cabinet ministers by suggesting during a speech in Davos that Britain will only make `` very modest '' changes to its relationship with the EU after Brexit . In his interview with The Telegraph , Mr Rees-Mogg mounted his strongest attack on the Chancellor yet . `` Of course he is wrong . High alignment denies us Brexit . It is about obstructing Brexit . It is essentially code for saying I do n't want to leave the EU , I never did and I do n't think I 'm wrong . It 's thwarting Brexit . `` That is the aim , to thwart Brexit . You simply end up being tied into the EU 's rules without even having a commissioner , MEPs , attending the Council of Ministers or a judge on the European Court of Justice . `` With high alignment you are actually a vassal state . It 's not what people voted for , nor is it where the opportunity is . The people who want it are the corporatists , the fat cats . It 's why the CBI wants it . '' Asked about Mr Hammond 's intervention in Davos , Mr Rees-Mogg added : `` The dangers of the lack of oxygen and high altitude of Davos means people forget the manifesto and their obligations of collective responsibility . The Chancellor ought to support government policy . That 's his job . '' Mr Rees-Mogg 's intervention and assumption of the role of leader of the Eurosceptic European Reform Group is carefully timed . `` Now the bill is through the Commons and we are into the nitty gritty of the negotiation . It 's noticeable that the people who want to obstruct Brexit are making a lot of noise , '' he said . It comes at a critical juncture as the Prime Minister and her Cabinet debate the shape of a transition period after Brexit and the future of Britain 's relationship with the EU . There are significant splits in Cabinet between those such as Mr Hammond and Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , who are calling for high alignment , and Eurosceptics such as Michael Gove and Mr Johnson . Mr Rees-Mogg is adamant that if Britain is still subject to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , has to accept new laws and pay into the EU 's budget , it will represent a betrayal of Brexit . `` It would be a lie to say we have left under those circumstances , '' he said . `` The negotiations going on now about what the implementation transition means are very important . Status quo transition would be a failure of negotiations , it would be a sign of weakness . We would not be getting the Brexit people voted for . '' He is keen to throw his support behind Mr Johnson , who last week was roundly rebuked by Mrs May and other Cabinet ministers for suggesting that Britain give the NHS an extra £100million a week from the `` Brexit dividend '' . The Chancellor was the first to criticise Mr Johnson . He said : `` The Chancellor , of course , has important priorities and the setting of the Budget is one . But if his order of priorities is perverse it 's not surprising other Cabinet ministers mention it . This is n't Philip Hammond 's money . It 's your money , my money , the rest of the country 's money . It is taxpayers ' money . '' Mr Rees-Mogg believes that Mr Johnson 's critics are motivated by `` jealousy '' . He said : `` He is the one figure in British politics that people literally stop their cars , get out and shake him by the hand . '' Asked if he was referring to Mr Hammond , Mr Rees-Mogg replied : `` Why would you think that against a man of charisma and popularity ? I ca n't understand why Philip Hammond would conceivably be jealous of Mr Johnson when he is so noticeably charismatic himself . '' Acid drops Caustic words from 'The Mogg ' ... on alignment 'With high alignment you are actually a vassal state ' ... on the Chancellor 'I ca n't understand why Philip Hammond would be jealous of Mr Johnson when he is so charismatic himself ' ... on the Brexit negotiations 'Status quo transition would be a failure ... it would be a sign of weakness ' ... on May 's leadership 'The PM has my full support . May the PM live forever , Amen , Amen , Hallelujah '
Boost for May as Remainers back a hard exit
Brexit survey According to an Aug 12 article , `` Boost for May as Remainers back a hard exit '' , an LSE/Oxford University survey of attitudes to Brexit had 20,000 respondents . In fact , there were 3,293 . We are happy to make this clear. ? DT Dec 1 2017 THE majority of Remain voters now back a hard Brexit and believe that Britain should take control of its borders , end the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and pay little or nothing to leave the European Union . A survey of more than 20,000 people by the London School of Economics and Oxford University found that 53 per cent of Remain voters back a hard Brexit over a soft Brexit . The news represents a significant boost to Theresa May and her ambition of uniting the country behind her Brexit strategy in the wake of the EU referendum vote . It comes in the run-up to the publication of position papers by the Government next week which will set out Britain 's stance on key aspects of Brexit . The YouGov survey suggests there is now little difference between Remain and Leave voters on some of the most contentious issues of the EU referendum . A total of 51.3 per cent of Remain voters backed a Brexit deal which delivers full control over migration and leads to lower numbers of EU migrants.The survey also suggests that Remain voters agree with Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , that the EU should `` go whistle '' for a big Brexit divorce bill . A total of 54.7 per cent of Remain voters and 56.9 per cent of Leave backers said that they did not think the UK should hand over any money to the EU . The position is in contrast to that of Britain 's Brexit negotiators , who are prepared to hand over a divorce bill of more than £36billion . There is also a significant endorsement of Mrs May 's `` red line '' that Britain will leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice - 52.2 per cent of Remain voters said they would support a deal in which Britain adopts some EU laws but is no longer subject to the European Court of Justice . Close to 60 per cent of Leave voters supported the same outcome . Thomas Leeper , one of the authors of the report from the London School of Economics , said : `` One of the things we were most intrigued by in these results was the degree to which Remain voters are willing to accept Brexit and the specific features of Brexit that Leave voters care the most about , such as legal sovereignty and control over immigration . '' Support for hard & soft Brexit policies Voted to : Leave Remain 56.9 % Paying nothing towards a Brexit Divorce bill 54.7 % 56.5 % Leaving the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice 52.2 % 57.5 % Full control over borders , lower numbers of EU migrants 51.3 %
Labour 'stitch-up ' wipes Brexit off the agenda ; Labour in Brighton 2017Party 's 'gobsmacked ' MPs accuse their leadership of 'manoeuvring to avoid the biggest issue of our time ' as annual conference decides against debate to avoid a row
LABOUR was last night reduced to a `` laughing stock '' , in the words of its own MPs , after the party decided Brexit will not be debated at this year 's party conference . After a day in which deep divisions within the party over Brexit were exposed , the pro-Jeremy Corbyn group Momentum told members and unions to choose other topics for debate at the conference in Brighton to avoid a public row over the biggest issue facing the country . It came as a former Labour frontbencher suggested that managed migration was `` racist '' and Mr Corbyn came under intense pressure to commit to staying in the single market and customs union . Andrew Gwynne , Labour 's election coordinator , admitted earlier in the day that Brexit could `` tear the party in two '' if MPs and party members could not reach agreement in a `` comradely fashion '' . The Labour rift over Brexit seemed likely to overshadow the entire conference after 30 MPs , together with MEPs , Labour peers , trade union leaders and mayors , published an open letter in The Observer demanding that Labour committed to full and permanent membership of the single market and customs union . Instead , members responded by wiping Brexit off the agenda altogether . In a ballot of members Brexit did not make it into the top eight of 13 topics offered for debate . Heidi Alexander , the Labour MP and former shadow health secretary , said she was `` gobsmacked '' that Brexit had been kept off the agenda , adding : `` How can Labour not have a full and proper debate on Brexit policy at [ the conference ] ? We will be a laughing stock . '' Chris Leslie , Labour MP for Nottingham , said the decision was `` utterly ridiculous '' and that members would be shocked at the party `` manoeuvring to avoid the biggest issue of our time '' . Topics including Grenfell Tower , railways and housing will be debated instead . A Labour source said : `` This was meant to be a conference about democracy but it will be remembered for one of the biggest leadership stitch-ups in recent history . Party members ' right to a voice seems to extend to chanting the leader 's name and no further . '' Alison McGovern MP said : `` We needed to talk about Brexit . It 's the biggest issue for our country and will be the biggest issue for whoever is the next government . Those who organised against this debate need to ask themselves what they really believe about Labour Party democracy . '' Outside the conference hall in Brighton , arguments over Brexit had dominated the first day of the Labour gathering . The letter published in The Observer called on Labour to have the `` courage of its convictions '' on Brexit by rejecting a `` destructive Brexit '' that would involve leaving the single market and customs union . Mr Corbyn , appearing on The Andrew Marr Show on BBC , appeared to be softening his stance when he failed to rule out the idea that a Brexit transifellow tion period could last for as long as 10 years , while John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , told ITV 's Robert Peston that a transition of up to four years would be sensible . Then Clive Lewis , the former shadow defence secretary , added further controversy by suggesting people who oppose freedom of movement were racists . In a clash of views with Labour MP Caroline Flint , he told Sky News : `` I actually believe in freedom of movement . You are talking about managing migration . You are not going to like to hear this , it always comes back down to something the Left in this country has very much difficulty with , which is that it is ultimately about racism . It comes down to racism . '' Today , Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , will use similarly inflammatory language when he tells delegates that the Conservatives ' Brexit policy shows they have `` post-imperial delusions '' . In his conference speech - which will not be debated - he will claim that Labour are now `` the grown-ups in the room '' on Brexit despite their deep divisions . Further north-south divisions in the party also opened up in a row over whether Sadiq Khan , the mayor of London , should be allowed to speak . Delegates from the north objected to Mr Khan being given a slot , suggesting it made the conference too Londoncentric , with the `` star '' speakers - Jeremy Corbyn , Diane Abbott , John McDonnell and Emily Thornberry - all representing constituencies in the capital . Andy Burnham , the Greater Manchester mayor , has also been denied a speaking slot , saying he was `` disappointed '' . He said and the decision not to give one of Mr Khan 's northern counterparts a slot suggested the party was `` half-hearted '' in its commitment to devolving power in England . Editorial Comment : Page 15 'How can Labour not have a full and proper debate on Brexit policy at conference ? We will be a laughing stock '
Britain 's future may have come and gone before politicians noticed ; Sketch
What Labour have achieved should be impossible . Yet somehow they 've managed it . They 've convinced people who are pro-Brexit that Labour are anti-Brexit - and convinced people who are anti-Brexit that Labour are pro-Brexit . Or , to put it another way : they 're alienating both the 52 per cent and the 48 per cent . And becoming the party of the 0 per cent . On the one hand , they have Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , forensically probing for flaws in Brexit . And on the other , they have John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , who announced in London yesterday that : `` It 's time we were all more positive about Brexit . '' To demonstrate his own positivity , Mr McDonnell promised that Labour would not block or delay Article 50 , because to do so would put Labour not only `` against the majority will of the British people '' , but also `` on the side of certain corporate elites who have always had the British people at the back of the queue '' . Which is interesting , because when he was campaigning for Remain Mr McDonnell suggested that the `` corporate elites '' - or , as he called them then , the `` robber barons '' - were actually in favour of Brexit . Maybe the corporate elites have switched sides , too . The bulk of the shadow chancellor 's speech yesterday was about the economy and jobs . A Labour government , he said , would `` plan for the future '' , `` intervene for the common good '' , and `` create the wellpaid jobs we need '' . Yet he made this pledge without explaining how Labour would tackle the greatest threat to jobs that our society faces . To be fair , Mr McDonnell is n't alone in this . His counterparts in other parties have said little if anything about it , too . In the next 20 years , great numbers of people - workingclass and middle-class - stand to be made redundant by advances in automation , artificial intelligence and the internet . Yet major politicians are barely talking about it . I suppose we 've been here before . Mass immigration from eastern EU states began in 2004 , but mainstream parties treated it as a serious issue only after the breakthrough of Ukip a decade later . Nigel Farage may feel that he 's now won that argument . But , if so , he 's won it too late . There is a bigger crisis coming - and when it arrives , it wo n't be possible to blame it on foreigners . Previously , Mr McDonnell has said Labour will `` look at '' the idea of a universal basic income - which would in theory save the obsolete from destitution . Provided he can work out how to pay for it , anyway . Yesterday , though , we heard him mourning Britain 's `` dead town centres '' , without noting that what killed them - primarily , online shopping - is unlikely to prove a passing fad . He talked about creating `` secure '' jobs , without explaining how any job will be secure in a world where technology outperforms mere humans . The shadow chancellor - like the rest of the political world - sounded as if he was planning for a future that has already gone .
MPs tell Hammond to back May over Brexit or leave Cabinet ; Road to Brexit ; Eurosceptics fear access to Single Market will cost country billions in 'nightmare scenario '
PHILIP HAMMOND must back Theresa May over Brexit or quit the Cabinet , Eurosceptic MPs have warned amid mounting concerns over plans to pay billions of pounds for access to the Single Market . The Chancellor has been accused by Cabinet colleagues of trying to `` undermine Brexit '' by pushing for delays to Cabinet measures designed to control immigration . There is also anger among Eurosceptic MPs over plans which will see Britain continue to pay billions of pounds into the EU budget after Brexit in exchange for access to the Single Market and other sectors . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , said that Mr Hammond must support the Prime Minister over Brexit . He warned that paying for access to the Single Market would be a `` nightmare '' scenario . Other Eurosceptic MPs accused Mr Hammond of `` obstructing Brexit '' and said he must decide whether he is going to support Brexit and `` stick around in Government '' . The Cabinet splits over Britain 's future after it leaves the EU yesterday prompted the Prime Minister 's official spokesman to express her `` full confidence '' in Mr Hammond . She said that the Prime Minister believes that the Cabinet must `` work together '' to achieve a `` successful Brexit '' . Mr Duncan Smith yesterday told The Daily Telegraph that Mrs May had been clear that migration was a red line during Brexit negotiations . He said : `` Theresa May has been admirably clear about what her red lines are . I think it 's important when that position is taken by a Prime Minister that the Cabinet backs the Prime Minister . `` The most important member of the Cabinet is the Chancellor . That is the key . `` If we were to leave and make payments to the EU for Single Market access that would be the equivalent of putting 7 per cent tariff barriers on UK trade . If we are forever going to pay money that would be the nightmare scenario . '' Another Tory MP said : `` The Treasury is the least open of all departments to Brexit . They feel that the setting up of David Davis 's department has taken power away from them . `` Philip has to decide whether he is going to support Theresa and stick around in government . '' The Prime Minister 's official spokesman yesterday said that Cabinet ministers must `` work together '' if Brexit is to be a success . She said : `` The Prime Minister is pushing a collective government approach where either through the Cabinet or through Cabinet committee the relevant Cabinet ministers are able to discuss and debate issues before decisions are reached . `` The Prime Minister is focused on making sure we prepare for the negotiations and that we get the best deal for the United Kingdom . I 'm not going to give a running commentary of those discussions . The PM wants to prepare fully for those negotiations . `` That means hearing the differing views of ministers , departments and stakeholders based on some of the conversations we have been having . `` Ultimately we need to make sure that we are working together to make a successful Brexit . `` The Prime Minister has full confidence in the Chancellor and the work he is doing . '' It is understood that Mr Hammond was one of a number of voices urging caution during a Brexit Cabinet meeting last week , when proposals were discussed for a new work permit system designed to reduce immigration Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , presented plans for a post-Brexit visa regime that would see all EU workers forced to prove they have secured a skilled job before being allowed into Britain . Sources claimed that Mr Hammond raised questions about the plans , and that there are fears that the Chancellor could resign over the tensions . Treasury sources have dismissed the claims as `` complete and utter nonsense '' . 'The Treasury is the least open of all departments to Brexit '
Ignore EU complaints - we must start negotiating trade deals now ; There is nothing in the EU treaties to stop Britain reaching agreements that begin straight after Brexit
With Theresa May visiting Donald Trump to discuss an early trade deal between the US and the UK , the question of whether and to what extent Britain can negotiate post-Brexit trade agreements with non-EU countries before formally leaving the EU is set to become one of the thorniest issues of the Brexit negotiations . The average US trade deal takes 18 months to agree , so could be completed well before we 've left . Australia says ratification could be complete within months of Brexit . At one level it is a mystery that this is an issue at all . We 've confirmed we 're leaving the single market and customs union , so what business is it of the EU 's what trade agreements we have , post-Brexit , with non-EU countries ? Imagine the furore if China told Japan it was n't permitted to have a trade agreement with Australia from 2019 . Why should the UK any more tolerate being told by the EU that it can not have a trade deal with the US or Australia that begins in 2019 ? Some commentators and politicians claim the EU 's rules forbid the UK from negotiating with non-EU countries before we 've formally left . I 'll argue in a moment that that 's not true . But suppose it were . Would n't the right response be to feel there was an overwhelming imperative to change those rules or to get permission from the EU to negotiate ? The EU has granted such permission before , even to continuing members . At the time of the Lisbon Treaty EU members were granted permission to negotiate their own transitional arrangements for investment agreements with non-EU countries . So surely , as a matter of urgency , if indeed the rules did require that , the UK should be granted permission to negotiate with the US or Australia ? As it happens , however , they do n't . The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) grants the EU exclusive competence over its common commercial policy , including in particular its trade policy . From this flows the EU 's competence over trade negotiations . And where the EU has a competence , there is a duty of `` sincere cooperation '' . So EU member states can not negotiate with non-EU countries over any matters that might impinge upon the exclusive or shared competences of the EU ( even in some cases where the negotiations are not directly about those matters ) . But the EU is not competent over the UK 's post-Brexit trade policy , and that applies from the moment the UK leaves . There is no `` gardening leave '' or `` no-compete '' provision in the treaties . Once we 're out , the treaties do n't apply to us . Since the EU does not have competence over our post-Brexit trade policy , it does not have competence over negotiating post-Brexit trade deals for us , and we have no duty of sincere cooperation in respect of the EU 's post-Brexit trading arrangements . Furthermore , the EU can not have competence over the UK 's post-Brexit trading arrangements because it can not make post-Brexit deals for us . An EU deal such as the Ceta trade agreement with Canada can not bind either the UK or Canada post- Brexit . Neither can the EU negotiate on behalf of just one of its parties ( ie the UK ) to the exclusion of the rest . There can not be a competence where there is not , even in principle , a power . Thus the EU has no competence over our post-Brexit trading arrangements , because we 'll have left and because it can not make trade agreements that would bind us after we 've left . Why would we accept any restrictions over our ability to negotiate with the US or Australia , say , when the consequence of that would be a delay in our finalising a trade deal with these countries post-Brexit ? And to repeat , the argument `` that 's what we 've signed up for '' does n't fly - there is simply no reference in the treaties to our agreeing to any gardening leave or no-compete period post-Brexit . We should be able to negotiate , finalise and ratify trade post-Brexit deals as soon as we 've formally declared we 're leaving the EU ( by triggering Article 50 ) . If it provides a political fig-leaf and if we can be sufficiently certain that the ratification processes in the US and Australia will only take months , we could accept merely negotiating all the main political terms of the deal now but saving the actual ratification for the post-Brexit period . The practical political reality , though , is that we are , and must be , negotiating now , regardless of what the UK Government says or how hard EU bureaucrats complain . 'We could accept merely negotiating the main terms of the deal now but saving ratification until later '
Remember Brexit , dear ? Turns out the issue has n't gone away after all ; Sketch
And to think , some of us used to complain about the news being nothing but Brexit . So boring , we groaned . It 's just the same old dreary story , day after day after day . Brexit , Brexit , endless blasted Brexit . Was n't there anything else happening in Westminster we could write about ? Well , turns out that there was . Weird , is n't it ? Since being abruptly dwarfed by other events , Brexit somehow feels distant , remote , even quaint : as if it happened long ago , in a gentler , more innocent age . Remember Brexit , darling ? You know . That thing where Britain voted to leave the European Union . What happened about that , in the end ? Did we ever find out ? In case anyone needs reassuring , I can confirm that Brexit is still going on , albeit somewhat in the background , and yesterday morning the Commons met to question David Davis and his ministers on the latest developments . In a vote the night before , MPs had backed Labour 's demand that the Government publish its secret studies on the likely economic impact of Brexit . At the very least , argued Labour , the studies should be shown to the Brexit select committee . In the Commons yesterday , Robin Walker , a junior minister , responded . Mr Davis , he promised , would discuss it with Hilary Benn , the committee 's chairman , `` in due course '' . Labour were far from satisfied . `` Could ministers confirm what they mean by 'in due course ' ? '' asked Seema Malhotra ( Lab , Feltham & Heston ) . `` And if they do n't know yet , when will they ? '' `` In due course , '' honked an unseen Labour colleague . Steve Baker , another junior Brexit minister , looked troubled . The problem facing him was clear . The only answer he could give was `` in due course '' . But he could n't say `` in due course '' because he 'd just been asked what `` in due course '' meant . Essentially , therefore , he had to find a way to say `` in due course '' without using the words `` in '' , `` due '' and `` course '' . So , rather gamely , he tried : `` We 'll move as swiftly as is possible in all circumstances . '' Nigel Evans ( Con , Ribble Valley ) sensed a Remainer plot . The German and French governments , he sniffed , had surely done secret studies of the impact Brexit would have on their own economies . So why were n't Labour MPs badgering the Germans and the French to release those studies , hmm ? Mr Baker might have said , `` Well , it 's probably because Labour MPs are British , and therefore more immediately concerned about Britain 's economy than Germany 's or France 's . '' But Mr Evans is a party colleague , so he could hardly say that . Instead , he told him it was `` an extremely good point '' . Still , even if Labour do hope the secret economic studies will undermine Brexit , Mr Evans need n't worry . After all , Labour are going to look pretty silly when they learn that after March 2019 we 'll all be driving diamond-studded Rolls-Royces and lighting our cigars with £50 notes .
This is like a Hitchcock thriller , says EU 's Tusk ; Election announcement welcomed in Europe as leading to a stable base for further Brexit negotiations
EUROPEAN leaders reacted to Theresa May 's shock election announcement by comparing Brexit to a Hitchcock thriller - but insisted negotiations would not be affected . Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , commented on the news by tweeting : `` It was Hitchcock , who directed Brexit : first an earthquake and the tension rises . '' The joke was a reference to director Sir Alfred Hitchcock 's famous quote that `` a good film should start with an earthquake '' and be followed by increasing tension . Critics claimed the bemusing tweet was a suggestion that the political ramifications for the UK from the Brexit vote were only beginning to be felt . But Mr Tusk also said he had a `` good phone call '' with the Prime Minister about the early election , during which Mrs May underlined the UK 's `` deep and special partnership '' with the EU . EU leaders also moved to calm concerns about how the election could impact Brexit by saying preparations for talks would not be affected . A Brussels source said : `` This is a domestic matter for the UK . But we have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us with strong backing by the electorate . This does not change things . We are ready . Early June was always the calendar [ to start the negotiations ] . '' A spokesman for Mr Tusk insisted that the snap election would not affect the EU 's attempts to come up with a position on Brexit talks . `` The UK elections do not change our EU27 plans , '' the spokesman said . `` We expect to have the Brexit guidelines adopted by the European Council on April 29 and , following that , the Brexit negotiating directives ready on May 22 . This will allow the EU27 to start negotiations . '' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's Brexit negotiator , called on UK voters to show how close they wanted Britain to remain with the EU . `` The UK election is an internal affair , but clearly Brexit will be the key element of it , '' he said . `` This means there will be an opportunity for the UK citizens to express themselves on how they see the future relationship between their country and the EU . `` As the European Parliament Brexit negotiator , I will work with a new government for the best common future possible . '' Sigmar Gabriel , the German Foreign Minister , said the early election could help create `` accountability '' after the Brexit vote . `` Accountability and reliability are more important than ever after the Brexit vote of the Britons , '' he said . `` Hopefully the new elections announced today ... can lead to more clarity and accountability in the negotiations with the EU . '' A diplomat from an EU member state said that Mrs May `` is completely right to call these elections now '' , as she could benefit from a favourable political backdrop . `` The good news on the European side is that she will be less weak to make all the concessions she will have to make '' in the talks , the diplomat said . Other EU politicians said that Mrs May 's decision was `` understandable '' and predicted that the Tories would win . Gonzalez Pons , a Spanish MEP for the European People 's Party , said : `` May calls for UK elections , which means either undoing Brexit or making it harder by shortening times . I wish the UK all the best . '' Mrs May talked to Donald Trump during a string of conversations with world leaders . She also discussed the decision with Angela Merkel and Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny . 'We have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us '
Senior Labour MPs may be asked to join Brexit commission
THERESA MAY is considering setting up a cross-party Brexit commission , asking senior Labour MPs to join it , as part of her attempts to reach a consensus on the terms of Britain 's exit from the European Union . Downing Street sources said the Prime Minister was looking at asking senior Labour MPs like Hilary Benn and Yvette Cooper to sit on the commission , which would `` shadow the work of the Brexit department '' . The plans emerged after Mrs May asked Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn for his support in delivering Brexit and pushing through legislation . In a speech on Tuesday , Mrs May made a direct appeal to opposition parties to `` contribute , not just criticise '' and help `` clarify and improve '' her policies in the House of Commons instead of undermining them . It comes at a time when Mrs May 's leadership is at its weakest , amid open calls by Tory MPs for her to stand down following her failure to secure a majority at the election . The Government 's slim working majority of 12 in the House of Commons - with the support of the Democratic Unionist Party - means that some key Brexit votes could be lost without support from MPs from other parties . Mrs May 's friends said the commission would allow ministers and officials to try to win cross-party support for her Brexit negotiating strategy . Both Mr Benn and Ms Cooper are members of the Privy Council , which allows them to be briefed on sensitive Government work . Both did not vote for an amendment backed by Chuka Umunna this month to keep Britain in the single market after Brexit . Sir Keir Starmer was sworn on to the Privy Council at the end of last month so he could receive briefings on Brexit talks . The Daily Telegraph understands that this was personally pushed for by David Davis , the Brexit secretary . However , Number 10 is nervous that any Labour MP who signs up to the commission might be targeted by hard Left Momentum activists . News of the commission could spark fear among pro-Brexit Conservatives that Mrs May is willing to compromise on their ambition to leave both the single market and the customs union . She has been determined not to soften her position on Brexit and has insisted that ending the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and leaving the single market and customs union remain a red line . A post-election poll by YouGov last month found that 51 per cent would prefer Brexit to be negotiated by a cross-party team . Ms Cooper is a known supporter of a cross-party Brexit commission . She has said : `` We should set up a small crossparty commission to conduct the negotiations , and have a clear and transparent process to build consensus behind the final deal . It should be accountable to parliament but avoid getting caught up in the inevitable hung parliament political rows . '' The move was also backed by Lord Hague , the former Tory party leader , who urged the Government to form a commission with the CBI , the Institute of Directors , the British Chambers of Commerce , the Federation of Small Businesses , the TUC , the first ministers of the devolved governments , and the leaders of all the opposition parties . However , Stephen Kinnock , another Labour MP , warned : `` If it 's focused on a tangible outcome , then fine . If it 's going to be a talking shop for Theresa May to pay lip service to the idea of cross-party working , then forget it . ''
Scotland Boris 'simple minded ' on Brexit ; Cabinet battle intensifies with Hammond allies claiming Foreign Secretary fails to see intricacies of leaving EU ; Boris allies warn over prolonged transition
PHILIP HAMMOND 'S allies have accused Boris Johnson of being `` simpleminded '' over Brexit and warned that the transition period may need to be extended until after the next election . The Foreign Secretary has made clear that a Brexit `` implementation period '' must last no longer than two years , meaning that the UK will effectively leave the EU by 2021 . However , the Chancellor and other ministers including Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , have argued that the UK will need an extra year so that businesses can adjust . That would mean the Brexit process would still not be complete by 2022 - the latest date for the next election - leaving open the possibility that the next government could water down Brexit or even try to reverse it . Allies of Mr Johnson fear Brexit could yet be `` hijacked '' by pro-Remain MPs . The deepening Cabinet split comes after Theresa May appeared to have brokered a truce between Mr Hammond and Mr Johnson before her speech in Florence last Friday . However , Mr Hammond 's supporters were left infuriated at the weekend by claims that allies of Mr Johnson had thwarted the Chancellor 's push for a longer transition . They pointed to the fact that the Prime Minister had said only that a Brexit implementation period should last for `` about '' two years , leaving open the possibility that it could take longer . An ally of Mr Hammond said : `` The bottom line is that this is not going to be easy , something that 's overlooked by simple-minded Brexiteers like Boris . When it comes down to practicalities it may well take longer . `` Philip is n't being ideological about it , he is pragmatic . What he wants is for it to work in the interests of the economy and the country , that is what is driving him . Boris is talking tough for the sake of it . '' Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , yesterday announced that he favoured an open-ended post-Brexit transition period lasting `` as long as necessary '' . Speaking on the first day of the Labour conference , Mr Corbyn said it was `` impossible '' for anyone to place an `` absolute figure '' on how long the transition should last . However , despite conflict within the party , conference delegates yesterday elected not to hold a vote on any Brexit-related issues . The decision saved Mr Corbyn 's blushes by avoiding a damaging public row on Brexit , but reduced the party to `` a laughing stock '' , according to one of its own MPs . Last week the Prime Minister set out plans for a status quo implementation phase , with the UK and EU maintaining access to each other 's markets `` on current terms '' and under `` the existing structure of EU rules and regulations '' . It means freedom of movement will effectively continue for another four Continued on Page 2 Labour conference : Page 4 Continued from Page 1 years , with Britain paying its full contribution to Brussels of around £9 billion a year during that period . Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptic ministers had argued previously for a six-month transition period , but compromised and agreed to a maximum two-year transition after a summer of Cabinet clashes . The Daily Telegraph has learnt that the Prime Minister was warned at Cabinet last week that Brexit must be `` done and dusted '' by 2021 or risk damaging the Conservatives ' chance of winning the next election . Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary , and Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , warned that failing to do so risked alienating Eurosceptic supporters if the Government had not delivered Brexit by then . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , made clear yesterday that he agreed with Mr Johnson 's position that the transition period should last `` up to '' two years , not longer . Allies of Mr Johnson warned against a longer transition . One said : `` Rubbing up against 2022 is a problem , the sooner it 's done the better . '' Mr Davis will today embark on a fresh round of talks in Brussels in an attempt to break the deadlock in the Brexit negotiations . He will meet the EU 's chief negotiator , Michel Barnier , in the Belgian capital at the start of the fourth round of negotiations . Mr Davis suggested yesterday that he believed that Mr Johnson was behaving like a `` backseat driver '' over Brexit . He dismissed claims that Mr Johnson 's 4,200-word article on Brexit in The Daily Telegraph a week ago had forced Mrs May to abandon plans for a softer Brexit . Asked about Mr Johnson 's intervention , Mr Davis said : `` The policies in the Prime Minister 's speech had been coming for a long time . `` Some of them - transition - we were designing right back in the beginning of the year . `` Some of it we had been designing months ago . I do n't think there 's been any change of policy in the last few weeks . '' The Foreign Secretary also wants Britain to stop adopting any new EU rules and regulations after it formally leaves the bloc in March 2019 . He believes it is wrong for rulings from Brussels to apply in the UK during the two-year transition because Britain will no longer be involved in the decision-making process .
Scotland Juncker dismisses talk of calling off Brexit
BREXIT is inevitable , Jean-Claude Juncker has said , as he dismissed claims that Britain will not leave the EU . The president of the European Commission made the comments after Malta 's prime minister and Ireland 's taoiseach cast doubts over whether the UK would ultimately leave the bloc . In an interview with the Politico Europe website , Mr Juncker said : `` I do n't go as far as the Maltese prime minister , who has not ruled out that it will not come to Brexit . '' He added : `` My working hypothesis is that it will come to Brexit . '' Mr Juncker warned : `` People will become more and more conscious of the density of problems on a daily basis , without always being able to provide a coherent answer to these problems . '' Joseph Muscat , Malta 's prime minister , said last week that he thought the `` tide was turning '' against Brexit . Malta held the rotating presidency of the EU when Article 50 , the legal process taking the UK out of the EU , was triggered . `` For the first time , I 'm starting to believe that Brexit will not happen . I am seeing hopeful signs that indicate things will change , '' Mr Muscat told Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant . Leo Varadkar , Ireland 's taoiseach , said this week : `` I still hope that it [ Brexit ] wo n't happen . When it comes to my work in Brussels , working with other European prime ministers and presidents , it 's part of my remit to keep the door open . '' Sir Vince Cable has also predicted that Brexit will not , in the end , happen , despite the British Government 's insistence that `` Brexit means Brexit '' .
Finally the UK can get on board the global economic upswing
This year was not the economic disaster for the UK predicted by some of the more excitable pundits . It was not quite a fun-filled year either . With luck , next year will be better now that the UK and the EU have made enough progress on the Brexit divorce to move on to what counts for the economy - post-Brexit trade . Pardon the imagery but , until now , the Brexit divorce had acted like a kidney stone , preventing the UK from enjoying its usual healthy economic vigour . Now the stone is passed , with some considerable political pain , the outlook seems brighter . What did we learn in 2017 ? First the positive news : the major downside risks to growth did not manifest in a major way . Despite the hit to real wages from rising import prices caused by the fall in sterling , households have used their balance sheets , which are stronger than a decade ago , to smooth their consumption . Similarly , businesses have continued to hire and invest to meet the growing demand at home and abroad . That households have simply opened up their wallets more as prices have risen , and firms have continued to expand production despite heightened uncertainty , reflects a healthy underlying confidence in the economy . We can be less nervous about future shocks . Now the negative news : although growth has held up OK , slowing only a little to 1.5pc this year , compared to the post-Lehman average of 1.9pc , the UK has missed out on the building global upswing . After enjoying one of the fastest post-Lehman recoveries of the major advanced economies , the UK should have been riding high this year as the rest of the advanced world enjoys the strongest synchronised upswing in a decade . Instead , held back by its Brexit nerves , the UK has sat on the sidelines . Yesterday 's breakthrough in the Brexit negotiations lowers the chance that the UK could exit the EU in March 2019 without an agreement for post-Brexit trade . As firms and households begin to discount this risk too , confidence will rise and the global upturn can begin to rub off on the UK a bit more . As Brexit uncertainty was the major factor weighing on growth this year , reducing some of this uncertainty should be positive for growth . Higher business and household confidence from the lower risk of a hard Brexit should underpin stronger gains in long-lived consumption and investment . The UK 's annual GDP growth rate could rise towards 1.8-1.9pc in 2018 and 2019 . The improved outlook for the economy also lowers the risk that voters could eventually vote hard-Left Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn into Number 10 . Markets worry that , if Mr Corbyn 's Leftist policies were followed , the UK would risk repeating the painful mistakes of the Seventies . Labour is marginally ahead in the polls after Prime Minister Theresa May 's botched election and mishandling of Brexit . A more moderate Labour leader would be much further ahead in the polls by now . There is a good chance that , if the economy picks up , Corbyn 's lead will start to fade . Brexit is no different to other politically charged issues - the most extreme views tend to dominate the public debate . Most of the time , such predictions are decidedly wrong . On its own , Brexit will not turn the UK into a land of milk and honey . It is not likely to be the end of the world either . The likely reality is that , unless the UK takes steps to improve its fiscal , supply-side and non-EU trade policy , it will see its long-term growth rate fall by a few tenths of a percentage point per year after Brexit , from its potential rate of 2.2pc while inside the EU . Indeed , the fall in the value of sterling since the Brexit vote reflects just that : global markets lowering their expectations for long-run UK growth . The rebound in sterling on the news that the Brexit divorce had been settled reflected markets reversing some of this pessimism . Unless the UK changes its approach to economic policy , expect it to be less of a magnet for foreign capital and talented foreign workers . The UK might have to start living more within its means , dedicating more of its income to saving and investment , and less to consumption . With the right policies , the UK could rise back towards the top of the growth league for advanced countries . Hopefully , now the sensitive Brexit divorce has been mostly settled , the UK can begin to focus not just on Brexit but also a bit more on other key economic policy areas . The policy path the UK follows over the next year will have a decisive impact on its long-term fortunes . A stronger commitment to sound economic policies and budgetary discipline would underpin a rise in business and household confidence . The UK could finally get its public finances in order while pursuing supply-side reform - think housing - to make the economy more productive and raise potential growth . Today , the UK continues to profit from the indispensable reforms of the Thatcher era . Firms still benefit enormously from the UK 's highly flexible labour and product markets . Indeed , the biggest testament to these policies is that the Blair/Brown Labour government did not do much to alter them . With the country still split on Brexit , the UK 's New Year resolution ought to be to find a policy direction that a majority of the country can get behind , even if it is an old one . Kallum Pickering is the senior UK economist at Berenberg 'Brexit will not turn the UK into a land of milk and honey . It is not likely to be the end of the world either '
Do not try to block Brexit , May warns opponents ; Miliband and Clegg join forces to demand a vote on the Prime Minister 's deal for leaving the EU
THERESA MAY has warned Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg that they will not be allowed to `` thwart the will of the British people '' by blocking Brexit . Mr Miliband , the former Labour leader , and Mr Clegg , the former deputy prime minister and Liberal Democrat leader , are demanding a vote in Parliament on Theresa May 's Brexit deal . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , is backing the move which is likely to be debated by MPs this week . However , Mrs May has ruled out a parliamentary vote on the terms of her Brexit deal . She will today travel to Holland and Denmark for talks before visiting Spain on Thursday for a meeting with Mariano Rajoy , the prime minister . A Downing Street source said : `` Parliament voted by a margin of six to one in favour of the referendum . `` While Labour are looking for ways to stop Brexit we are focused on delivering on the people 's verdict - and making a success of it . Of course Parliament will have a role in the exit process , but this suggestion is simply an attempt to find another way to thwart the will of the British people . '' It came as Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , signalled that Britain was likely to leave the single market by saying there would be a `` full Brexit '' . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , has suggested that the Government might have to compromise on immigration controls to secure free market access . Mr Fallon appeared to adopt a harder tone on BBC One 's Andrew Marr Show yesterday . `` This is Brexit , this is full Brexit . We are going to be outside the European Union but we still want to maximise our trade with it . We are all Brexiteers now , we are respecting the decision of the British people . We have got to make a success of it , '' he said . Mr Miliband , the former Labour leader , is planning to table an urgent question in the Commons demanding that Mrs May clarifies the role of Parliament in Brexit . He has joined forces with Mr Clegg as well as the SNP and the Greens . Mr Miliband told The Observer : `` Having claimed that the referendum was about returning sovereignty to Britain , it would be a complete outrage if May were to determine the terms of Brexit without a mandate from Parliament . '' Mr Clegg told the same newspaper : `` My great worry is that while there will be a vote on repealing the 1972 European Communities Act , which is about the decision to leave the EU , it will be left to the executive alone to decide the terms of Brexit . That would not be remotely acceptable . '' Sir Keir Starmer , Labour 's shadow Brexit secretary , said the party would support the move . `` There has to be democratic grip of the process . And , at the moment , the Prime Minister is trying to manoeuvre without any scrutiny . `` That is why the terms on which we are going to negotiate absolutely have to be put to a vote in the House . '' The move comes after leaders of the Confederation of British Industry expressed alarm at the apparent direction of Government policy , which they say could see tariffs imposed on 90 per cent of British exports . Business chiefs have demanded that Mrs May rules out the `` worst options '' , such as not having arrangements which allow easy access to European markets for the financial services industry .
May offered medicine without sugar-coating ; Letters to the Editor
She was n't optimistic , she was n't charming , she was n't inspiring : all true of the Prime Minister in her botched election campaign . But for the sake of completeness we ought to mention another failing : Theresa May was too honest . She prided herself on being serious . She did n't want to spin nonsense at the electorate , like David Cameron selling his EU renegotiation . She launched her leadership bid before a wall of books . She entered government with a reputation for making decisions tediously , after listening and learning . The public liked it , or thought they did . Mrs May 's impressive authority instantly dispersed the sense of chaos following the Brexit vote . There was no reason , it seemed , why she could n't win an early election too . I was among those who thought it a good idea . Except ! Except it turns out her gravitas was just a side effect of her commitment to brutal honesty . Mrs May did n't lose because she is an inauthentic person . She lost because she tried to be honest and , when that failed , had no capacity to spin . So she fell back on robotic obfuscation . The honest truth is that after seven years of austerity , the books still are n't balanced . Britain is still spending too much . Real wages are stagnant or falling , worsened by the weak pound , debt is high and the population is ageing . Brexit , meanwhile , is an unknown quantity . While riding high , Mrs May used her political capital to be straightforward with voters . She admitted that Britain ca n't afford benefits for all , like social care and bus passes for the wealthy . She made few guarantees on Brexit . Her proposition for public services was more of the same : gradually falling standards until the nation 's finances are repaired . The dirty truth of campaigning , though , is that it involves sugarcoating . This was not impossible . Employment is at a record high . The deficit is down to 2.5 per cent of GDP and set to fall very slowly , allowing for a less austere mood . Brexit inspired millions of new voters to turn out and Mrs May might have captured that mood . Instead , she was swept over by the tidal wave of jam and custard served up by Jeremy Corbyn . The Corbynista vision was n't sugar-coated : it was honeycomb all the way through . During a Question Time held just after the election , one man declared that Mr Cameron had been a `` reassuringly dishonest '' chap . Mr Corbyn is , to some , a reassuringly optimistic fantasist . To be neither dishonest nor deluded , as Mrs May found out , can be a tough sell . Over the weekend , I was on the radio with a member of the hard-Left activist group called Momentum , when the poor fellow was asked what kind of Brexit Labour would support . `` A people 's Brexit ! '' was the spluttered reply - as if the rest of us would prefer a dog 's Brexit . `` What 's a people 's Brexit ? '' asked the bemused presenter . The answer , as far as I could make out , was that it might be a Brexit with lots of socialist bells and whistles sewn on . Naturally , Labour did n't much fancy talking about Brexit during the election , other than to condemn `` the Tory hard Brexit '' . Confusingly , its manifesto endorsed an approach very similar to `` the Tories ' hard Brexit '' by stating that Labour would take us out of the EU single market and then obtain `` tariff-free access '' . John McDonnell repeated this position on Sunday , only to be contradicted by Keir Starmer on Tuesday . Labour voters apparently chose whatever stance they liked best , with the young deciding Labour would stop Brexit , and the old Labour working class convinced the party would implement it . Mr Corbyn would no doubt love to get Britain out of the single market , not in order to curb immigration , but so that he could ditch the EU 's rigorous state aid rules and bail out whatever industries he likes . His MPs might have other ideas . If , as looks likely , the Government has to negotiate Brexit with the other parties in Parliament to get any legislation through , perhaps we will finally find out what exactly a `` people 's Brexit '' is meant to be . Some male dolphins court females by balancing sea sponges on their foreheads , scientists have discovered . This sounds absurd until you consider human mating rituals . Is it any sillier for a dolphin to put a sponge on his head than it is for a man to wear painfully tight jeans or bang on about existentialism ? Are bower birds who amass arrays of coloured objects to woo females any more quaint than the friend of mine who carefully edited the movie Thor so that it contained a marriage proposal ? Are flirting flamingoes , who copy each others ' every move , any more clueless than flirting couples who unconsciously mirror one another 's body language ? Of course not . A friend and I went separately to an exhibition of David Hockney 's work last month . I came out elated by his joyful paintings of nature . She , to my astonishment , declared it all horribly bleak , alluding to all sorts of family or relationship problems behind his sterile portraits and LA scenes . Both of us were right . This is exactly the sort of tension we stand to lose by barricading ourselves inside bubbles of self-affirming political news and culture . The best disagreements come from sharing knowledge , not partitioning it . FOLLOW Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Merkel victory wo n't help Brexit , claims rival ; FDP candidate warns that talks will not accelerate after election - and that a special deal is 'unrealistic '
THE British government should not expect Angela Merkel to break the deadlock in the Brexit talks if she joins forces with the pro-business Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) after this weekend 's election , a leading figure in the party has told The Daily Telegraph . The warning came after David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , predicted that the talks would `` accelerate '' after the German election , with UK ministers privately hoping that a German coalition government with the FDP could lead to a more flexible approach from Berlin . But Michael Theurer , a senior FDP candidate who has argued publicly for a more pragmatic approach to Brexit and is a strong candidate to become economy minister in such an FDP coalition government , cautioned against raised British expectations . `` It was my initiative to call for a Brexit cabinet ... because Brexit was being under-estimated at the ministerial level in Berlin - but I do n't believe , actually , that the room to manoeuvre will be so big , '' he said , while campaigning in Blumberg in the southern German state of Baden-Württemberg . Mr Theurer , who is set to win a seat in the Bundestag , reported that small and medium-sized German companies were expressing fears about Brexit , but warned those fears were unlikely to translate into effective political pressure on Mrs Merkel , who resisted pressure from the business sector before imposing sanctions on Russia . `` Our machinery and tool industry was badly affected by sanctions . Businesses complained , but they were told by the government that for security reasons it was necessary to accept [ them ] , '' he said . `` So German companies are used to accepting political deci-sions . They will just find new markets . '' His comments will come as a blow to UK ministers who have been promising that a newly elected Mrs Merkel could break the current Brexit deadlock . `` The FDP are likely to be in the coalition , and they will not allow Mrs Merkel to ignore German industry , '' one senior government minister said . Mr Theurer 's comments on the limited `` room to manoeuvre '' echo the German government 's private line to ministers , and the warnings of senior figures in Mrs Merkel 's Christian Democrat ( CDU ) party . A senior aide to Mrs Merkel said that German Brexit policy would be the `` same old soup '' after the election , while a senior CDU politician , who asked to remain nameless , was equally vehement . `` I am seriously worried that London is getting this wrong , '' he warned . `` As much as Brexit plays a role in the UK , Merkel never talks about Brexit . The future of the EU is just so much more important to her . '' Mr Theurer added that Germany felt somewhat sore about Brexit , since it left Germany `` overloaded in organising everything in continental Europe '' and sucked up large amounts of political energy at a time when Germany was focused on re-energising the EU . `` There is so much work to do to stabilise the euro , get back on a growth path , to integrate refugees , stabilise eastern Europe , there are so many questions - we are busy , but now instead of developing a better-functioning Europe , we are now dealing with Brexit . '' Mr Theurer said the UK government should accept the binary choice being presented by Brussels - to stay close in a Norway-style arrangement , or be treated like any other non-EU country , adding there will be no `` special deal '' to accommodate Britain . `` Why is it so difficult for the UK to understand that the EU has agreements with Switzerland and Norway , and they can be the blueprint . It should be clear that a deal would be on Swiss/ Norway terms , '' he said . `` Expecting anything else is unrealistic . ''
Remainers missed the point : the biggest blow is unrelenting boredom ; Sketch
The Remain campaign must be kicking themselves . All that time they wasted , banging on about how Brexit would mean economic ruin , mass redundancies and loss of global influence . What a blunder . Only now , 18 months too late , do they realise what their message should have been . The trouble with Brexit , they should have said , is that it will be monumentally tedious . So tedious , in fact , that beleaguered voters will actually beg their MPs to make the media shut up about it . Such has been the experience of Tracey Crouch , Tory MP for Chatham & Aylesford . `` People come up to me in the street , '' she revealed in an interview yesterday , `` and say , 'Can you ask the BBC to stop reporting on Brexit ? ' '' For many voters , explained Ms Crouch , the whole subject had become overpoweringly dull . Even though they themselves had voted for Brexit , they were sick to the back teeth of hearing about it . We shall never know , of course , but I wonder what the result of the referendum would have been if , rather than threaten voters with penury , David Cameron had simply said , `` Look . If you vote Leave , you 're never going to hear the end of it . Literally . Never . Every time you turn on the TV or open a paper , it 's going to be BREXIT-BREXIT-BREXIT-BREXIT . And that means wall-to-wall , unadulterated , 24-carat solid-gold boredom . Ferocious boredom , tyrannical boredom , savage , suffocating , spirit-crushing boredom : day after day , week after week , month after month , year after year . At every turn you 'll be subjected to news about monotonous negotiations , insufferable debates , exhausting amendments and impenetrable in-fighting . `` And unless you destroy your TV , radio , phone and laptop , lock your doors and cut yourself off from all human contact , there will be no escape . You 'll be trapped . Your family will be trapped . We 'll all be trapped . Trapped , in the 24-hour Brexit news cycle . Tomorrow , the day after , and very possibly the rest of our lives . `` Vote Remain : For a Different Story Leading the Six O'Clock News At Least Every Once in a While . '' Now that 's what I call Project Fear . Personally , I do sympathise with Ms Crouch 's constituents , but at least they can switch off the TV when anything about Brexit comes on . I actually have to turn up and sit through this stuff , And , with all due respect and deference , dear people of Chatham & Aylesford : you do n't know you 're born . Yesterday , for example , I had to go to a Brexit-themed conference in London , at which David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , gave a speech saying nothing of interest and then took no questions . The most memorable moment came when he said goodbye , turned away from the lectern , missed his step , and almost fell flat on his face . In the nick of time , he caught himself , regained his balance , and hastened out . If only he 'd fallen over . Even the long-suffering denizens of Chatham & Aylesford would have tuned in for that .
Scotland May unleashes fire at Europe ; The Telegraph Election 2017 ; Keep out of our election , angry PM tells Brussels with accusation of plot to undermine Brexit talks
THERESA MAY cast herself in the role of Britain 's new Iron Lady yesterday with a blistering attack on the EU for trying to interfere in the General Election and `` run over us '' in Brexit talks . The Prime Minister accused European politicians and officials of plotting to `` deliberately affect '' the result of next month 's poll by issuing threats against Britain . She said bureaucrats had misrepresented the UK 's position on Brexit , adding that some of them `` do not want these talks to succeed '' . On a day in which the gloves came off in Mrs May 's negotations with Brussels over the Brexit deal , she stood outside the door of Number 10 and invoked the spirit of Margaret Thatcher in her battle with those who `` do not want Britain to prosper '' . She was speaking hours after Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , had told Britain to pay an `` incontestable '' Brexit divorce bill of up to £92billion ( ( EURO ) 100billion ) - double the previous estimate - or face being taken to court . Mrs May spoke in measured but forceful tones that hinted at an underlying anger that has been building since a highly partial account of her meeting with Mr Barnier and Jean-Claude Juncker last week was leaked to a German newspaper . Since that meeting , she has been criticised , mocked and briefed against by senior figures in the EU . She had initially dismissed the reports as `` Brussels gossip '' but could contain herself no longer after Mr Barnier 's browbeatelection ' ing comments . Although she was careful not to accuse anyone by name , her speech was clearly aimed at Angela Merkel , who said last week Britain had `` illusions '' about the outcome of Brexit , as well as Mr Barnier , European Commission president Mr Juncker and Mr Juncker 's chief of staff Martin Selmayr , the man accused of leaking damaging reports to the German press . Mrs May 's extraordinary - and unscheduled - speech also took aim at Jeremy Corbyn , telling voters `` we will all pay the price '' if he became Prime Minister and took over the Brexit talks . Critics said that while the speech might help win over voters - particularly those who voted Ukip in the last - attacking Brussels ' most senior figures would make the Brexit negotiations far harder . Speaking after meeting the Queen to mark the dissolution of Parliament , Mrs May said : `` Britain 's negotiating position in Europe has been misrepresented in the continental press . The European Commission 's negotiating stance has hardened . Threats against Britain have been issued by European politicians and officials . All of these acts have been deliberately timed to affect the result of the General Election . '' She said she wanted the EU to succeed , but added : `` There are some in Brussels who do not want these talks to succeed , who do not want Britain to prosper . '' Mr Selmayr last night appeared to offer Mrs May an olive branch by saying Mr Juncker regarded her as `` an impressive woman and a very impressive negotiator '' which would be `` good for negotiations because we need a very strong negotiator , someone who unites the entire nation behind her '' . However , he added : `` Brexit will never become a success , of course , because it is a sad and sorry event , but it can be managed in a professional and pragmatic way . '' He also suggested Mr Juncker would only spend half an hour each week on Brexit , giving an insight into where it lies in his priorities . Mr Barnier had earlier suggested that Britain could be forced through the courts to pay the Brexit bill . However , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , insisted there was no legal obligation for the UK to pay anything at all . Germany , France and Poland have insisted extra payments are added to the bill , almost doubling the cost from £50billion to more than £90billion . Mr Davis replied : `` We will not be paying 100 billion euros ... in the walkaway circumstance , there is nothing to be paid . '' Mr Corbyn accused Mrs May of `` playing party games with Brexit '' , while Nicola Sturgeon , Scotland 's First Minister , suggested the Prime Minister had `` poisoned '' the Brexit talks . Reports : Pages 4-6 Allister Heath : Page 18 Editorial Comment : Page 19 Farron 's close encounter of the Brexit kind Pages 4-5 'Threats against Britain have been issued by European politicians and officials . All of these acts have been deliberately timed to affect the result of the General Election ' THERESA MAY OUTSIDE NUMBER 10
Brexit migration cuts may push state pension age up ; Hard Brexit effect could force people to work longer
BRITONS may have to work longer if immigration is cut in the wake of Brexit , the Government 's pension adviser warns today . John Cridland , a former CBI director reviewing the state pension age for the Government , said the `` Brexit Factor '' had made the future of the state pension uncertain . The Government 's decision on pension changes , due in May , will be informed by Mr Cridland 's report to be published one month earlier . New calculations reveal a `` hard Brexit '' in which migration is greatly reduced , could push up retirement ages , potentially forcing people to work well into their mid-70s . Mr Cridland 's forthcoming report will be based on the latest Office for Budget Responsibility forecasts , which do not take Brexit into account , meaning it could quickly become outdated . However , he told an audience at an International Longevity Centre conference that the future ratio of pensioners to working age people - a major factor affecting the cost of the state pension - was now `` unpredictable '' due to three factors : life expectancy , fertility and post-Brexit migration policies . Projections calculated by actuaries at Hymans Robertson show a `` hard Brexit '' could result in the state pension age needing to be raised by 18 months for people currently under 40 . The calculations are based on projections by researchers at King 's College London which assume national insurance number registrations by migrants fall after `` extreme '' Brexit migration policy from around 600,000 to 140,000 in three years . Eventually this would lead to over a million fewer under 70 paying the pensions of over a million more over 70 . Prof Sarah Harper , director of the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing , said : `` The state pension may well have to be revised and this will come as a nasty surprise to many . '' Law firm Eversheds Sutherland , which is researching the effect of Brexit on the state pension age , has warned that if the Government fails to raise state pension age amid falling migration , it will have to raise taxes instead . Francois Barker , a director at the firm , said : `` All the signs are that Brexit is likely to reduce the number of people of working age coming into the UK from the EU and , unless this shortfall is made up elsewhere , the UK 's old-age dependency ratio looks set to rise even further than currently projected . This may force the Government to increase state pension age , reduce the rate of the state pension or raise taxes . '' A spokesman at the Department for Work and Pensions said : `` We are committed to reviewing the state pension age each parliament and take into account the most up to date projections at the time . '' Grey pound Pensioners outearn younger workers Pensioner household incomes have overtaken working age ones for the first time , a study has found . Elderly spending power has been boosted by a new wave of pensioners who tend to still be in work , own a home and receive generous pension pots , the Resolution Foundation for the Intergenerational Commission report shows . Its As Time Goes By study states , after housing costs , typical pensioner households are now £20 a week better off than typical working age ones . In 2001 typical pensioner incomes were £70 worse off . The proportion of senior households in which at least one person works has grown from one in eight in 2001 to nearly one in five . Some 73 per cent of pensioners own their homes , up from 64 per cent in 2001 .
Brexit delay MPs accused of subverting the will of the people
A COALITION of Europhile MPs planning to delay Brexit by forcing Commons votes on the issue are `` subverting the will of the British public '' , a Cabinet minister has said . Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary , hit out at Brexit opponents including Ed Miliband , Nick Clegg and senior figures in her own party attempting to force a Commons vote before Mrs May triggers Article 50 . The MPs , who include a number of senior Tories , want to use the Commons to force Mrs May to abandon plans to pull out of the European single market as part of the Brexit process , something she has hinted that she intends to do . They will attempt to table a vote calling on Mrs May to set out a detailed `` Brexit plan '' in Parliament . Mrs May has said she will trigger Article 50 - which begins the formal Brexit negotiations - by March next year . However , speaking on the BBC 's The Andrew Marr Show , Mr Clegg , the former Lib Dem leader , said his plans to force a Commons vote could delay the triggering of Article 50 , effectively pausing Britain 's withdrawal from the EU . Asked what would happen if the Government lost the vote on the `` Brexit plan '' , Mr Clegg said : `` [ Mrs May ] would have to go back and improve her negotiating stance . '' Mrs May only has a majority in the Commons of 12 , meaning that a small group of Tory rebels could lead to her losing a Brexit vote . Ms Patel criticised the MPs plotting votes in the Commons designed to destabilise the Government . She said : `` I 'd say respectfully that the job of the Government is to deliver the result of the referendum . '' She added : `` The British people have spoken and we 're going to deliver for them . This is not about using Parliament as a vehicle to subvert the democratic will of the British public . '' Nicola Sturgeon , the SNP leader , said that Mrs May does not have a `` mandate '' to take Britain out of the single market . She said her MPs in Westminster will back a vote forcing Mrs May to come forward with a Brexit plan . `` I do n't believe there is a majority in the House of Commons for a hard Brexit , '' she said . Ms Sturgeon added that Mrs May 's refusal to present a plan for Brexit in the Commons is `` untenable '' and `` unacceptable '' . She added : `` The House of Commons and the wider public has almost been told to butt out and mind their own business . ''
What to watch ; TELEVISION WEDNESDAY 21 JUNE BODY : Brexit Means Brexit BBC Two , 9.00pm ; Scotland , 11.15pm Bafta-winning documentary maker Patrick Forbes follows up last year 's superb fly-on-the-campaign film Brexit : A Very British Coup with another that follows players in the ongoing Brexit debate over the turbulent 12 months since Britain voted to leave the EU . `` In the last film we were watching the Brexit comet smash generations old certainties to pieces , '' says Forbes . `` This is about the establishment struggling to its feet and trying to ride that comet . '' Forbes spent time with people from all sides , from Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer to Anna Soubry , Nicholas Soames and Jacob Rees-Mogg and captured some extraordinary moments . He was at `` ordinary citizen '' Gina Miller 's side as she dragged the government to the supreme court over the triggering of Brexit and he was in the USA with Nigel Farage as he `` went off as Donald Trump 's very special friend to the inauguration '' . And he was filming right up to , and after , the recent general election . `` One thing I am clearer about , '' says Forbes , `` is that ' Brexit means Brexit ' is not just an empty slogan . It is a genuine moment in history that 's going to test the British establishment as it has never been tested . '' Gerard O'Donovan Love Your Garden ITV , 8.00pm ; NI , 10.40pm Alan Titchmarsh 's series returns to help transform more people 's gardens . It begins in Plymouth , where Titchmarsh and the team create a contemporary outdoor space for former Marine Mark Ormord , who lost three limbs while fighting in Afghanistan . Ackley Bridge Channel 4 , 8.00pm There 's plenty of warmth and humour to be found in this comedy drama about two Yorkshire schools - one predominantly white , the other mostly Asian - merged into one . In episode three , Nas 's ( Amy-Leigh Hickman ) love life takes an awkward turn . The Met : Policing London BBC One , 9.00pm Who needs scripted crime dramas when you have the real thing right here ? This week in the fly-on-the-wall series the hunt for one of Ealing 's most-wanted burglars ends in a high-speed car chase and a crucial lead comes through regarding the case of an elderly man murdered in north London . Fargo Channel 4 , 10.00pm The third season of Noah Hawley 's excellent - and very loose - adaptation of the Coen brothers ' black comedy continues to find Emmit ( Ewan McGregor ) and Sy ( Michael Stuhlbarg ) trying to figure out what they 've got themselves into . Catherine Gee
Scotland Sturgeon raps Brexit 'xenophobes ' ; SNP leader claims there is a Tory intolerance towards foreigners that 'shames the party ' Unilever points the finger at 'negative impact ' of Brexit
NICOLA STURGEON will today claim that Conservative Right-wingers are using Brexit as a `` licence for xenophobia '' and pledge to build a cross-party coalition to prevent Theresa May taking Britain out of the EU 's single market . The First Minister will use her opening address to the SNP conference in Glasgow this morning to argue that the Tory Right wing is attempting to hijack Brexit and is using the vote to promote a hostility to foreigners `` that has long lain under the surface '' . She will claim they have no democratic mandate for a `` hard '' Brexit , which would see the UK clamp down on EU immigration and leave the single market , but they are `` determined '' to impose one `` regardless of the ruinous consequences '' . Leave voters did not back Brexit to give Boris Johnson , Liam Fox and David Davis carte blanche to `` throw economic rationality out of the window '' and lower living standards , she will say . Ms Sturgeon will confirm that SNP MPs will vote against Mrs May 's Great Repeal Bill , but she will also pledge to try to build a coalition in the Commons against a hard Brexit with Labour , the Liberal Democrats and moderate Tories . In a direct warning to the Prime Minister , who commands a working majority of only 16 , she will say : `` If the majority in the House of Commons stand up for what they know to be right , she will not get away with doing it . '' But the First Minister is expected to come under fierce pressure from her rank-and-file members to set out a clear timescale for a second independence referendum after Alex Salmond predicted she will stage it in autumn 2018 , following confirmation Britain is leaving the EU single market . The Conservatives last night said she should use the three-day conference to `` dump her threat '' of a rerun of the 2014 vote after opinion polls showed a majority of Scots oppose it and would reject separation again . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , pointed out that the UK single market is four times more important to Scottish exporters and confirmed that Brexit will lead to more powers being devolved to Holyrood . Ms Sturgeon 's stance on the EU single market puts her on a collision course with Mrs May , who has made clear that cutting European immigration is her priority in Brexit talks . A series of Cabinet ministers used last week 's Tory conference to set out plans to curb migration , although the Government later abandoned proposals that would force businesses to disclose how many foreign staff they employ . Ms Sturgeon will today claim the Conservative conference displayed an intolerance towards foreigners that was a `` disgrace '' and `` shames the Tory party and all who speak for it '' . `` But make no mistake - the Right wing of the Tory party is now in the ascendancy and it is seeking to hijack the referendum result . Brexit has become Tory Brexit , '' the SNP leader will tell her party members . `` They are using it as licence for the xenophobia that has long lain under the surface - but which is now in full view . They are holding it up as cover for a hard Brexit that they have no mandate for - but which they are determined to impose , regardless of the ruinous consequences . '' She will argue that many Leave voters are opposed to the `` actions and rhetoric of the Tories '' and are thinking `` that 's not what I voted for . '' In particular , she will say they do not want businesses to face EU tariffs , holidaymakers to require visas or `` the scapegoating of foreigners . '' exit from the EU . Mr Davis warned of a `` blame Brexit festival '' as he rejected demands from a cross-party coalition of MPs that backbenchers are allowed to vote on the terms of Britain 's exit from the EU . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , also attacked MPs not `` accepting '' the Brexit vote , telling the Commons : `` We are siding with the British people who voted to leave the European Union . '' A series of senior Conservative MPs faced a barrage of criticism from their colleagues as they joined a cross-party coalition attempting to stop a so-called `` hard Brexit '' and ensure that Britain remains a member of the single market . There was growing anger last night over Unilever 's attempt to increase the price of its brands , which also include Colman 's , Flora , Comfort and Knorr . Ahead of the EU referendum , Unilever said the firm would be `` negatively impacted '' by Brexit . Unilever said that the `` way we run the company may be fundamentally different if the decision were taken to leave the EU '' . Ahead of the referendum Paul Polman , Unilever 's CEO , said that a Brexit would force up the price of ice cream . He said : `` Let 's take our ice cream for example , one of our Walls products - a Magnum ; undoubtedly if the UK will leave the conditions will not be as good as if they stay in . '' Dave Lewis , Tesco 's chief executive who joined to steer the turnaround of Britain 's biggest supermarket in 2014 , was the former head of Unilever 's personal goods range , credited with helping to revive the Dove soap range . At Tesco 's interim results last week Mr Lewis said that he was not `` comfortable '' with suppliers ' efforts to reclaim costs when sterling drops , when they fail to pass on currency benefits to shoppers . Gone from shelves Brands removed from Tesco website ? Surf washing powder ? Persil washing powders ? Comfort fabric conditioner ? Hellmann 's , mayonnaise ? Pot Noodle Ben & Jerry 's Ice Cream ? Knorr stock cubes ? Bertolli spreads ? Dove soap products ? Colman 's mustard 'The Right wing of the Tory party is in the ascendancy and is seeking to hijack the referendum result '
Mutiny in the Commons blows up storm for May 's Brexit talks ; Conservative rebels win battle for 'meaningful ' vote on leaving EU in embarrassment to Government 'Tonight Parliament took control ' boast Tory rebels
THERESA MAY last night suffered a major Conservative mutiny against her Brexit plans after 11 of her own MPs refused to back the Government and boasted that Parliament had `` taken control '' . The Prime Minister lost a key vote in the Commons despite senior Conservatives pleading with the self-styled `` rebel alliance '' to back Mrs May or risk a disorderly Brexit . Following chaotic scenes in Parliament , the rebels defied their party by voting through an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill demanding a `` meaningful '' vote on Brexit . In a sign of the ongoing bitter recriminations , one of those behind the mutiny was last night sacked as vice-chairman of the Conservative Party . The disunity in her party threatened to undermine Mrs May on the eve of a crucial Brussels summit at which she is hoping to receive backing from other European leaders to move on Brexit talks to begin discussing trade . Whitehall sources fear that some European politicians may seek to use the problems faced by the Prime Minister in Parliament to secure further concessions or legal guarantees . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator , last night hailed the Government 's defeat as a `` good day for democracy '' . GETTY TAYLOR/ JACK He said : `` British Parliament takes back control . European and British Parliament together will decide on the final agreement . Interests of the citizens will prevail over narrow party politics . A good day for democracy . '' The dispute arose over the status of the vote on the Brexit deal before March 2019 , which the rebels had insisted must be guaranteed in law . Ministers had pledged to give Parliament a proper vote but warned that the rebel amendment demanding that a `` meaningful vote '' should be enshrined in law risked derailing a `` smooth and orderly '' Brexit . What had been seen as a technical row yesterday erupted into a major political embarrassment for No 10 . Last night , Brexit-supporting Con-servative MPs rounded on their colleagues - who were led by former ministers Dominic Grieve , Anna Soubry , Ken Clarke and Nicky Morgan - warning that they had undermined Brexit and boosted Labour 's chances at the next election . Nadine Dorries said : `` Tonight , the Tory rebels have put a spring in Labour 's step , given them a taste of winning , guaranteed the party a weekend of bad press , undermined the Prime Minister and devalued her impact in Brussels . `` They should be deselected and never allowed to stand as a Tory MP , ever again . I 've been a rebel myself , but never when a Marxist government was knocking at the door . '' Michael Fabricant , another Tory MP , said : `` Labour 's cheers in the Chamber should have been cause for deep reflection by the likes of Anna Soubry and Dominic Grieve . A shallow victory for the Remainers , but a victory for Labour morale and polling . '' Stephen Hammond , who was sacked as Conservative vice-chairman last night , was one of 11 Tory MPs including Sir Oliver Heald , Bob Neill , Antoinette Sandbach , Sarah Wollaston , and Jonathan Djanogly who joined Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats in the anti-Brexit move . The Government said it was `` disappointed '' and senior Conservatives raised concerns the vote could be used to frustrate or block Brexit entirely . Labour MPs punched the air in jubilation as the result of the vote was announced , while Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , said that the result was `` humiliating '' for Mrs May . The rebels accused the Government of being `` stupid '' for failing to make more concessions ahead of the vote as they vowed to defeat the Government again next week in a rebellion on plans to enshrine the date of Brexit in law . Ms Soubry , a former business minister , said : `` It was a stupid fight the Government fought and they fought it very badly . I 'm afraid they did themselves no favours . '' Nicky Morgan , a former education secretary , said : `` Tonight Parliament took control of the EU withdrawal process . '' The Government had made a series of last-minute climbdowns in a bid to appease rebels over the amendment , which was tabled by Dominic Grieve , a Tory MP and former attorney general . At 5.30am David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , sent Tory MPs a letter promising Parliament a vote on the Brexit deal `` as soon as possible '' . Throughout the day the Prime Minister called the rebels into Downing Street one by one in an attempt to win them over . Less than half an hour before the vote Dominic Raab , the justice minister , pledged to commit to a meaningful vote at the next stage of the EU Withdrawal Bill . However , Mr Grieve said that the climbdown was `` too late '' . It came after a day of extraordinary clashes between the Government and pro-European Tory MPs in the run-up to the vote . Julian Smith , the Chief Whip , threatened to sue pro-European MPs for defamation as he strongly denied claims that he had `` bullied '' a female MP and reduced her to tears . Tory MPs also clashed in the Commons where one pro-Brexit MP was heckled by rebel Tories and told to `` sit down '' as he made an intervention . Philip Davies , a Brexit-supporting MP , said : `` The problem with ( Mr Grieve 's ) amendment is it could be , and no doubt is designed to be , used to try to overturn and frustrate that meaningful vote ... it 's a shame he has n't got the courage of his convictions to admit that that 's what his game is . '' Oliver Letwin , a former Cabinet minister , warned in the debate : `` You either exit without a deal or you exit with a deal . If the deal is rejected but the Government is told it can not leave without a deal then it can not leave . '' Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , said : `` My contempt for career politicians knows no bounds . ''
Labour plans raise prospect of second Brexit referendum
LABOUR will today unveil plans to frustrate Brexit by scrapping the Tories ' Great Repeal Bill , raising the prospect of a second European Union referendum . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , will commit Labour to a new EU Rights and Protections Bill to ensure there is no change to workers ' rights , consumer rights or environmental protections . A Labour government will also scrap the Tories ' Brexit White Paper , which set out the Government 's plans for Brexit , and `` replace it with fresh negotiating priorities that have a strong emphasis on retaining the benefits of the Single Market and the Customs Union '' . Conservative Eurosceptic MPs said the scale of the plans would make it difficult for Jeremy Corbyn , as prime minister , not to agree to hold a second referendum . Iain Duncan-Smith , the former Tory Cabinet minister , said : `` The truth is that Labour is running scared that the Liberal Democrats will steal their votes . `` It is clear and obvious that they are in the worse of all worlds - they are in effect opposing Brexit and raising the prospect of a second referendum but have n't got the guts to say so . '' Jacob Rees-Mogg MP added : `` Clearly what he wants to do is scrap Brexit . He is using code for this by referencing other issues . The only person this will please is Tony Blair as the Labour Party abandons all its voters outside London . '' Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has already pledged a new Great Repeal Bill to repatriate EU regulations into UK law to ensure that Brexit is implemented with as little upheaval as possible . Sir Keir will say an EU Rights and Protections Bill `` will make sure that all EUderived laws - including workplace laws , consumer rights and environmental protections - are fully protected without qualifications , limitations or sunset clauses . `` We will work with trade unions , businesses and stakeholders to ensure there is a consensus on this vital issue . A Labour approach to Brexit will ensure there can be no rolling back of key rights and protections . '' Sir Keir will also say : `` A Labour government will set out a new Brexit strategy . We will scrap the Government 's Brexit White Paper and replace it with fresh negotiating priorities that reflect Labour values and our six tests . `` The White Paper will have a strong emphasis on retaining the benefits of the Single Market and the Customs Union , as Labour know that is vital to protecting jobs and the economy . `` And we will approach negotiations in a completely different way to a Tory Brexit : negotiating for the many , not the few . '' Sir Keir will say that - unlike Mrs May - Labour will not walk away from the EU without any agreement , saying it `` will not accept 'no deal ' as a viable option '' . Labour will seek to settle transitional arrangements early in the negotiations and will `` unilaterally guarantee legal rights for all EU nationals living in the UK and seek reciprocal rights for UK citizens in the EU '' . Dominic Raab MP , a Conservative member of the Exiting the European Union Select Committee , said : `` There is a real risk of Jeremy Corbyn - with the support of the SNP and Lib Dems - becoming Prime Minister and being in charge of the Brexit negotiations . He is a weak leader of a divided party who could n't get the right deal for the United Kingdom . '' Asked what Labour 's position on Brexit is , Lord Mandelson told the BBC 's Newsnight : `` Search me . '' In a day of further turmoil for the party yesterday , Andrew Gwynne , Labour 's election campaign chief , contradicted his leader and said he would kill Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( Isil ) leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi if offered the chance . On Sunday Mr Corbyn refused to answer the question . It came as Nia Griffith , the party 's shadow defence secretary , also contradicted Mr Corbyn and promised that Trident renewal will be included in Labour 's manifesto after the Labour leader hinted it might not be on Sunday . It has emerged that hard Brexit supporters including Iain Duncan Smith , Theresa Villiers and Kate Hoey have been placed on an `` attack list '' of 20 MPs by a pro-EU group that will attempt to oust them by mobilising 500,000 supporters . Open Britain , the successor organisation to the Remain campaign , whose board includes Lord Mandelson , believes it can unseat MPs even where they have large majorities by targeting them . It wants to redraw the balance between Leavers and Remainers in Parliament . 'A Labour government will set out a new Brexit strategy - negotiating for the many , not the few '
Bank Governor is enemy of Brexit , says Rees-Mogg
JACOB REES-MOGG has labelled Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , an `` enemy of Brexit '' and accused the BBC of bias . The MP for Somerset North said Mr Carney had been `` consistently wrong '' on the economy and condemned the negative attitudes of many , including the radio show on which he was appearing . Mr Rees-Mogg said : `` Mark Carney is one of the enemies of Brexit , he has attacked it consistently . '' He also attacked the `` anti-Brexit '' BBC , telling Radio 5 Live : `` It 's the constant refrain of the BBC - in spite of Brexit there 's some good news ; because of Brexit there 's some bad news . '' He disputed claims that Brexit was harming the economy , saying that the `` fall of the pound has helped the economy '' and that the drop in GDP was because of growth last year . Editorial Comment : Page 19
Scotland Exit deal caught between the Rock and a hard place
SPAIN 'S effective veto over whether the Brexit deal will apply to Gibraltar could be illegal under EU law and faces being overturned by the European Court of Justice , The Daily Telegraph can reveal . MEPs and legal experts have warned that the veto over Gibraltar 's future after Brexit would give Spain special status among EU nations , which are supposed to be equal . The EU 's Brexit negotiating guidelines , drafted on behalf of the remaining 27 countries , state that the Brexit deal will not apply to Gibraltar without an `` agreement between the kingdom of Spain and the UK '' . It led to accusations that Spain was using Brexit to mount a `` land grab '' for the Rock . Spain 's right to a veto over Gibraltar 's post-Brexit future must be based on EU treaty law . However , it is uncertain if Article 50 , which triggered Brexit , is legally watertight enough to give the guarantee . Experts suggested that the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) could rule that the veto is in breach of EU law and force it to be changed . Isabella de Monte , a Socialist MEP from Italy , has demanded clarification over the issue in a European Parliamentary question . She asked if Article 50 was strong enough to support the special treatment of the Spanish and , if not , if there was still legal basis for the veto . Bart Van Vooren , of global law firm Covington and Burling , said : `` Could such a legal issue become an obstacle to the withdrawal agreement with the UK ? That certainly can not be excluded . '' `` Nothing is clear about the legal issues arising from Article 50 , '' said Steve Peers , expert on EU law and professor of law at the University of Essex . A legal challenge to the Spanish veto could hand British negotiators leverage in Brexit talks , and help push back against Spanish sovereignty claims over the Rock . Such a challenge would risk throwing the already tight timetable for the Brexit negotiations into disarray . If there is no EU-UK agreement by March 2019 , Britain will leave the EU in what has been called `` the hardest of Brexits '' .
Blair 's blueprint to block Brexit branded 'delusional ' ; Why should n't we think again about Brexit , says former PM
TONY BLAIR yesterday unveiled his blueprint for stopping Brexit , setting out his plans to use the NHS , jobs and living standards to make the case for a second referendum or fresh general election . The former prime minister published a 32-page document claiming that Brexit is already damaging the economy by hitting productivity , increasing food prices and deterring investment . It is likely to form the basis of a carefully orchestrated campaign by Mr Blair and other leading Remain-supporting politicians to secure a second referendum on Brexit as the exit date of March 29 , 2019 approaches . However , Lord Lamont , the former Conservative chancellor and prominent Eurosceptic , said that Mr Blair was `` delusional '' and branded his blueprint as `` Project Fear mark two '' . Several of the document 's key assertions were contradicted yesterday . Mr Blair 's report , entitled `` Brexit - what we now know '' , examines the impact of Brexit on 16 aspects of the economy since the referendum , including financial services , agriculture , construction and the car industry . It highlights the Government 's `` concessions and chaos '' over Brexit , and criticises every potential outcome ranging from leaving the EU without a deal to adopting a Norway model . The former Labour leader 's claims were challenged yesterday morning by John Humphrys , the BBC Radio 4 presenter , in an interview in which he accused Mr Blair of being `` tendentious '' , `` elitist '' and `` undemocratic '' . He was accused of `` conflating two things '' after claiming there were `` significant staff shortages '' in the NHS in the wake of the EU referendum vote . Official figures show that the number of EU nationals working in the NHS increased by 5.4 per cent in the year after the Brexit vote . Mr Blair 's also directly challenged by over his claim that Brexit is damaging the UK 's productivity . Humphrys highlighted that fact that productivity has been a consistent issue in the UK since Mr Blair 's time in office . He told Mr Blair that his plan to give voters the chance to reverse Brexit with another referendum or even a special election risked provoking `` civil disobedience '' . Mr Blair'sisted that there was nothing wrong with continuing the `` democratic debate '' . Humphrys replied : `` If you do n't like the result of the referendum you have another one ? '' The former prime minister said : `` The common sense [ approach ] would be to say if the circumstances change and [ we ] decide on reflection that that new relationship does not offer us a better way forward for the future ' of the country , why should n't we be entitled to think again ? '' Lord Lamont accused Mr Blair on the Today programme of `` attempting to sabotage the result of the EU referendum '' . He said : `` This is not about examining the terms of a deal . It 's about opposing withdrawal at all costs . The giveaway is that within hours of the referendum result , people had a petition asking for a second referendum . Are we to have a third , a fourth referendum ? When does it stop ? He 's delusional ' . This is `` Project Fear mark two '' . and the plan for sabotaging the referendum Senior Labour MPs described Mr Blair 's intervention as `` utterly unhelpful '' . Mr Blair'said he disagreed with the Labour Party 's stance , saying it was mistaken tactically : `` First , because the Labour Party is saying that we too would do Brexit , we can not attack its vast distractive impact . `` Labour could mount such a powerful assault on the Government 's `` cord from the appalling state of the NHS to crime , which through neglect and failure to support the police is on the rise again , if we were saying to the country : here 's the agenda which could be delivered for the people were it not for the fact that all the energies of government and substantial amounts of cash are devoted to Brexit . `` And , second , it puts us in a vulnerable position when the Government 's `` conludes 'the deal ' some time in 2018 . '' u Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , is to meet the EU 's Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier on Monday so he can represent `` the views of the 17.4 million '' . Mr Farage wrote on Twitter that he wanted people to send in their questions for Mr Barnier and promising to pick the `` best three '' . The anti-Brexit pressure group Open Britain derided the decision , saying it was `` like sending an arsonist to put out a house fire '' .
UK can not cherry-pick trade deal , warns EU ; Britain must be free to go its own way after Brexit , Prime Minister will be told as she faces Cabinet row
THERESA MAY will today face a Cabinet row over Brexit after the EU warned that there was `` no way '' that the Prime Minister would be able to strike a bespoke trade deal with Brussels . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , said that Britain must `` face the consequences '' of Brexit and could not `` cherry-pick '' and still enjoy the benefits of the Single Market after Brexit . Allies of Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , said Mr Barnier 's comments significantly boosted their case for Britain to be free of EU regulations and laws after Brexit . Eurosceptics in the Cabinet , who also include David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , want Britain to diverge from the EU so it is free to strike trade deals with other countries . However , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , and Greg Clark , the Business Secretary , want to ensure the UK remains closely aligned with the EU to reduce the impact on the economy . The Prime Minister will today insist that the UK will be free to negotiate and sign trade deals during a two-year transition period after Brexit . There was confusion last week when the EU 's negotiating guidelines said that Britain must comply with the bloc 's trade policy during the transition . However , Brussels sources subsequently confirmed that the UK will be able to sign deals with other countries as long as their implementation does not take place until 2021 . In an interview with Prospect magazine , Mr Barnier said the UK would not be able to `` mix up '' the benefits of Norway , which is a full member of the Single Market , and Canada , which has trade and services agreement with the EU . He said : `` They have to realise there wo n't be any cherry picking . `` We wo n't mix up the various scenarios to create a specific one and accommodate their wishes , mixing , for instance , the advantages of the Norwegian model , member of the Single Market , with the simple requirements of the Canadian www.one.No way . They have to face the consequences of their own decision . '' Mr Johnson and Mr Gove 's allies said that Brussels had effectively `` torpedoed '' Mr Hammond 's hopes of securing a close alignment with the EU after Brexit . However , a government source insisted that Mr Barnier 's intervention was a negotiating `` bluff `` . It comes after Mr Johnson warned in an interview at the weekend that the UK must not become a `` vassal state '' of the EU after Brexit . The Prime Minister will today try to address criticism of the two-year transition she is attempting to negotiate with the EU after Brexit in March 2019 . Eurosceptics have warned it will effectively delay Brexit until 2021 because Britain 's relationship with the EU will be virtually unchanged during that period . Addressing the Commons , the Prime Minister will say that the UK will be able to negotiate and sign new trade deals during the transition period , although they will not come into force until it ends . She will also announce plans to register new migrants during the transition , who will be subject to controls after the UK leaves the European Union . She will say : `` As I proposed in Florence , during this strictly time-limited implementation period which we will now begin to negotiate , we would not be in the Single Market or the Customs Union , as we will have left the European Union . `` But we would propose that our access to one another 's markets would continue as now , while we prepare and implement the new processes and new systems that will underpin our future partnership . `` During this period we intend to register new arrivals from the EU as preparation for our future immigration system . And we will prepare for our future independent trade policy by negotiating - and where possible signing - trade deals , which could come into force after the conclusion of the implementation period . '' Editorial Comment : Page 19
Scotland May dares rebels to defy her on Brexit ; EU date to be set in law as PM shores up Eurosceptics in Cabinet with Mordaunt
THERESA MAY today warns pro-European Tory rebels that she will not `` tolerate '' any attempts to undermine Brexit as she unveils plans to enshrine in law the date that Britain leaves the EU . The Government last night tabled an amendment to commit Britain formally to leaving the European Union at 11pm on March 29 2019 ahead of a debate and vote in the Commons next week . The amendment will effectively force pro-European MPs to declare publicly if they oppose leaving the EU in March 2019 . Writing in The Daily Telegraph , the Prime Minister warns MPs that they must not use the passage of the EU Withdrawal Bill through Parliament over the next month to try to `` slow down or stop '' Brexit . The Prime Minister is also attempting to reassert her authority after losing two Cabinet ministers in the space of a week while Brexit talks with Brussels remain deadlocked with no signs of a breakthrough . She yesterday bowed to the demands of Eurosceptic Tory MPs by appointing Penny Mordaunt , a Brexit supporter who serves as a Royal Naval reservist , to replace Priti Patel as International Development Secretary . Mrs May says in her article : `` We will not tolerate attempts from any quarter to use the process of amendments to this Bill as a mechanism to try to block the democratic wishes of the British people by attempting to slow down or stop our departure from the European Union . `` The British people have been clear Parliament itself voted for Article 50 - and for this bill at its second reading . We are leaving the European Union on March 29 2019 . '' She says that the Government 's amendment , which has cross-party backing , will set out in `` black and white '' that Britain will leave the EU . The comments will be seen as a direct challenge to Tory rebels , who have said that they are prepared to defeat the Government by siding with opposition parties to secure a legally-binding vote on the final Brexit deal . The UK will leave at 11pm - an hour earlier than previously thought - because the timing of Brexit under the terms of Article 50 is determined by Brussels . The Prime Minister says that while she is prepared to work with MPs to `` improve '' the bill , they must ultimately `` come together '' and help the UK secure the best deal for Britain as it leaves the EU . She says : `` Let no one doubt our determination or question our resolve , Brexit is happening . `` It will be there in `` black and white '' the front page of this historic piece of legislation . the EU Withdrawal Bill is the single most significant piece of legislation in this Parliament because it is fundamental to delivering a smooth and orderly Brexit . '' EU leaders are said to be preparing for the fall of Mrs May 's government 'After Brexit I might have to relocate to Frankfurt ' within weeks after scandal and divisions threatened her grip on power . Mrs May 's appointment of Ms Mordaunt , 44 , follows a backlash over her decision to appoint Gavin Williamson , the former Chief Whip who backed Remain , as Defence Secretary . The Prime Minister also appointed Victoria Atkins as a Home Office minister . Allies said that the promotions of the two women showed that Mrs May wants to bring in `` fresh blood '' ahead of a full reshuffle later this year . The promotion of Ms Mordaunt came after Ms Patel was forced to resign over secret meetings with Israeli politicians . She is expected to make a series of interventions from the backbenches during the debate over the EU
May 's Big Speech must offer a Big Tent Brexit ; The PM 's tendency to freeze out those who criticise or disagree with her will do her no favours
Like so many modern political habits , the tradition of the Prime Minister 's Big Speech comes from Tony Blair . Whether to stamp authority on an issue , answer critics alleging a lack of leadership , or distract from some other problem , Mr Blair would offer a Big Speech , an act of oratory intended to dominate the agenda , capture headlines and frame political debate . Whether such speeches actually work is an open question , not least since most people barely notice them . But politicians always enjoy the idea that they can change the world through the power of their words alone . Gordon Brown and David Cameron liked Big Speeches too . Theresa May resisted for half a year , but she will soon give her first Big Speech , about Brexit . Next month , she will `` set out more about our approach and about the opportunity I think we have as a country to use this process to forge a truly global Britain '' . Sounds grand . That 's a problem of Big Speeches : they raise hopes . Just ask Mr Cameron . He made a Big Speech about Europe just three Januaries ago and it destroyed him . He did n't just announce the EU referendum , he cast it as a choice between leaving and staying on radically different terms . The expectations he raised meant the reforms he finally offered could only disappoint voters . That left him offering them a choice between Brexit and a status quo he had admitted was unacceptable . In this respect , Mrs May will come to her speech with a certain advantage : no one will expect the exquisite details of her negotiating strategy . The message-free message of `` Brexit means Brexit '' has sunk in , at Westminster and among EU leaders . Mrs May 's glacial opacity is now accepted as a fact of life . Yet she still needs to learn from Mr Cameron 's mistakes . Her speech needs to balance hope and disappointment . More delicate still , her optimism and pessimism must be offered to the same audience : Leave voters and the politicians who speak for them . The optimism they need is this : Brexit will happen . Britain will leave the EU . That needs to be said , loud and clear and often , to lift the curious gloom afflicting many Leavers . Despite a decisive referendum victory and the appointment of a Prime Minister who knows her job depends on it , many Brexiteers remain oddly timid , fearful of political opponents whose strength and resolve they exaggerate : despite the magical power some Tories ascribe to him , Mr Blair will not bewitch Britain out of Brexit . Nor will a few dozen refuseniks in Parliament block Article 50 if the courts force Mrs May to legislate ; she will win there , easily . Yet even as she reassures the Brexiteers , Mrs May should ready them for disappointment , a Brexit that takes longer than they 'd like and may include more Europe than they 'd hoped . She should build on the hints of recent weeks to confirm that in the Government 's view , neither a `` transitional '' deal after our formal exit nor some participation in either the single market or the customs union is incompatible with honouring the referendum result . There are two reasons to prepare the ground for a Brexit that falls short of the Brexiteers ' dreams . First , barring a failure of talks that really is n't in anyone 's interests , the terms of our exit and our new relationship with the EU will be a compromise , falling somewhere between Britain 's ideal outcome and the EU 's . Second , Brexit will also be a compromise between different British positions : it needs to be accepted not just by Leavers but by Remainers too . Most of the latter , contra Mr Blair , accept that Brexit is inevitable ; arguing to stay in the single market is n't a plot to stop Brexit , merely an opinion about how to achieve it . The referendum result did not end political debate : the 48 per cent may be in the minority , but they have votes , and voices . Mrs May should make clear she seeks a Brexit for the 100 per cent , or as many as possible , to make sure she goes to the negotiating table with the broadest support . The more aggressive players on the EU team , notably Guy Verhofstadt of the European Parliament , are openly trying to exploit differences between Leavers and Remainers . Mrs May 's best answer is to eliminate those differences , bringing as many reasonable Remainers as she can into partnership with Leavers . Instead of leaving George Osborne to plot on the backbenches , she should make clear there is a place for him in what amounts to a national coalition for Brexit . That does n't have to mean a ministerial job , just the chance to be heard , respectfully , within the Government . Mrs May 's unfortunate tendency to freeze out those who criticise or disagree with her will do her no favours either in the Brexit negotiations or the effort to sell the outcome of those talks to Britain . Mrs May would probably rather die than admit she owes any political debt to Mr Blair , much less draw inspiration from him . But since she 's following his pattern with her big speech , she might as well learn from his habit of casting his political net as widely as possible : time for Big Tent Brexit . FOLLOW James Kirkup on Twitter @ jameskirkup ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Trump chides May : I would be tougher with EU on Brexit
DONALD TRUMP has criticised Theresa May over her Brexit strategy and said that he would have taken a `` tougher '' approach with Brussels . The US president said the European Union was `` not cracked up to what it 's supposed to be '' and claimed he was unsurprised by the result of the Brexit referendum because Britons `` do n't want people coming from all over the world into Britain '' . The comments will be seized on by Brexiteers who are urging the Prime Minister to take a tougher approach with the EU and pursue a clean Brexit . In an interview broadcast on ITV last night , Piers Morgan asked Mr Trump if Mrs May was in a `` good position '' in Brexit talks . The president replied : `` Would it be the way I negotiate ? No , I would n't negotiate it the way it 's ( being ) negotiated ... I would have had a different attitude . '' He went on : `` I would have said that the European Union is not cracked up to what it 's supposed to be . I would have taken a tougher stand in getting out . '' Mr Trump also suggested that he predicted Brexit . The president said : `` I said ( that ) because of trade , but mostly immigration , Brexit is going to be a big upset . And I was right . '' The US president also hinted that he is preparing to enter into a trade war with the EU . He said : `` The European Union has been very , very unfair to the United States . And I think it will turn out to be very much to their detriment . '' He criticised the transition period after Brexit , but said he was committed to doing a free trade deal with the UK as soon as possible . He said : `` As you know , you 're somewhat restricted because of Brexit . And when that restriction is up , we 're going to be your great trading partner . It 's a tough restriction to have . You know , for a couple of years you have a very strong lack of being able to do things . `` No 10 declined to comment , but Baroness Evans , leader of the Conservatives in the Lords , said : `` I think Donald Trump tends to think he can do way better than most people in most senses . '' Trump clash with Jay-Z : Page 15
Tories and Labour hold secret talks on soft Brexit ; The Telegraph Election 2017 Cross-party commission offers way forward , says Hague
SENIOR Cabinet ministers are engaged in secret talks with Labour MPs to secure cross-party backing for a soft Brexit , it has emerged . Some of the most senior members of Theresa May 's team have been plotting how to force the Prime Minister to make concessions on immigration , the customs union and the single market . There have also been discussions of a cross-party Brexit Commission to agree common ground between the parties and ensure an orderly withdrawal from the EU . Labour is expected to use the talks as leverage to demand an end to the public sector pay freeze among a series of concessions in next week 's Queen 's Speech at the State Opening of Parliament . Mrs May is understood to have been `` aware '' of the plot for several days but so far has done nothing to stop it . Ruth Davidson , the increasingly influential leader of the Scottish Conservatives , told Mrs May in a meeting yesterday that she must `` reach out '' to other parties and `` work with others on Brexit '' . She added that there should be `` changes in the offer on Brexit as we go forward '' - a direct challenge to the Prime Minister 's authority . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary and staunch Brexiteer , says it is vital that the Government can `` achieve a deal that can command the widest possible support '' . Last night Mrs May was cheered at the first meeting of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tory MPs since losing her majority as she told them : `` I got us into this mess and I 'll get us out of it . '' In other developments : Senior Conservatives suggested Mrs May will be allowed to continue as Prime Minister until 2019 ; The start of Brexit talks was delayed after the EU said the election result had caused uncertainty in Brussels ; Downing Street announced that the Queen 's Speech could be delayed by the need to reach an agreement with the DUP about what will be in it ; Theresa May will fly to Paris tonight to meet the French president , Emmanuel Macron , to discuss counter-terrorism and Brexit ; Labour 's policy on Brexit descended into chaos as two of Jeremy Corbyn 's most senior frontbenchers contradicted the Labour leader . Brexit will dominate whatever remains of Mrs May 's premiership , and the Conservatives behind the talks with Labour MPs believe the Prime Minister will have no choice but to accept their demands in order to ensure her Brexit plans are not blocked by Parliament . MPs who favour a soft Brexit or oppose it altogether , largely comprising those who backed Remain in the EU referendum , outnumber hard Brexiteers in the Commons . The two opposing sides forged alliances when they campaigned side by side in the EU referendum , and last night senior Conservative and Labour sources confirmed that talks were ongoing and look set to intensify over the coming weeks as negotiations with EU leaders begin . One senior Tory source said the election had made clear that the Conservatives were `` no longer in control of the Brexit process '' and added that the party must listen to `` all sides '' . Conservative MPs fear that losing akey vote on Brexit would weaken Mrs May 's position so much that she could be forced to stand aside , triggering a leadership contest or worse - a second election . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Lord Hague , the former Tory leader , puts forward a plan for how a crossparty commission would work . He suggests that the election result requires `` a change both of style and substance '' in government , and should be treated as `` an opportunity and a duty to tackle intractable issues in new ways '' . Gaining cross-party support , he says , will require a change in `` the emphasis given to the UK 's objectives , with a clear indication that economic growth will have priority over controlling the number of people entering the country for work '' . A commission would include business leaders , the first ministers of devolved governments and `` the leaders of all the opposition parties - yes , even Corbyn '' to agree common ground . He also suggests that Britain could join the European Economic Area , like Norway , for two years as a staging post to full Brexit . Yvette Cooper , one of Labour 's most senior and credible figures on immigration , also called for cross-party talks on how a deal is struck . Writing in the Guardian she said : `` We should set up a small cross-party commission to conduct the negotiations , and have a clear and transparent process to build consensus behind the final deal . `` It should be accountable to Parliament but avoid getting caught up in the inevitable hung parliament political rows . '' Jeremy Corbyn is working on plans to amend the Queen 's Speech , in which the Government will set out its plan to push Brexit through Parliament , to include his `` jobs-first '' plan for leaving the EU . Senior Labour sources said conversations had taken place to allow backchannels between the two parties to negotiate amendments to Brexit Bills which would soften the exit . If there is no agreement to set up a Brexit commission , one alternative would be for Labour backbenchers to table amendments , with agreement from pro-Remain Conservatives , which would be easier for Tory MPs to support than if they came from Mr Corbyn 's own team . The shadow cabinet would then `` fall in behind '' the same amendment , the source said , making it look like the change had not been won by Mr Corbyn himself . The sources added that Labour would urge the Prime Minister to change her tone and strategy on Brexit to focus on jobs and the economy rather than curbing immigration .
Scotland Starmer plans to scrap Great Repeal Bill raise prospect of second Brexit referendum
LABOUR will today unveil plans to frustrate Brexit by scrapping the Tories ' Great Repeal Bill , raising the prospect of a second European Union referendum . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , will commit Labour to a new EU Rights and Protections Bill to ensure there is no change to workers ' rights , consumer rights or environmental protections . A Labour government will also scrap the Tories ' Brexit White Paper , which set out the Government 's plans for Brexit , and `` replace it with fresh negotiating priorities that have a strong emphasis on retaining the benefits of the Single Market and the Customs Union '' . Tory Eurosceptic MPs said the scale of the plans would make it difficult for Jeremy Corbyn , as prime minister , not to agree to hold a second referendum . Iain Duncan-Smith , the former Tory Cabinet minister , said : `` The truth is that Labour is running scared that the Liberal Democrats will steal their votes . It is clear and obvious that they are in the worse of all worlds - they are in effect opposing Brexit and raising the prospect of a second referendum but have n't got the guts to say so . '' Theresa May has already pledged a new Great Repeal Bill to repatriate EU regulations into UK law to ensure that Brexit is implemented with as little upheaval as possible . Sir Keir will say an EU Rights and Protections Bill `` will make sure that all EUderived laws - including workplace laws , consumer rights and environmental protections - are fully protected '' . Sir Keir will also say : `` A Labour government will set out a new Brexit strategy . We will scrap the Government 's Brexit White Paper and replace it with fresh negotiating priorities that reflect Labour values and our six tests . Labour will seek to settle transitional arrangements early in the negotiations and will `` unilaterally guarantee legal rights for all EU nationals living in the UK and seek reciprocal rights for UK citizens in the EU '' . Sir Keir will add : `` It is shameful that the Prime Minister rejected repeated attempts by Labour to resolve this before Article 50 was triggered . ''
May tells civil servants to get on with Brexit ; Hammond plan to protect car industry after Brexit
THERESA MAY has given pro-EU civil servants their `` marching orders '' , telling them they must get on with the job of delivering Brexit . Senior government sources have complained that Europhile mandarins are attempting to sabotage Brexit by frustrating the work of ministers . Lord O'Donnell , the former Cabinet secretary , added to fears of a `` stitchup '' by pro-EU civil servants by warning Brexit was `` not inevitable '' and that Britain could end up remaining in a reformed EU . However , a Downing Street source said : `` The Prime Minister has been very clear that the Government will deliver on the Brexit vote and make a success of it . `` Those are the marching orders and the civil service will be expected to deliver . '' The Prime Minister will use a meeting of her Cabinet at Chequers on Wednesday to demand action plans for how Brexit can work . Mrs May will tell the meeting at her official country residence that how to make a success of Brexit and `` the opportunities for the UK '' is at the `` top of her in-tray '' . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , is expected to suggest Britain could leave the Single Market but retain access for the financial sector Continued on Page 4 Jeremy Warner : Page 14 Editorial Comment Page 15 Continued from Page 1 and car industry . The approach , if successful , would enable Britain to impose restrictions on free movement of EU migrants while ensuring that key parts of Britain 's economy are protected . It follows reports that Mr Hammond has clashed with senior Conservatives , who say he is restricting their plans to pull out of the Single Market . A source close to Mr Hammond insisted he is not `` operating a blocking mechanism '' . A former governor of the Bank of England has said Britain could be better off outside the EU , The Times reported . Lord King of Lothbury told Central Banking magazine that in the wake of the drop in the value of Sterling : `` We are now in a better position to rebalance the UK economy . '' He added that government forecasts ahead of the referendum `` inevitably were highly speculative '' . Meanwhile , Sigmar Gabriel , Germany 's economics minister , warned the EU could go `` down the drain '' if it gives in to Britain 's Brexit demands . He said : `` Brexit is bad but it wo n't hurt us as much economically as some fear - it 's more of a psychological problem and it 's a huge problem politically . `` If we organise Brexit in the wrong way , then we 'll be in deep trouble so now we need to make sure that we do n't allow Britain to keep the nice things , so to speak , related to Europe while taking no responsibility , '' He also said free trade negotiations between the EU have failed but `` nobody is really admitting it '' .
Adonis says May 'is voice of Ukip ' as he quits as tsar
LORD ADONIS , the Europhile Labour peer , has resigned as the Government 's infrastructure tsar , accusing Theresa May of becoming `` the voice of Ukip '' in her Brexit policy . The former transport secretary under Gordon Brown used his resignation letter to tell Mrs May she was putting Europe 's peace and security at risk , comparing the `` isolation '' of Brexit to the policy that preceded the First World War - something he removed from the version he later published . He described Brexit as `` a dangerous populist and nationalist spasm worthy of Donald Trump '' . Whitehall sources said his belief that Brexit can be stopped was so far against Government policy it effectively meant he `` jumped before he was pushed '' . It is understood he was planning to resign in the new year but brought it ahead when The Daily Telegraph obtained a draft of his letter to Mrs May . Although as a peer Lord Adonis is unelected , he lectures Mrs May about pursuing a Brexit policy for which she has `` no mandate '' , while saying he will `` relentlessly '' oppose the EU Withdrawal Bill in the House of Lords . Lord Adonis , who served in the Labour government of 2005 to 2010 , was made chairman of the National Infrastructure Commission by Mrs May in April , with the task of drawing together policy on roads , rail , HS2 and broadband . But he has attracted more attention for his stance on Brexit . He described it as `` self-mutilation '' and in October was accused of trying to thwart Brexit when he went to Brussels with fellow Europhiles Nick Clegg and Kenneth Clarke to meet Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator . In his letter , Lord Adonis said he was stepping down because of `` fundamental policy differences which simply ca n't be bridged '' . He said : `` The European Union Withdrawal Bill is the worst legislation of my lifetime , '' adding : `` After the narrow referendum vote for an undefined proposition to 'leave the EU , ' it could have been attempted without rupturing our essential European trade and political relations . `` However , by becoming the voice of Ukip and the extreme nationalist Rightwing of your party , you have taken a different course , for which you have no parliamentary or popular mandate . '' He predicted that Britain returning to the EU would become `` the mission of our children 's generation , who will marvel at your wanton destruction '' . In his draft letter , he went on to claim that Russian aggression , the rise of nationalism in Poland and Hungary , and British isolationism was creating conditions similar to those that came before the First World War . He warned : `` No one can doubt the resonances with the past or the dangers ahead . ''
This rebellion reminds the PM that Leaving is about Parliament too ; A great many powers are being repatriated from Brussels and MPs are keen to have a say in their use
As a handful of Tory rebels shared a bottle of wine in the Pugin Room after defeating the government over Brexit on Wednesday night , the real party was being held at the other end of the parliamentary estate . After the vote , some Labour MPs glided back to Jeremy Corbyn 's office for an early Christmas celebration that lasted well into the night ; there were reports of them toasting their new Tory accomplices . And this is why so many Conservatives have been so angry : they sense not just rebellion but outright betrayal . As happens so often in politics , tempers are running higher because the stakes are now lower . Brexit is not in danger - in fact , it has never looked more secure . And this is precisely why the Tories feel more at liberty to start fighting . As MPs told me after the rebellion : `` The Brexit deal is pretty safe , so we can now afford to murder each other . '' So far , this part of the plan is going rather well . Prime Minister Theresa May did not much mind her parliamentary defeat on Wednesday . Those who spoke to her afterwards said she was relaxed and joking that it was the least of the problems she has had to deal with this year . At lunchtime today , the European Council will say that the first - and , politically , the toughest - stage of the Brexit talks are complete . It was , in the end , all about money . We offered the equivalent of about four years ' membership fees and they accepted . Complicated trade talks will soon start , but there is now not much chance of negotiations collapsing entirely . It is not too great an exaggeration to say that the Brexit deal is mostly done and the panic over . And Parliament ? Its full permission for a Brexit has already been given and no other vote is required . That is what the fuss with the Supreme Court was all about . The vote for Article 50 was the big one , and it serves to eject the United Kingdom from the European Union by March 29 2019 whether or not there is a deal - and whether or not Parliament likes it . What has changed , now , is that MPs have made sure they will have the chance to vote on whether to approve whatever deal the Prime Minister negotiates - but it is all a bit tokenistic . If they do not approve , then Britain leaves with no deal at all . You can see why MPs are feeling a little aggrieved about all this . What they think about leaving the EU does not really matter anymore , which is why they were fighting to get back in the conversation . And revelling in the new roles that Brexit has allotted to them . Once , it was hard to think of a more obedient minister than Nicky Morgan or a more establishment figure than Dominic Grieve - yet both are now playing at being rebels , and quite enjoying it . On the other side we have Bernard Jenkin talking about the need for discipline and loyalty , to the amazement of the MPs who remember him collecting signatures calling for David Cameron 's resignation just after the near-miraculous Tory majority of 2015 . Not so long ago , Nadine Dorries would denounce Mr Cameron as an `` arrogant posh boy '' ; now , she is calling for the deselection of MPs who undermine the Prime Minister . The punch-up has been a long time in coming . A few weeks ago , this newspaper identified the new Tory mutineers , and we can expect to hear quite a lot from them in the next few weeks . But how much damage might they really do ? Only two , Ken Clarke and Anna Soubry , are genuinely out to thwart Brexit but lack the opportunity to do so . Most have no coherent agenda at all , they just think they ought to make life difficult for the government . They are picking their battles - and , I have to admit , making some fairly decent arguments in the process . A great many powers are being repatriated from Brussels and it 's not entirely clear that the Government knows what to do with them . One of the rebels ' main themes is that Parliament is needed to scrutinise these new powers . For example : bad , fractured regulation was one of the main causes of the financial crash of 2007 . If Brexit ends up creating a financial regulatory monster , with the wrong powers in the wrong hands , then the conditions for the next crash will be set . With this in mind , the Tory rebels can argue that standing up to the Government is not about subverting Brexit , but rather about securing the best kind of Brexit . Some of the rebels say that their real concern is Jeremy Corbyn . It 's one thing allowing the Conservative Government to acquire huge , unchecked powers as a result of Brexit . But what happens if Labour ends up in charge ? John McDonnell would be delighted if , as Chancellor , he had powers to direct a massive post- Brexit financial regulator without anyone in parliament to hold him back . So in most cases , this is seen as a kind of loyal mutiny : making sure that Brexit does not deform British government . Much of the rebellion is just about putting down a marker , to remind the Government that it needs to keep being afraid of Parliament . So the more trivial the law , the more likely the rebellion . When there 's a pointless , symbolic amendment - such as asking Parliament to set an exact date for Brexit - then the Government might well lose the vote . But the important Brexit votes are all going rather well . The Government has been winning them by a majority of about 20 seats , twice its actual majority . So we are not , really , looking at a dirty-dozen Tories hell-bent on stopping both Brexit and the Prime Minister . There are maybe one or two in that camp , a number so low that Mrs May should take it as an insult : Mr Cameron always had at least a dozen Tories dedicated to his destruction . But , in most cases , MPs are still working out when to obey , when to rebel and how best to shape the great many powers now on their way back to Westminster . It will be raucous , unedifying at times , and involve much more parliamentary drama - but this is precisely what Brexit is all about . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Brexiteers warn that 17 million voters must not be betrayed
THERESA MAY has been warned she `` must deliver on Brexit '' or she will betray the 17million people who voted last month for Britain to leave the European Union . Eurosceptic Cabinet ministers including Boris Johnson , the former Mayor of London , and Owen Paterson , a former Environment Secretary , said it is `` vital '' that Mrs May `` respects the will of the people '' . Owen Paterson , a former Environment Secretary and supporter of Andrea Leadsom , said : `` If she fails to deliver on Brexit there will be massive disillusionment in the political class as a whole . She must deliver a Brexit for the 17.4million people who voted for it . '' Boris Johnson , one of the leading voices in the Vote Leave camp , said : `` I have no doubt Theresa will make an excellent party leader and prime minister and I 'm encouraged that she 's made it clear that Brexit means Brexit - that we will leave the EU . `` It is vital that we respect the will of the people and get on with exploiting new opportunities for this country . '' Mrs May insisted yesterday that she is `` going to make a success '' of Brexit . She said : `` Our country needs strong , proven leadership to steer us through this time of economic and political uncertainty and to negotiate the best deal for Britain as we leave the EU and forge a new role for ourselves in the world . `` Because Brexit means Brexit , and we 're going to make a success of it . '' The new Tory leader had campaigned for the UK to remain inside the EU but did not make any high-profile appeals earning her criticism for her lacklustre approach . But she has vowed not to trigger Article 50 , the formal mechanism to begin a Brexit , until the UK is ready to negotiate a new deal . Mrs Leadsom , her former opponent , had promised to do so more quickly in order to speed up the process of leaving . Mrs May said there is no `` absolutely deadline '' for her to trigger the formal talks , adding the most important thing is to secure a good deal . She added : `` We should n't invoke Article 50 immediately , I 've said it should n't be before the end of the year , we need to set our own negotiation position . '' Other pro-Brexit MPs called for Mrs Leadsom to be given a position in Mrs May 's cabinet and backed the Tory leader 's promise to put a Brexiter in charge of plans to leave the EU . Nigel Evans MP , who campaigned for the UK to leave , said : `` There is no sidestepping , there is no second referendum , we are going to respect the wishes of the British people ... that 's exactly whats going to happen and Theresa did give a guarantee that a Brexiteer would be in charge of that withdrawal . It has to be someone who vigorously campaigned for us to leave the European Union . '' Politicians in Brussels conceded that Mrs May is a tough negotiator and will battle to get the best deal for the UK and one Italian newspaper described Mrs May as the English equivalent of Angela Merkel . EU sources are said to be pleased with Mrs May 's appointment as Prime Minister because she is a known quantity following her numerous talks and discussions during her time as a Cabinet minister .
Brexit price row over Marmite ; Tesco stops stocking Unilever products after it demands 10pc increase on everyday items Unilever is taking advantage of Brexit , say ministers
ONE OF Britain 's biggest supermarkets is running low on everyday household items such as Marmite and PG Tips after it refused to bow to demands from a major conglomerate to raise prices in the wake of the Brexit vote . Tesco was last night locked in a standoff with Unilever , which campaigned against Brexit , after the company demanded price rises of 10 per cent , blaming the falling value of the pound . Unilever , which earlier this year posted profits of more than £2 billion , is understood to have stopped deliveries to Tesco branches , leading to shortages of products including mayonnaise , Ben & Jerry 's ice cream , toothpaste and soap . Many of the items have been removed from Tesco 's online store , with reports that stocks could start running out in shops throughout the country . It is believed that a series of British supermarkets are in dispute with Unilever . Conservative MPs and industry insiders last night accused Unilever of `` exploiting consumers '' in the wake of Brexit . One minister described Unilever as `` reprehensible '' and said the company is `` using Brexit as an excuse '' . It came as David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , faced down a growing Tory rebellion in the Commons by saying that Parliament must not be allowed to `` thwart '' Britain 's exit from the EU . Mr Davis warned of a `` blame Brexit festival '' as he rejected demands from a cross-party coalition of MPs that backbenchers are allowed to vote on the terms of Britain 's exit from the EU . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , also attacked MPs not `` accepting '' the Brexit vote , telling the Commons : `` We are siding with the British people who voted to leave the European Union . '' A series of senior Tory MPs faced a barrage of criticism from their colleagues as they joined a cross-party coalition attempting to stop a so-called `` hard Brexit '' and ensure that Britain remains a member of the single market . There was growing anger last night over Unilever 's attempt to increase the price of its brands , which include Colman 's , Flora , Comfort and Knorr . Before the EU referendum , Unilever said the firm would be `` negatively impacted '' by Brexit . It said the `` way we run the company may be fundamentally different if the decision were taken to leave the EU '' . Ahead of the referendum Paul Polman , Unilever 's CEO , said that Brexit would force up the price of ice cream . He said : `` Let 's take our ice cream , for example , one of our Wall 's products - a Magnum ; undoubtedly if the UK will leave the conditions will not be as good as if they stay in . '' Dave Lewis , Tesco 's chief executive who joined to steer the turnaround of Britain 's biggest supermarket in 2014 , was the former head of Unilever 's personal goods range , credited with helping to revive Dove soap . At Tesco 's interim results last week , Mr Lewis said that he was not `` comfortable '' with suppliers ' efforts to reclaim costs when sterling drops , when they fail to pass on currency benefits to shoppers . The Tesco boss said that he would try to offset any cost increases brought on following the post-Brexit slump in the pound by boosting productivity and negotiating with suppliers . Sir Gerald Howarth , the Conservative MP , said : `` I think it will be very damaging to the reputation of Unilever if they seek to use the fall in the pound to exploit the consumer . `` Clearly products which are not dependent upon imports into the United Kingdom will not be affected by the fall in the value of the pound . `` Consumers will switch to other products where companies are n't seeking to fleece the consumer . '' Iain Wright , the Labour chairman of the business select committee with oversight of the retail sector , said : `` The last thing consumers need is a stand-off between Tesco and its suppliers , where shoppers ca n't buy their regular favourites and staple groceries off the shelves . `` This is exactly the kind of dispute which the Grocery Code Adjudicator was set up to intervene in and I trust they will be paying close attention to getting this situation resolved quickly . '' A Tory minister said : `` This is really quite reprehensible , they should n't be taking advantage in this way . They are using Brexit as an excuse , Tesco are to be applauded . '' The pound has fallen 17 per cent since Britain voted to leave the EU . Bryan Roberts , a retail analyst at TCC Global , said : `` A lot of suppliers are seeking to pass on price increases to retailers but in the current environment retailers are increasingly reluctant to take it . They want to keep prices as low as they can to increase their affordability against the competition . '' A Tesco spokesman said : `` We are experiencing availability issues on a number of Unilever products . We always work to ensure customers get the best possible prices and we hope to have this issue resolved soon . '' Tesco last night said the issue was mostly affecting its online operation , insisting that most shops would be unaffected . Unilever last night refused to comment . It came amid warnings that Britain faces a ( EURO ) 20 billion ( £18 billion ) bill from Brussels as it leaves the EU . According to an analysis by the Financial Times , British taxpayers could be forced to pay the `` divorce settlement '' because of unpaid budget contributions and pensions contributions . Vanishing act Brands removed from Tesco website ? Surf washing powder ? Persil washing powders ? Comfort fabric conditioner ? Hellmann 's mayonnaise ? Pot Noodle Ben & Jerry 's ice cream ? Knorr stock cubes ? Bertolli spreads ? Dove soap products ? Colman 's mustard
Rebel Tories must explain Brexit stance BODY : If it was Theresa May 's intention to flush out anti-Brexit rebels on her own backbenches with her article in last week 's Telegraph , she has certainly succeeded . In announcing plans to fix legally the date of Brexit to March 29 2019 , she made it clear that she would not tolerate wreckers on her own side using parliamentary process to undermine , or attempt to reverse , our departure from the European Union . Now a group of at least 15 Conservative MPs has emerged , defying her . It was always clear that an opportunistic , flip-flopping Labour Party would , despite its promises and the clear wishes of many of its own supporters in the election campaign , put every obstacle in the path of Brexit . But at least Jeremy Corbyn can offer the feeble defence that he and his colleagues are in Opposition . Such shameless hypocrisy is to be expected . What equivalent excuse can rebel Tory MPs offer - MPs who voted in favour of triggering Article 50 , yet now suddenly find they have insurmountable scruples about accepting its inevitable consequences ? These are parliamentarians who chose to invoke a process with a clear two-year timeframe . So Brexiteers in the country may find themselves asking , with entirely legitimate scepticism , why their representatives can not bring themselves to follow through now . Despite the unprecedented strains of Brexit , parliamentary process has held up well so far . But it is beginning to fray . Individual threads are splitting from the fabric . Rebels must know that , by opposing the legal fixing of Brexit 's date , they can not stop Brexit itself . But they can weaken the Government , and thus the hand that Britain can play in negotiations with the EU . So what is their actual aim ? This is not about a witch-hunt . Kenneth Clarke , the Father of House , is one of the group and has long made his opposition to Brexit clear . His position is established , well-argued and principled . It is possible to disagree with his point of view , but it is hard to object . He made an excellent speech in the House yesterday , stating his position once again and reminding other members of its `` consistency '' . `` Now I find I am the rebel , '' he joked . Only up to a point . For he is consistent , and voted against invoking Article 50 . His fellow `` rebels '' did not . So they must explain why they have suddenly changed their minds . Is it principle ? Or is it anti-Brexit prejudice ?
UK economy would be seriously weakened by Brexit
It is a fact that the balance of the conclusions from the serious and detailed economic studies of the medium-term consequences of Brexit for the British economy is overwhelmingly negative . The central estimates from the studies are that the economic losses from Brexit are in the range of 5pc to 10pc of GDP per annum around 10 or 15 years from now , or around £1,500 to £3,000 per person per year ( I deliberately use round numbers here to avoid spurious precision ) . Estimates of short-term losses to GDP from Brexit over the next few years are in the range 0.5pc to 2pc . Examination in some way of these results is the duty of anyone taking their vote seriously in the referendum . My purpose here is to offer some help in evaluating this evidence , something I have been doing for much of my professional life though I write now in a personal capacity . Evaluation must come by looking at the arguments , assumptions and quality of work . It should not be based on personal attacks or impugning motives , as has all too often been a feature of this referendum campaign . The seriousness of the decision requires we do better than that . In evaluating the arguments we should also ask whether the biases in any estimates of losses point to over or underestimates . I will examine the most prominent and carefully researched of the medium-term studies : Her Majesty 's Treasury , the OECD , and the Centre for Economic Performance at the LSE . I have had the opportunity to discuss these studies with leading authors of each one , but was not involved in the production of any of them . The three studies pursue their task of estimating losses or gains from Brexit by examining effects on investment , trade and productivity . They do not all make the same assumptions about how a Brexit world would work , but they are centred on the `` Canada '' example . Canada and the EU have been negotiating a deal to remove many trade barriers and lower tariffs ( it took seven years to negotiate and is not yet in force ) . Effects on trade , investment and productivity are then calculated , broadly , on the basis of what the extra trade barriers in the Canada post-Brexit example might look like , what opportunities and risks are likely to be perceived by investors , and how competitive structures and opportunities are likely to influence productivity . In each case evidence is used from economic studies of past experiences or changes as to how much trade barriers , perceived risks and so on are likely to influence the GDP and economic activity in the new post- Brexit state . These are not forecasts in the sense of predicting where we will be . They are assessments of how much worse off after Brexit we might be compared with wherever we think we would be in , say , 2030 . That is a central question : would we as a nation , relative to the single economic measure of our output as captured by GDP , be worse off ? And we find , as I described above , very serious losses . In my assessment of the quality of the work , the plausibility of the assumptions and the use of evidence is as good as they could be in this kind of exercise . Do they offer over or underestimates of the costs of Brexit ? My view is clearly the latter for the following reasons . First , they do not take into account the likely undermining of the stability of the EU of a UK exit and the feedback on the UK economy . Second , they probably assume a `` too easy '' bargain from the EU in any new trade deal . The EU has a clear incentive to `` warn '' any other potential exiteer that the costs will be high . Third , the studies are quite conservative in their assessments of policy uncertainty and its effects on investment . My experience as chief economist of the World Bank was that magnitude of such effects are often underestimated . Fourth , there can be large and lasting effects of short-run shocks on medium-term outcomes , as we have seen from the financial crises . Fifth , over the medium term the positive effects on productivity of being in a large and competitive market can be very substantial ( the CEP-LSE study with its larger cost estimates of Brexit , rightly in my view , has a stronger focus here ) . And , sixth , the dynamic effects of investment , innovation , learning and growth are , modern growth theory tells us , likely to be strong and important , magnifying short and medium-term losses . My conclusions therefore are that these studies represent the best we can do in these circumstances and , on balance , are likely to be underestimates of the losses from Brexit . Within any set of assumptions there are large margins of error . Nevertheless , we surely should not go into a decision of such importance without doing the best we can to assess the economic costs . The assessments of the medium-term costs point clearly and strongly one way : the economic costs of Brexit are high . Of course , economic life , trade and investment would go on under Brexit . But the conclusion is that they would be seriously weakened . The changes in the shorter term , not my focus here , have been clearly , plausibly and professionally set out by the Bank of England , the IMF , the Institute for Fiscal Studies and others . Their conclusions are that the shortterm costs are high too . Whilst this crucial decision is about more than economics , the conclusions from the careful quantitative economic studies are clear . Brexit is likely to be a very costly option . Nicholas Stern is IG Patel Professor of Economics and Government , LSE and President of the British Academy 'The conclusions from the careful quantitative economic studies are clear . Brexit is likely to be a very costly option '
The UK must not lose its nerve on Brexit BODY : Philip Hammond has had a roller coaster of a week . On Wednesday he said he was unwilling to spend the big money now to prepare for a `` no deal '' Brexit . On Thursday , Lord Lawson , a prominent Eurosceptic , called for him to be sacked . The Prime Minister was forced to say that she had `` full confidence '' in the Chancellor . Yesterday , Mr Hammond was recorded in an interview urging unity within the Government , saying that the real `` enemy '' was the EU . A few minutes later , Mr Hammond tweeted an apology . His use of the `` e '' word was wrong , he wrote , and he regretted it : `` # noenemieshere '' . The Chancellor 's misfortunes are symptomatic of political failure . The Government simply is n't selling Brexit correctly ; its message is confused . It ought to prepare seriously for a `` no deal '' Brexit , if only because the threat of Britain walking away from the negotiating table is one of the strongest cards it has to play . But while Theresa May promises readiness and has named Steve Baker as minister for `` contingency planning '' , the necessary money is not forthcoming . Likewise , Brexit is supposed to mean Brexit , which we are reassured is what the Government wants , and yet this week the Prime Minister failed to say how she would vote on Brexit now if she had to . One day , Mrs May makes concessions . The next she declares that the ball is in the EU 's court . The EU , however , is in no rush to act . Yesterday , Jean-Claude Juncker said that while Europe was grateful for Britain helping to rescue it in the Forties , it now has a bar tab to pay - and that is the way that many Eurocrats see these negotiations . Why hurry ? Why move on to talking trade when they can hold their position , panic the British into overreaction and wring them for every penny they can get ? No doubt Brussels is listening to the militant Remainers who are convinced that Britain does n't really have the political acumen or the guts to go through with Brexit . If Europe waits long enough , they calculate , the Brexit coalition will collapse and the UK will return to the fold . If that happens , the Tories will take the blame . It was the Tories who bungled the general election and were thus returned without a majority . It is Tory rebel MPs who now threaten the EU Withdrawal Bill - necessary to avoid a legal catastrophe the day after Brexit - with death by amendment . And it is a Tory Cabinet that appears divided , with some members still ambivalent in their attitude towards the referendum result they were put in office to effect . Do n't they realise that if they bungle this , they will be defeated at the ballot box ? That means Jeremy Corbyn becomes Prime Minister , a disaster that both Britain and the EU would live to regret . Order in government comes from the top : Mrs May has to pick a side in her Cabinet dispute and back it to the hilt . The country craves a return to the kind of firm leadership shown before the general election , accompanied by parliamentary skill and compelling diplomacy . The Europeans and Remainers must be shown that the British people want Brexit - and they are going to get it .
Ministers and the City require the same Brexit vision
Considering how much they rely on each other , it 's surprising how often the City of London and the Government seem to be talking at cross-purposes - particularly when it comes to Brexit . Whichever way you look at it , the City of London is a British success story . The financial services sector employs more than a million people , pays roughly 10pc of all tax receipts , and runs a big trade surplus with the rest of the world . London is the dominant financial centre in Europe and the leading international financial centre in the world : in many sectors of the financial markets , around two thirds of all activity in the rest of the EU actually takes places in London . And whichever way you look at it , Brexit will have a big impact on the www.City.No , the City is n't about to decamp to Paris , and Frankfurt is n't about to overtake London as a financial centre ( roughly the same number of people work in the City as live in Frankfurt ) . However , between a quarter and a third of the City 's business involves the EU , and on the other side of Brexit , that 's going to be a problem . The latest example of this disconnect is the breathless warnings from the City over the past few months that unless the Government agrees a so-called Brexit `` transition period '' with the EU by the end of this year ( or , at the latest , the end of March 2018 ) , then hundreds of firms will have to start moving thousands of staff to the Continent . At first glance , it looks like the City and the Government are reading different words from the same script . The City talks about a `` transition period '' , the Government prefers the phrase `` implementation period '' . While the two terms are often used interchangeably - roughly , they both mean a period of two years ( perhaps more ) after Brexit for both sides to adapt - they mean different things , are based on different assumptions , and have profoundly different consequences . The key difference is timing . An `` implementation period '' would first require reaching a trade deal with the EU to implement and is based on what many people think is an optimistic assumption that the UK can negotiate such a deal by March 2019 . A `` transition period '' would need to be agreed before a trade deal is reached . It explicitly accepts that the chances of clinching a deal in the next 17 months are slim , and is in effect an extension to the negotiation process . It would mean that regulation and market access would remain unchanged for a few years after Brexit , giving politicians more time to negotiate a better deal , and enabling firms to wait until the detail of that deal is clearer before having to move staff and operations to the EU . This is more than just semantics : by linking an implementation period to a trade deal , the UK Government is reducing the chances of achieving either , missing out on the opportunity to agree a deal that would buy everyone more time , and increasing the risk of a messy `` no deal '' Brexit . A similar effect is on display with discussions about what sort of longer-term relationship the UK wants to have with the EU on the other side of Brexit . In her speeches at the party conference in October last year and at Lancaster House in January , Theresa May left no room for doubt that Brexit means leaving the single market . For the City , that means losing the EU passports that allow so much business to be done in London . Yet the City is still asking for the moon : in this newspaper recently the former city minister Mark Hoban called for an ambitious free trade deal with the EU based on mutual recognition of standards . The Bank of England has floated the idea of an enlarged European area of shared common standards for financial services covering the UK and the EU . And to confuse things further , the Government is still talking about carving out a special deal for the City that has been repeatedly rejected by the EU . As Michel Barnier said : `` On financial services , UK voices suggest that Brexit does not mean Brexit . Brexit does mean Brexit - everywhere . '' To be clear , these ideas have merit . They would be an excellent potential solution in the longer term . But anyone who thinks such a complex deal for financial services can be agreed in a little more than a year can , in the Foreign Secretary 's words , `` go whistle '' . The latest big piece of markets regulation from the EU - Mifid 2 - will have taken eight years of consultations and negotiations by the time it comes into force at the beginning of next year . Of course , if you want the moon , it 's better to start by asking for the stars . But it would be better still for the City and the Government to start talking the same language . William Wright is the managing director of New Financial , a capital markets think-tank Square Mile 's patience wanes , page 5 'Anyone who thinks such a complex deal for financial services can be agreed in a year can , in the Foreign Secretary 's words , go whistle '
Two thirds of people think Brexit would not leave them any poorer ; Fears of Brexit trade loss fail to register with voters
Two thirds of Britons believe they would not be worse off in the event of a Brexit vote , in a blow to the assembled forces of `` Project Fear '' . The findings came despite warnings issued by the Treasury , the Bank of England , the International Monetary Fund , and OECD , all of which have cautioned on the economic repercussions of a Brexit vote to some degree , and suggest that most voters have been left unconvinced . Some 58pc of the public believe that their living standards would stay the same in the five years after a UK withdrawal from the EU , according to an Ipsos Mori survey of more than 4,000 Britons . A further 11pc expect that their financial wellbeing would actually improve if voters decided to leave the political bloc behind on June 23 . The polling company 's analysis also revealed that concerns about the economy were most likely to affect the decisions of swing voters , for whom the financial consequences of a Brexit vote are felt more keenly than questions over British sovereignty or the migration debate . Bobby Duffy , managing director of Ipsos Mori , said : `` The twin issues of immigration and the economy have dominated the referendum campaigns so far . `` The received wisdom has been that messages about controlling borders and Continued on Page 3 Continued from Page 1 sovereignty are the ones which resonate with people who want to leave the EU , but this study shows that the issue of how Brexit could affect individuals financially is more likely than immigration to cause uncertainty in how they would vote . '' Yet attempts to convince the electorate that the UK would certainly be on worse terms with the rest of the world after a decision to leave the EU have failed to win over the British public . More than four in 10 - 44pc - believe that Britain would be in a strong position to negotiate free trade agreements after a Brexit vote , compared with just 27pc who think the opposite . Asked if they would consider switching their position if Brexit made them £500 a year better off , 13pc of Remain voters said that they would vote to leave the EU . Around four in 10 said that they would be unsure about how to vote if this were the case . `` So whilst the rhetoric in the Leave campaign has focused on more abstract concepts of self-determination , the arguments about cash in pockets seem more likely to impact on Brexit voters , '' said Mr Duffy . Supporters of Brexit were less likely to waver . When asked if they would change sides if remaining in the EU made them better off by £500 each year , only 7pc said that it would prompt them to vote to stay in the EU . 7pc Proportion of Brexit supporters who said they would switch sides if remaining in the EU made them £500 a year better off
10,500 jobs to go by day one of Brexit ; More companies expected to move City roles by March 2019 , with emphasis on front office , says EY
THE City will have lost 10,500 jobs to rival financial centres by `` day one '' of Brexit after a fifth of banks , brokers and asset managers confirm their plans to open hubs or relocate staff once the UK leaves the EU . Double the number of companies now plan on moving jobs post-Brexit compared to this time a year ago , according to accountant EY , although the number of roles thought to be affected has shrunk by 2,000 . The firm , which tracked 222 financial institutions during November , warned that `` many '' of the 10,500 roles at risk will be client-facing , front-office jobs and not the back office roles originally expected . Its estimate , which echoes the 10,000 figure made by senior Bank of England official Sam Woods last month , comes days after the European Commission announced that there had been `` sufficient progress '' in the Brexit talks , allowing the discussions to move onto trade . The announcement `` sent a wave of relief across the City '' as it signals an intention to agree to a post-Brexit transitional period early next year , EY 's UK financial services leader Omar Ali said . Financial institutions have been calling for a transitional period for months over fears that they will lose the right to access EU clients with no time to adjust . More firms are expected to press the firing gun on their contingency plans if an agreement is n't tabled early next year . The finance sector , which makes up 10.7pc of the UK economy , is already starting to disperse . Goldman Sachs ' boss Lloyd Blankfein told French newspaper Le Figaro last month that Brexit was forcing the bank to decentralise . He also publicly aired his Brexit concerns and support for Frankfurt and Paris on Twitter . Dublin and Frankfurt are the two financial centres likely to benefit the most from the Brexit moves , EY said , with the two cities attracting 26 financial institutions since the Brexit vote last June . However , the relocation of roles to these cities is unlikely to have an impact on London in the short-term , Mr Ali added . The industry is keen to keep any moves to a minimum , with the investment banking boss of one large bank saying they want the numbers to be as low as possible . Headhunters claim they are still busy filling City-based jobs , as areas such as mergers and acquisitions are expected to remain active . `` We remain very busy in M & A , financing and structuring , '' said Richard Hoar , a director of finance at Goodman Masson . `` My clients seem to remain positive that they can keep the number [ of exits ] low . '' 20pc The proportion of banks , brokers and asset managers that have confirmed plans to open hubs or relocate staff after Brexit
Juncker supports speeding up Brexit talks ; PM battles to end deadlock with dinner for EC president and a charm offensive against leaders
THERESA MAY 'S hopes of breaking a deadlock in Brexit talks appeared to be given a boost last night after she and Jean-Claude Juncker agreed to `` accelerate '' negotiations . The Prime Minister yesterday flew out to dinner with Mr Juncker , the president of the European Commission , in a bid to break the deadlock in Brexit negotiations . It came after a Brexit charm offensive that saw her speak to Emmanuel Macron , the French president , Leo Varadkar , the Irish taoiseach , and Angela Merkel , the German chancellor . And in an apparent sign of more cordial relations , Mr Juncker gave David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , a `` bear hug '' after the dinner , while earlier joking that there would be an `` autopsy '' in the wake of the meeting . But while Mrs May and Mr Juncker hailed the talks as `` constructive and friendly '' , the EU appeared to be hardening its position ahead of Thursday 's European Council summit . It yesterday emerged that EU leaders will formally demand that the European Court of Justice must oversee the rights of European citizens living in the UK after Brexit . The line was reportedly added to a leaked draft of conclusions for the summit at the request of Germany and France . The UK has said the court can have no oversight after Brexit . EU sources told The Daily Telegraph that while there is an `` appetite '' to move on with negotiations `` there is just nothing to eat '' . A source said that the dinner was a pre-arranged `` courtesy '' that `` nobody wants to attend '' but there were concerns that failing to do so would represent `` the worst of both worlds '' . The Prime Minister is unwilling to make further concessions after committing to paying Brussels up to ( EURO ) 20billion ( £18billion ) during a two-year transition period after Brexit . The European Union is demanding that `` sufficient progress '' must be made towards a Brexit divorce bill , the rights of EU citizens and Northern Ireland before talks can move forward . A senior EU diplomat told The Daily Telegraph that the `` only game-changer would be money '' , in a reference to the bill . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , suggested that it was `` silly '' for the European Union to get `` hung up '' over issues of process . He said it was `` blindingly obvious '' that it is in the interests of both the EU and the UK to move on to discussions about a future trade deal . It came as Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said that the EU must `` stop letting the grass grow under our feet '' . Mr Johnson , speaking ahead of a summit of foreign ministers in Luxembourg , said that it is `` time to head for the open sea '' and move talks on . He urged negotiators to `` put a tiger in the tank '' and push discussions forward . He said : `` And people say to me , look , we want to reassure the 3.2million EU nationals in the UK and the one and a bit million UK nationals in the EU , and so do we . `` We 've made a very good offer , we 've made a very fair ( offer ) . `` Let 's give them that reassurance , let 's put a tiger in the tank , let 's get these conversations going and stop letting the grass grow under our feet . ''
Out camp reveals its blueprint for Brexit ; Boris and Gove set out laws to end power of Europe - but Osborne warns of £30bn cuts Brexit will leave us less money , warns Osborne
BORIS JOHNSON and Michael Gove will today set out new laws that the Leave campaign plans to implement immediately after a Brexit in an attempt to end the EU 's influence on Britain . Vote Leave will announce its intention to curtail the power of European courts , divert money saved by quitting the EU into the NHS and halt the free movement of migrants . The blueprint is designed to address concerns that leaving the EU could take up to a decade of negotiations , during which Britain would still be under the influence of Brussels . However , their manifesto coincides with a warning by George Osborne , the Chancellor , that a vote to leave the EU would force him to make up £30 billion from cuts and tax rises in an emergency `` Brexit budget '' . He will say that the shock of a Brexit could force him to raise taxes by £15billion , including 2p on the basic rate of income tax , 3p on the higher rate and a 5p rise in inheritance tax rates on the middle classes . He was immediately accused of planning a `` punishment budget '' and was warned he will be forced to consider his position as Chancellor . Last night , Tory Eurosceptics were said to be in talks about voting down any `` Brexit budget '' . One said : `` There is meltdown in the party over this . Osborne wo n't be allowed to get away with it . '' Last night , Mr Johnson used his appearance at The Daily Telegraph 's EU debate to say that a Brexit will be a `` fantastic prize '' for Britain . He also accused David Cameron and Mr Osborne of using `` extreme '' tactics to `` scare '' voters , and ruled out a second referendum if Britain votes to remain in the EU , saying it should be a `` generational issue '' . In the debate , co-hosted with the Huffington Post and broadcast by YouTube , Mr Johnson also said the VW emissions scandal would never have happened if Britain was out of the EU . His remarks came as £30 billion was wiped off the FTSE 100 in a sign that the markets are increasingly predicting a Brexit vote . And it was claimed that Downing Street is considering making a major pledge to curb EU freedom of movement amid fears the country is heading for a Brexit because of their failure to deal with the issue . Mr Osborne will today risk intensifying the Tory civil war by using an appearance alongside Lord Darling , the former Labour chancellor , to suggest his `` Brexit budget '' would lead to alcohol and petrol duties rising by 5 per cent . A further £15 billion worth of cuts would have to be made to public spending , he will claim , which could see spending on NHS , education and defence slashed by 2 per cent . He will warn that other areas , including the Home Office , transport and local government , will face a 5 per cent cut . In his most stark economic outlook to date , Mr Osborne will add : `` Far from freeing up money to spend on public services , as the Leave campaign would like you to believe , quitting the EU would mean less money . Billions less . It 's a lose-lose situation for British families and we should n't risk it . '' Mr Darling will say that he is `` even more worried '' about the economic impact of a Brexit than he was in 2008 in the wake of the global financial crisis . In recent days a series of polls have given Leave the lead , with sources in Mr Cameron 's camp admitting there is `` panic '' at the prospect of a Brexit . Both Mr Johnson and Mr Gove have insisted that they want Mr Cameron to stay on as Prime Minister if Britain votes to leave the EU . They will demand that the Government comes forward with their six new Bills , arguing that a Brexit vote would give them a mandate from the British people , it is understood . Issuing their `` manifesto '' ahead of the referendum also allows them to go before Parliament and tell MPs that the public backed the laws at the ballot box , reducing the prospect of pro-EU MPs and peers attempting to defeat the legislation . Other new laws will include a new Finance Bill to abolish the 5 per cent rate of VAT on household energy bills , a Free Trade Bill to restore the Government 's power to control its own trade policy and a Bill to repeal the 1972 European Communities Act . The repeal of the 1972 Act will mean that all EU treaties will no longer form part of UK law and the European Court 's jurisdiction over the UK `` will come to a permanent end '' . Pledges Leave 's new laws 1 . Deporting criminals The campaign pledged an EU Law ( Emergency Provisions ) Bill to allow more foreign criminals to be deported . 2 . Ending VAT on energy bills A special finance Bill would end 5 per cent VAT on household energy bills , introduced before 2020 . 3 . Funding the health service NHS ( Funding Target ) Bill would enable a `` transfusion '' of a weekly £100 million . 4 . Controlling immigration An asylum and immigration control Bill will end EU citizens ' right to enter the UK , using an Australian-style points system . 5 . Free trade Bill Britain would leave the EU 's `` common commercial policy '' and start negotiating new trade deals . 6 . European Communities Act 1972 ( repeal ) Bill A Bill to end the European Court 's power over UK laws .
Corbyn accused of plotting to wreck Brexit ; Labour MP launches attack on leadership amid fears its new 'soft ' policy will lead to grassroots backlash
JEREMY CORBYN has been accused by Labour MPs of plotting to `` wreck '' Brexit after unveiling plans to keep the UK in the European single market and customs union indefinitely . Labour risks alienating its own Eurosceptic voters after Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , yesterday repositioned it as the party of `` soft Brexit `` . He announced that under a Labour government , the UK would stay in the single market and customs union during a transition period after Brexit . He said that if a deal could be struck with the EU over reforming free movement this could be extended indefinitely . A Labour source said that the policy had been the subject of intense debate in the shadow cabinet in recent weeks amid fears that it will `` close the door '' on voters who back Brexit . Many of the party 's traditional strongholds in the North overwhelmingly voted Leave . The new policy comes despite both Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , and John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , previously making it clear that the UK will leave the single market . Frank Field , a Eurosceptic Labour MP and leading figure in the Leave campaign , said there was a plot to `` wreck '' Brexit . He said : `` There are a lot of people around who are wolves in sheep 's clothing - their main intention is to keep Britain in the EU . They are pretending to help the process while seeking to wreck Brexit . A lot of Labour voters want us out of the customs union and the single market . They are going to get very angry with people who they begin to see are intent on messing up that process . '' However , the change of policy was dismissed by pro-European Tory MPs , who pointed to Mr Corbyn and Mr McDonnell 's history of Euroscepticism . Nicky Morgan , a Tory MP and chairman of the Treasury select committee , told The Daily Telegraph : `` Corbyn and McDonnell wo n't stick to it because they do n't believe it . '' Anna Soubry , another pro-European Tory MP , said : `` Labour 's playing a cynical game , the EU wo n't abandon free movement . Corbyn and McDonnell are hard-left Bennite Eurosceptics . They 've not changed their minds , they 're playing politics . '' Mr Corbyn said yesterday that he did not know how long any transitional period would last , saying it would be `` as long as is necessary but time-limited '' . Asked whether the UK would continue to accept free movement and make payments into the EU budgets after March 2019 under Labour 's plans , he said : `` Obviously , we have got to work out what the arrangements are during the transition period and make sure we reach agreement on that . `` Quite clearly , the priority has to be protecting jobs and also understanding the needs of EU nationals that are living here . '' A Tory spokesman said : `` The truth is Labour have no idea what they want and this is a weak attempt to kick the can down the road . `` Their leader ca n't say they would end unlimited freedom of movement , they ca n't decide whether we are leaving the single market and they have no vision for what Britain should look like outside the EU . '' Editorial Comment : Page 15
Scotland Pension age could rise due to Brexit ; Hard Brexit effect could force people to work longer
BRITONS may have to work longer if immigration is cut in the wake of Brexit , the government 's pension adviser warns today . John Cridland , a former CBI director who is reviewing state pension age for the Government , has said the `` Brexit Factor '' has made the future of the state pension uncertain . Already workers retiring after 2028 face being told they will need to work longer , possibly beyond age 70 , under Government plans to make the state pension more affordable . The decision , due in May will be informed by recommendations being drawn up by Mr Cridland which will be published one month earlier . But now calculations reveal `` hard Brexit '' policy , in which migration is greatly reduced , could be used to further push up people 's retirement ages , potentially forcing them to work well into their mid seventies . Mr Cridland 's upcoming report will be based on the latest Office for Budget Responsibility forecasts , which do not take Brexit into account , meaning it could quickly become outdated . But he said that Brexit was `` one factor that could have an effect '' on the retirement age due to the changes it could bring in migration . He told an audience at an International Longevity Centre conference that the future ratio of pensioners to working age people - a major factor affecting the cost of the state pension - was now `` unpredictable '' due to possible post-Brexit migration policies . He said : `` The reason this is a very unpredictable dependency ratio now , is because the third swing factor is migration . '' Other factors affecting this ratio are life expectancy and fertility . Speaking to The Daily Telegraph about the factors affecting state pension age , he said : `` One of the things that is in play is the number of economic migrants its just a statement of fact - its an issue as part of a judgement . `` Brexit is an issue which I am not responsible for or reporting on ... it is one factor that could have an affect in many years time . '' Projections calculated by actuaries at Hymans Robertson show a `` hard Brexit '' where UK immigration is reduced by 150,000 people a year until 2020 , could result in the State Pension age needing to be raised by 18 months for people who are now under 40 . The calculations are based on projections by researchers at King College London which assume the number of national insurance number registrations by migrants falls from around 600,000 in 2016-17 to 140,000 by 2020 in the event of a `` hard Brexit '' . Eventually this would lead to over a million fewer under 70s paying the pensions of over a million more over 70s . To keep the ratio , and the cost to the Government the same , the state pension age would need to rise by 18 months . Jon Hatchett , a partner at Hymans Robertson , said : `` The faster the net drop in working age migrants , the quicker the dependency ratio will rise , and the more pressure it will put on an increasing state pension age , or a lower state pension . '' Prof Sarah Harper , director of the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing , said she had calculated similar projections , but believed an 18 month rise in state pension age could be on the cards for older workers currently in their forties and fifties . The state pension may well have to be revised and this will come as a nasty surprise to many . '' Law firm Eversheds Sutherland , which is researching the effect of Brexit on the state pension age , has warned that if the Government failed to raise state pension age amid falling migration , it would have to raise taxes instead . Francois Barker , a director at the firm , said : `` All the signs are that Brexit is likely to reduce the number of people of working age coming into the UK from the EU and , unless this shortfall is made up elsewhere the UK 's old-age dependency ratio looks set to rise even further than currently projected . This may force the Government to increase state pension age , reduce the rate of the State Pension or raise taxes . '' A spokesman at the Department for Work and Pensions , which will decide any state pension age rises in May , said : ''We are committed to reviewing the State Pension age each parliament and take into account the most up to date projections at the time . Each review is forward looking , to ensure that the State Pension remains affordable , fair and sustainable for generations to come . '' Grey pound Pensioners outearn younger workers Pensioner household incomes have overtaken working age ones for the first time , a study has found . Elderly spending power has been boosted by a new wave of pensioners who tend to still be in work , own a home and receive generous pension pots , the Resolution Foundation for the Intergenerational Commission report shows . The proportion of senior households in which at least one person works has grown from one in eight in 2001 to nearly one in five . Some 73 per cent of pensioners own their homes , up from 64 per cent in 2001 . Its As Time Goes By study states , afterhousing costs , typical pensioner households are now £20 a week better off than typical working age ones . In 2001 typical pensioner incomes were £70 worse off .
I 'm in control , insists May , as she slaps down 'backseat ' Boris ; PM maintains that she is driving talks after Foreign Secretary split Cabinet with his vision for Brexit
THERESA MAY insisted yesterday that she was `` driving from the front '' as she sought to reassert her authority by strengthening her grip on Brexit negotiations . The Prime Minister rebuked Boris Johnson after he set out his own vision of Brexit in a 4,000-word article in The Daily Telegraph last Saturday . She also refused to endorse the Foreign Secretary 's claim that the UK would be able to `` take back control '' of £350million a week after Brexit and divert some of the money to the NHS . She made her comments , while on a trip to Canada , as it emerged that she has appointed Britain 's most senior Brexit official as her own EU adviser . Oliver Robbins has left his role as permanent secretary at the Department for Exiting the European Union after a series of clashes with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . He will continue in his role as the UK 's EU sherpa in the Cabinet Office , where he will report directly to Mrs May in what is seen as a significant blow to Mr Davis . Yesterday , Mr Johnson refused to deny categorically that he could resign Brexit amid mounting speculation about his future . Asked if he could quit as Foreign Secretary , he paused before saying that the interviewer was `` barking up the wrong tree '' . He added : `` When the burden of office is lifted from my shoulders I will of course look back with great pride on my time doing all sorts of things . '' It came after Mr Johnson 's article on Saturday , in which he set out a grand vision for Britain 's `` glorious '' post-Brexit future , provoked significant Cabinet splits . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary who is viewed as a future candidate for the Tory leadership , subsequently accused Mr Johnson of behaving like a `` backseat driver '' in Brexit negotiations . Mrs May moved to make clear that she - and not Mr Johnson - is in charge of the Government 's overall policy on withdrawal from the bloc . Asked if she could `` truly '' guarantee that she is leading the Brexit process , the Prime Minister said : `` This Government is driven from the front and we are all going to the same destination . '' Mrs May failed to answer a direct question of whether she thought Mr Johnson would resign over the row . She said : `` We are all agreed as a Government on the importance of ensuring that we get the right deal for Brexit , the right withdrawal arrangements but also the right deep and special partnership for the EU and the UK in the future . `` We are all optimistic about what we might be achieving as the United Kingdom in the future . '' She also brushed off suggestions that she was `` frustrated '' with Mr Johnson , adding : `` Boris is Boris . '' Mr Johnson 's father , Stanley , said yesterday that the Foreign Secretary would be `` happy , happy , happy '' to quit over Brexit if he felt it was necessary . Meanwhile , Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary who last year ended Mr Johnson 's leadership ambitions , publically backed the Foreign Secretary 's position on Brexit . He said : `` In the debate on EU contributions it 's important people look at what Boris actually wrote in his Telegraph article - not headlines . `` [ The ] debate should be forwardlooking on how to make the most of life outside EU - not refighting the referendum . '' Speaking as he attended the UN General Assembly in New York , where he met Donald Trump , Mr Johnson reiterated his support for Mrs May . He said : `` As far as backseat driving honesty there is only one driver in this car and it is Theresa . What I am trying to do is sketch out the incredibly exciting landscape of the destination ahead . '' Mrs May was yesterday asked about Mr Johnson 's controversial claim Britain would `` take back control '' of £350million a week that is sent to Brussels . She stressed that any decision on spending priorities had to be taken by the whole Government . She said : `` By definition if we are curover rently paying money into the European Union and at a point in the future we wo n't be paying that money into the European Union , we will have to decide as a Government how to spend that money and at the time we will look to see where we think it is appropriate and best to spend that money . `` That will be a decision taken at the time , it will be taken by the Government . '' Mrs May was also drawn into an extraordinary row between Mr Johnson and Sir David Norgrove , the head of the UK Statistics Authority , over whether Britain would gain £350million a week from Brexit . The statistics watchdog rubbished the claim when it was made by the Vote Leave campaign last year , complaining that rebates and EU subsidies meant the net figure was far lower . Asked `` who she trusted to do sums '' , Mrs May appeared to side with Sir David by pointing out that Britain 's net contribution to the EU changed from year to year . She denied that the change in Mr Robbin 's position showed that Brexit negotiations are a `` shambles '' . She said : `` No , not at all . What it is a sign of is that the negotiations are getting into a more detailed and more intense phase . `` As a result of that I think it 's right that Olly Robbins concentrates on that and obviously a different structure will be put in place in terms of the running of the management of the Department for Exiting the European Union and the permanent secretaryship there . '' Timetable Crucial days ahead for Mrs May Today Annual meeting of UN General Assembly in New York . Expected to hold bilateral meetings with Donald Trump and other world leaders Tomorrow Addresses the Assembly to stress the need for UN reform Thursday Arrives back in Downing Street Friday Flies to Florence to set out her vision of post-Brexit Britain Monday 25 Next round of Brexit talks kick off in Brussels Sunday Oct 1 - Wednesday 4 Conservative Party conference in Birmingham
This is like a Hitchcock thriller , says EU 's Tusk ; Election announcement welcomed in Europe as leading to a stable base for further Brexit negotiations
EUROPEAN leaders reacted to Theresa May 's shock election announcement by comparing Brexit to a Hitchcock thriller - but insisted negotiations would not be affected . Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , commented on the news by tweeting : `` It was Hitchcock , who directed Brexit : first an earthquake and the tension rises . '' The joke was a reference to director Sir Alfred Hitchcock 's famous quote that `` a good film should start with an earthquake '' and be followed by increasing tension . Critics claimed the bemusing tweet was a suggestion that the political ramifications for the UK from the Brexit vote were only beginning to be felt . But Mr Tusk also said he had a `` good phone call '' with the Prime Minister about the early election , during which Mrs May underlined the UK 's `` deep and special partnership '' with the EU . EU leaders also moved to calm concerns about how the election could impact Brexit by saying preparations for talks would not be affected . A Brussels source said : `` This is a domestic matter for the UK . But we have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us with strong backing by the electorate . This does not change things . We are ready . Early June was always the calendar [ to start the negotiations ] . '' A spokesman for Mr Tusk insisted that the snap election would not affect the EU 's attempts to come up with a position on Brexit talks . `` The UK elections do not change our EU27 plans , '' the spokesman said . `` We expect to have the Brexit guidelines adopted by the European Council on April 29 and , following that , the Brexit negotiating directives ready on May 22 . This will allow the EU27 to start negotiations . '' A diplomat from an EU member state said that Mrs May `` is completely right to call these elections now '' , as she could benefit from a favourable political backdrop . `` The good news on the European side is that she will be less weak to make all the concessions she will have to make '' in the talks , the diplomat said . Mrs May indicated that she chose a snap election for June because it would leave Brexit talks as unaffected as possible , given political events in the EU . She said : `` We need a general election and we need one now , because we have at this moment a one-off chance to get this done while the European Union agrees its negotiating position and before the detailed talks begin . '' Her reference to a `` one-off chance '' is believed to refer to the timings of European elections in the coming months that effectively stall any major progress on Brexit talks . The final round of the French election will be held next month , while Germany will find out in late September whether Angela Merkel will be re-elected as Chancellor . Senior Tories believe that until the French and German leaders are known no major decision on the Brexit deal can be taken , despite a two-year countdown having been triggered in March . Other EU politicians said that Mrs May 's decision was `` understandable '' and predicted that the Tories would win . Gonzalez Pons , a Spanish MEP for the European People 's Party , said : `` May calls for UK elections , which means either undoing Brexit or making it harder by shortening times . I wish the UK all the best . '' Mrs May talked to Donald Trump , about her early election yesterday during a string of conversations with world leaders . She also discussed the decision with Ms Merkel , Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the European Commission , and Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny . 'We have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us '
Scotland MPs accuse BBC of falling short of impartiality with Brexit coverage
THE BBC risks undermining Brexit and damaging the UK 's reputation with its `` pessimistic and skewed '' coverage , MPs have warned . More than 70 MPs from across the political spectrum have written to Lord Hall of Birkenhead , the director-general of the BBC , accusing the corporation of portraying the UK as either a `` xenophobic '' nation or one that regrets the vote to leave the EU . They say that the corporation has failed to `` break out of pre-referendum pessimism '' and accept the `` economic good news '' which the UK has enjoyed since the referendum . The MPs ' letter on the BBC follows months of mounting anger in the Conservative Party about the corporation 's coverage of Brexit in the wake of the EU referendum . Tory MPs argue that while the corporation 's coverage during the referendum itself was even-handed , it has since become `` partisan '' and anti-Brexit . In their letter , the MPs put the corporation on notice that its future will be in doubt if politicians and the public no longer see it as an `` impartial broker '' which they can trust . The signatories include several Tory MPs who voted for Britain to stay in the European Union amid concerns about the economic impact of Brexit but are now `` delighted '' that the forecasts have been proved wrong . The letter says : `` It particularly pains us to see how so much of the economic good news we 've had since June has been skewed by BBC coverage which seems unable to break out of pre-referendum pessimism and accept new facts . `` Some of the signatories of this letter shared many of the concerns about the economic impact of Brexit , but all are delighted to find forecasts of immediate economic harm were at best misplaced . `` So-called 'despite Brexit ' reporting may be expected of a partisan press , but licence fee-payers have the right to expect better . '' The letter adds that `` We fear that , by misrepresenting our country either as xenophobic or regretful of the Leave vote , the BBC will undermine our efforts to carve out a new , global role for this country . '' The conflict between Conservative MPs and the BBC over Brexit is the latest in a series of clashes . During the 2015 election campaign , senior Conservatives declared themselves `` furious '' at the BBC 's coverage and accused it of an `` unforgivable Labour bias '' . Tory MPs have become very critical of the BBC since the referendum . In October last year , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , hit out at the corporation 's `` infuriating '' and `` shamelessly anti-Brexit coverage '' . An analysis of a series of programmes on BBC Radio 4 found that listeners were two-and-ahalf times more likely to hear a pro-EU speaker than an anti-EU one . A total of 72 MPs have signed the letter , including three Labour MPs , eight DUP MPs and Douglas Carswell , Ukip 's only MP . A BBC spokesman said : `` The BBC is covering the political and financial events following the referendum vote in a responsible and impartial way . The BBC is also one of the great exports of this country and makes a significant contribution to the UK creative sector . '' Editorial Comment : Page 17
Sturgeon and May clash as Brexit talks turn acrimonious
THERESA MAY warned Nicola Sturgeon that she risks `` undermining '' Brexit negotiations after a Downing Street summit descended into acrimony . The Prime Minister hosted a meeting at No 10 yesterday with the leaders of Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland about the progress of Brexit . Ms Sturgeon , who has said she is prepared to hold a second referendum on Scottish independence unless Britain remains part of the single market , said that there had been a `` frank exchange of views '' and accused the Prime Minister of driving Scotland `` over a hard-Brexit cliff edge '' . Mrs May used a Commons appearance yesterday to say there was `` no suggestion '' that she was pushing for a `` hard Brexit '' adding that Britain would strike a series of free-trade deals while still gaining control of its borders . The Prime Minister said she wanted `` the maximum possible opportunities for British businesses to be able to trade within the single market , to operate within the single market and trade with it in both goods and services '' . Mrs May stopped short of offering a vote to MPs over Brexit although she said there would be a `` series of general debates '' on the UK 's future relationship with the EU before and after Christmas . However , her clash with the Scottish First Minister suggests that the Prime Minister will struggle to secure agreement with the devolved administrations during her Brexit negotiations . In a pointed criticism of Ms Sturgeon 's referendum threat , Mrs May said that the `` great Union '' had been a `` cornerstone of our prosperity in the past '' and will be `` absolutely vital '' But Ms Sturgeon said : `` I do n't know any more now about the UK Government 's approach to the EU negotiations than I did before I went in to the meeting . I ca n't speak for the other devolved administrations but I think there was a degree of frustration shared by all of us about that . `` I 'm not seeking to undermine anyone . I do n't know what the UK 's negotiating position is , so there 's nothing there that I can see to undermine . '' Ms Sturgeon said she was not prepared to `` sit back and see Scotland driven over a hard-Brexit cliff edge '' . The SNP leader also insisted that she was `` not bluffing '' or `` game-playing '' with her threat to hold a second independence referendum . However Downing Street said that the devolved administrations must work with one voice to help secure a successful Brexit . `` We have been very clear that we should be working together to secure the best possible deal for the whole country , '' the Prime Minister 's official spokesman said . Carwyn Jones , the Welsh First Minister , said there had been no details about what happens next , and warned `` time is not on our side '' . Martin McGuinness , Northern Ireland 's Deputy First Minister , said there was a `` joint responsibility '' to manage the Brexit process . He told reporters : `` As this process moves along , we need to be at the heart of it . '' William Hague : Page 16 Business : Page 1 Nicola Sturgeon said yesterday 's Downing Street talks had failed to clarify the Government 's position on Brexit
After the border issue comes trade . That 's when things get really tough
Steadily but surely , and sometimes in big , apparently unscripted jumps , Theresa May , the Prime Minister , keeps on ceding ground in her Brexit negotiations , just as she has on much of the rest of her political agenda , from grammar schools to social care . First came European Court of Justice jurisdiction over the rights of EU citizens living in Britain ; then it was conceded we 'd need a lengthy transition ; then came the money ; and now to the disgust of Northern Ireland 's Democratic Unionist Party , the Irish border issue . May 's negotiating refrain , `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' , is exposed as no more than the unconvincing bluff it always was . It now transpires that almost any deal , however bad , is better than no deal , and EU negotiators know it . Or just to give what 's happening a slightly more positive spin , any Brexit is better than no Brexit , for such is the sense of political crisis hanging over virtually all aspects of May 's Government that there must be some doubt about whether Brexit can be delivered at all . Leavers can feel the prize slipping away , and must therefore back whatever form of Brexit the politics allow . Perhaps there is method in the madness . The issues seem to have become ever more intractable ; by demonstrating this harsh reality , the PM may hope to take the hardliners with her on the softer Brexit now apparently envisaged . The EU can not simply be told to `` sod off `` , as proposed by the former Cabinet member Priti Patel ; even leaving aside whether a hard Brexit would be an economically viable way forward for the UK , it could never command a parliamentary majority , and as we can now see , would stand a high chance of resurrecting `` the Troubles '' in Northern Ireland . From all these perspectives , no deal has come to be seen as an unconscionable choice . It is therefore necessary to address the question of how many other red lines must now be crossed in order to win a satisfactory deal on trade . The divorce settlement is in a sense the easy bit . Next come much more tortuous negotiations on trade . Already it is obvious that a Canadianstyle deal , but with free trade in services added on top , is unrealistic . The problem could of course be solved simply by staying in the single market , much like Switzerland , Norway and other members of the European Free Trade Association . By the way , this would also substantially solve the Irish border issue , as regulation would then automatically be aligned between Northern Ireland , Great Britain , the Irish Republic and the rest of the EU . But both membership of the single market and the customs union have been ruled out by the Government , which seeks instead a unique `` deep and special '' relationship with the EU . Are these red lines to be ceded too ? It is hard to see how it would be `` taking back control '' if they were . Britain would become a rule and trade agreement taker , with very little say in their construction - not so much taking back control as abject surrender . The rest of the EU accounts for roughly half of British exports , or around 13pc of our GDP - sometimes a bit more , sometimes a bit less depending on erratics such as nonmonetary gold . Tariff-free trade in goods and non-subsidised agricultural produce such as fruit and veg should be a relatively easy thing to agree . Last year , we exported £145.5bn in goods to the rest of the EU , and they exported £242bn in goods to us , so it is overwhelmingly in the EU 's interests for this trade to continue unimpaired . The awkward bit comes in the services sector , where so-called non-tariff barriers are the main impediment to trade . Unlike goods , our exports of services to the rest of the EU have been growing almost continually ever since the UK joined the common market back in the mid-Seventies , reaching a record £90.4bn last year . What is more , we enjoy a substantial surplus in these service exports , again unlike goods . This is a great position to be in , for despite the nostalgia we have for the days of British manufacturing supremacy - actually we today manufacture more than at any stage in our history , but no matter - the fact is that the price of manufactured goods relative to services has been falling for decades , and with progressive automation will no doubt continue to do so . In other words , the terms of trade with Europe have shifted decisively in our favour . It 's true that Europe also exports a lot of services to us , but these are substantially in the form of overseas holidays ; if we all `` staycationed '' , our surplus in services trade would be even bigger . And so to the point ; the big driver of service sector export growth is finance . Unfortunately , there is no free trade agreement in existence that gives a free pass to finance . Britain owes this privilege when it comes to the rest of the EU entirely to its membership of the single market . It is naive to believe Europe is about to set a precedent by ceding free trade in finance . With careful persuasion and diplomacy , and by agreeing European jurisdiction in all such matters , it may eventually be possible to convince Europe that it is in its own interests to sustain the high levels of liquidity London is able to offer , but I would n't bet on it , and in any case , such concessions are likely to be quite limited in scope . Roughly speaking , around £40bn annually of City fee income comes from the continent , activity that is entirely based on permission access . This in turn directly generates around £15bn a year of tax revenue , ignoring income tax , national insurance and other spillover benefits from this business . It 's quite a hole to be punching in our already stretched public finances . More troubling still , over and above the trade surplus , the City plays a key role in funding the UK 's overall current account deficit by acting as a magnet for international capital . If this position were put at risk , the pound would need to fall quite a bit further to reach its equilibrium level , pushing up inflation and interest rates . Telling the EU just to `` sod off `` was never really an option . Even as a negotiating ploy , our affairs are too intermingled to have made the threat believable . When he became leader , David Cameron made it his ambition to stop the Tories obsessing about Europe ; in the end , the EU destroyed him , just as it destroyed Thatcher and Major . May scarcely looks like breaking the habit . 'Already it is obvious that a Canadianstyle deal , but with free trade in services added on top , is unrealistic '
Parliament could bypass court over Brexit ; Brexit turmoil ; Ministers suggest pushing through a one-line Bill triggering Article 50 before legal ruling made
THE Government could pass a law paving the way for Britain to leave the EU within weeks and not wait for the Supreme Court , ministers suggested . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , admitted that legislation could go through Parliament before the Supreme Court decides on whether to uphold a High Court ruling that MPs and peers should have a vote on when to trigger Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty that starts the UK 's withdrawal from the EU . Mr Davis hit out at attempts by Labour MPs to secure a second referendum and claimed that they were attempting to `` wreck '' Brexit . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has admitted that the Supreme Court could dictate the degree of scrutiny MPs and peers will have if the Government loses its appeal . MPs put pressure on Mr Davis to speed up the Brexit process in the wake of the High Court ruling . Nicky Morgan , the former Education secretary , urged Mr Davis in a Commons debate to agree to a `` one-line Bill authorising the triggering of Article 50 '' . Mr Davis said he was `` very tempted '' , before adding : `` We do have to complete the tests in the court that are necessary to establish the law . '' Oliver Letwin , the former Cabinet Office minister , also asked if Mr Davis `` agreed that in light of that it would be possible for both Houses of Parliament to amend their procedures in such as way as to bring forward an Act and Bill , and to pass that long before the Supreme Court judgment '' . Mr Davis replied : `` Yes . '' Sources close to Mr Davis stressed afterwards that he and the Government remained focused on winning the appeal to the Supreme Court . There was some confusion after Labour changed its position three times in three days on whether it would support the start of the Brexit process without any conditions . On Saturday , Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , said the party will vote to trigger Brexit talks as long the Government agrees to a series of `` bottom lines '' , including access to the EU single market . But on Sunday , Tom Watson , Mr Corbyn 's deputy , insisted that `` ultimately when the vote comes , Labour will support Theresa May to trigger Article 50 '' . By yesterday , Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , appeared to change Labour 's position again , saying that ministers had to set out their plans for Brexit before any Article 50 vote . `` We are absolutely clear that before we get to that stage the Government must put its plan before Parliament , '' he said . The prospect of Labour voting down attempts to start the Brexit process is fuelling speculation Mrs May might opt for a general election next year . Speaking in India , she appeared to soften her language on holding an early vote , telling the BBC that `` the next general election should be in 2020 '' . In an interview last month , Mrs May was firmer , insisting it was `` right that the next general election is in 2020 '' . William Hague : Page 16
French revolt opens door to EU climbdown on Brexit ; French Brexit transition deal 'could break impasse '
FRANCE and other EU nations have signalled they are willing to begin Brexit trade talks as early as October in a move that opens the door to a climbdown by the EU , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . Senior French diplomats have made clear they want to see the deadlocked Brexit talks make progress , in the first sign of splits emerging in the EU . Under the terms of a proposal set out by France , the UK is being encouraged to request a three-year transitional deal if it continues to pay into the EU Budget and accepts EU law . This position puts Paris at odds with hardliners in Brussels and Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , who are insisting there can be no trade talks until the Brexit divorce bill is settled . It represents a significant boost for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who today travels to Brussels for face-toface talks with Mr Barnier . Mr Davis will tell Mr Barnier that Brussels must show more `` flexibility and imagination '' as he seeks to break the deadlock in negotiations . He said : `` For the UK , the week ahead is about driving forward the technical discussions . We want to lock in points where we agree , unpick where we disagree , and make further progress on a range of issues . But in order to do that , we require flexibility and imagination . '' It came as the German Chambers of Industry and Commerce urged the EU to push ahead with discussions on a future trading relationship amid concerns that Brexit will have a `` major negative impact '' on businesses . The French overture on a transition deal was confirmed by two separate senior UK sources and points to underlying cracks in EU unity . British ministers are adamant the UK will not write any cheques unless payments are linked to a future trade deal , while Mr Barnier insists there can be no trade talks until the money question is settled . Tensions between the two sides increased further last week after Brussels officials accused Theresa May 's government of `` magical thinking '' over Brexit . EU officials have warned they are `` increasingly doubtful '' that talks can progress onto future relationship questions in October as originally envisaged , while British officials are demanding `` more flexibility '' and accusing the EU of `` dragging its feet '' . However the French position on transition arrangements offers the potential to break the impasse , leading EU analysts said last night , and reflects growing concerns among EU member states that time is running out to achieve a non-disruptive Brexit . According to information seen by The Daily Telegraph , the French version of transition would see the UK continue accept EU law for a fixed two or three year period after Brexit while paying ( EURO ) 10billion ( £922.8 million ) a year . The payments would fill the immediate ( EURO ) 10billion-a-year `` black hole '' left by Brexit in the EU 's seven-year budget cycle after 2019 and satisfy moderate voices in Brussels . Charles Grant , director of the Centre for European Reform , said : `` Many top officials in the EU and in governments would welcome an offer of ( EURO ) 10billion-ayear for three years as part of a transitional deal that would move the talks process forward . `` If the British get their act together and make a serious offer on the money to their partners they will not only put the EU on the defensive , they will also expose the divisions in the EU on how to respond to the money deadlock . '' Officials believe that the ( EURO ) 10billion-ayear payment will make it more difficult for Brussels hardliners to claim that Britain is not prepared to commit to making substantial payments towards a divorce bill . `` There are actually a large number of member states that want to start talking about future trade relations , '' said Mujtaba Rahman , chief EU analyst at the Eurasia Group political consultants , though adding that no one was prepared to break ranks for now .
What to watch BODY : Brexit Means Brexit BBC TWO , 9.00PM ; SCOTLAND , 11.15PM ? Bafta-winning documentary maker Patrick Forbes follows up last year 's superb fly-onthe-campaign film Brexit : A Very British Coup with another that follows players in the ongoing Brexit debate over the turbulent 12 months since Britain voted to leave the EU . `` In the last film we were watching the Brexit comet smash generations old certainties to pieces , '' says Forbes . `` This is about the establishment struggling to its feet and trying to ride that comet . '' Forbes spent time with people from all sides , from MPs Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer to Anna Soubry , Nicholas Soames and Jacob Rees-Mogg and captured some extraordinary moments . He was at `` ordinary citizen '' Gina Miller 's side as she dragged the government to the supreme court over the triggering of Brexit and he was in the USA with Nigel Farage as he `` went off as Donald Trump 's very special friend to the inauguration '' . And he was filming right up to , and after , the recent general election . `` One thing I am clearer about , '' says Forbes , `` is that ' Brexit means Brexit ' is not just an empty slogan . It is a genuine moment in history that 's going to test the British establishment as it has never been tested . '' Gerard O'Donovan
Scotland Labour refuses to kill off prospect of second referendum on leaving EU ; Confusion continues over Corbyn 's stance as SNP presses for 'chance for Britain to change its mind '
JEREMY CORBYN has refused to rule out a second EU referendum if he becomes prime minister . During a press interview , the Labour leader said his party was `` not advocating '' another vote on EU membership , but he stopped short of actually killing off the prospect . It came as Scottish Nationalists invited Labour to join forces with other opposition parties to keep Britain in the single market and customs union . Ian Blackford , SNP leader at Westminster , appealed for cross-party cooperation to prevent the `` catastrophic damage '' of an `` extreme '' Brexit . Labour 's ill-defined Brexit policy means Labour Remain voters are convinced it is `` completely against Brexit '' , while Labour Leave voters are convinced it is `` completely in favour of Brexit '' , according to a YouGov survey . Mr Corbyn continued to keep all options open in his interview with the i newspaper , in which he was asked about remarks made recently by Tom Watson , his deputy , that nothing should be ruled out . He said : `` He did indeed say that , but our position is that we are not advocating a second referendum . We have had a referendum which came to a decision . The negotiations are still ongoing , albeit well behind schedule and we have set out the kind of relationship we want to have with Europe . '' So , Mr Corbyn did not categorically rule out a second referendum - something that Tory rebel Lord Heseltine predicts will happen . Nine backbench Labour MPs this month supported an amendment by the Liberal Democrats to the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill - which transfers European law into UK law - which sought a second referendum on the terms of the Brexit deal . A group of 70 London-based Labour councillors has also written to ask Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , to commit to providing a chance for `` people to change their mind '' . Asked why the party had such a confusing message on Brexit , Mr Corbyn said : `` I do n't think it 's confusing . What we are saying is ... we are formally leaving the European Union , of course - that is the position - [ but want to ] develop a good economic relationship with Europe and recognise the interdependence of our industries . '' Mr Blackford is to invite opposition leaders to a Brexit summit on Jan 8 when MPs return to Westminster after the Christmas break . He said : `` Extreme Tory Brexit plans to drag Scotland and the UK out of the single market would cause catastrophic damage to the economy - costing hundreds of thousands of jobs , and hitting people 's incomes , livelihoods and living standards for decades to come . `` It is time for MPs of all parties to put politics aside and work together , in the national interest , to protect our place in the single market and the customs union . As we saw with the successful amendments to the EU Withdrawal Bill , when opposition parties work together effectively it is possible to secure a parliamentary majority and deliver change in the national interest , '' he added . Meanwhile , Mr Corbyn has insisted that he will be fit and ready to fight the next general election , even if he has to wait until 2022 , when he will be 73 . The Labour leader said he has `` loads of energy '' , and added : `` I eat porridge every morning ; porridge and energy bars ; and I keep off alcohol and meat . '' Sir Vince Cable , the Lib Dem leader who will be 79 in 2022 , admitted in an interview that his hope for the new year was to be able to `` work less and sleep more '' .
Scotland Mutiny in the Commons blows up storm for May 's Brexit talks ; Conservative rebels win battle for 'meaningful ' vote on leaving EU in embarrassment to Government
THERESA MAY last night suffered a major Conservative mutiny against her Brexit plans after 11 of her own MPs refused to back the Government and boasted that Parliament had `` taken control '' . The Prime Minister lost a key vote in the Commons despite senior Conservatives pleading with the self-styled `` rebel alliance '' to back Mrs May or risk a disorderly Brexit . Following chaotic scenes in Parliament , the rebels defied their party by voting through an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill demanding a `` meaningful '' vote on Brexit . In a sign of the ongoing bitter recriminations , one of those behind the mutiny was last night sacked as vice-chairman of the Conservative Party . The disunity in her party threatened to undermine Mrs May on the eve of a crucial Brussels summit at which she is hoping to receive backing from other European leaders to move on Brexit talks to begin discussing trade . Whitehall sources fear that some European politicians may seek to use the problems faced by the Prime Minister in Parliament to secure further concessions or legal guarantees . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator , last night hailed the Government 's defeat as a `` good day for democracy '' . He said : `` British Parliament takes back control . European and British Parliament together will decide on the final agreement . Interests of the citizens will prevail over narrow party politics . A good day for democracy . '' The dispute arose over the status of the vote on the Brexit deal before March 2019 , which the rebels had insisted must be guaranteed in law . Ministers had pledged to give Parliament a proper vote but warned that the rebel amendment demanding that a `` meaningful vote '' should be enshrined in law risked derailing a `` smooth and orderly '' Brexit . What had been seen as a technical row yesterday erupted into a major political embarrassment for No 10 . Last night , Brexit-supporting Con-servative MPs rounded on their colleagues - who were led by former ministers Dominic Grieve , Anna Soubry , Ken Clarke and Nicky Morgan - warning that they had undermined Brexit and boosted Labour 's chances at the next election . Nadine Dorries said : `` Tonight , the Tory rebels have put a spring in Labour 's step , given them a taste of winning , guaranteed the party a weekend of bad press , undermined the Prime Minister and devalued her impact in Brussels . `` They should be deselected and never allowed to stand as a Tory MP , ever again . I 've been a rebel myself , but never when a Marxist government was knocking at the door . '' Michael Fabricant , another Tory MP , said : `` Labour 's cheers in the Chamber should have been cause for deep reflection by the likes of Anna Soubry and Dominic Grieve . A shallow victory for the Remainers , but a victory for Labour morale and polling . '' Stephen Hammond , who was sacked as Conservative vice-chairman last night , was one of 11 Tory MPs including Sir Oliver Heald , Bob Neill , Antoinette Sandbach , Sarah Wollaston , and Jonathan Djanogly who joined Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats in the anti-Brexit move . The Government said it was `` disappointed '' and senior Conservatives raised concerns the vote could be used to frustrate or block Brexit entirely . Labour MPs punched the air in jubilation as the result of the vote was announced , while Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , said that the result was `` humiliating '' for Mrs May . The rebels accused the Government of being `` stupid '' for failing to make Continued on Page 4 Nick Timothy : Page 26 Editorial Comment : Page 27
The EU wo n't be defeated on Brexit , vows Tusk ; Council president says it is up to London whether exit talks end with 'good deal , no deal or no Brexit '
THE European Union will not be `` defeated '' by Britain in the Brexit negotiations , Donald Tusk said yesterday as he insisted Theresa May would fail in any effort to divide EU leaders . `` No one can divide the 27 in these negotiations , '' the president of the European Council said . `` Ahead of us is still the toughest stress test . If we fail it , the negotiations will end in our defeat . '' Speaking in the European Parliament in Strasbourg with Jean-Claude Juncker , Mr Tusk suggested that if the EU remained firm , the British Government could cancel Brexit . Mr Tusk , who leads meetings of EU national leaders , told MEPs : `` It is in fact up to London how this will end , with a good deal , no deal or no Brexit . '' The former prime minister of Poland admitted he was obsessed with the EU 's painstakingly constructed united front , before insisting : `` We must keep our unity regardless of the direction of the talks . The EU will be able to rise to every scenario as long as we are not divided . '' At last week 's EU summit , heads of state and government said Britain had not made `` sufficient progress '' in the Brexit negotiations . The EU is refusing to talk trade or a transition deal until it judges sufficient progress has been achieved on Ireland , citizens ' rights and the Brexit bill . Mrs May earlier this week issued a fresh threat to walk away from the talks with no deal unless a trade deal is agreed by the summer . Earlier , a humiliating leak from Brussels suggested she had `` begged '' EU leaders for help . Mr Juncker , president of the European Commission , told MEPs : `` The commission is not negotiating in a hostile mood . We want a deal . Those who do n't want a deal , the 'no-dealers ' , they have no friends in the commission . '' `` We want a fair deal with Britain and we will have a fair deal with Britain , '' said Mr Juncker . The commission is leading Brexit talks on behalf of the EU . Syed Kamall , Britain 's most senior Conservative MEP , called for more pragmatism from Brussels over Brexit . `` I hope we avoid becoming trapped by the sequencing of the negotiations , '' he said . `` Let us be more pragmatic . '' Manfred Weber , leader of the centre-Right European People 's Party , the largest political group in the European Parliament , mocked Brexiteers and said the business community in London was nervous . `` The Brexiteers have no common plan for the future of their country and especially not for the relationship with EU , '' the German MEP said . `` We can not accept that a country outside the EU can have the same conditions and status as a country inside the EU . '' In her Florence speech , Mrs May asked for a two-year transition period after the March 29 2019 date for Brexit . Mr Weber later said that any transition period should be used to deal with the `` leftovers '' from the Brexit negotiations sparked by the triggering of Article 50 and not as an excuse to extend the talks indefinitely . `` That will not fly . If there is no achievement then we are risking a hard Brexit , '' he told reporters . `` We need an outcome in the next two years - specifically on the future relationship - otherwise we are risking further difficulties . ' The UK and the EU agree that any transition would mean Britain remaining subject to EU law and the European Court of Justice for its duration . Ray Finch , a Ukip MEP , attacked Mrs May and the Government . `` What Mrs May is doing is quietly surrendering so that we will end up neither leaving , nor sovereign , '' he said . `` We will remain subservient to the EU , both financially and legally , a nation condemned to serve it by its leaders . '' Editorial Comment : Page 15
Scotland May refuses to say if she would vote Leave now ; No-deal UK could join American alliance
THERESA MAY has repeatedly refused to say whether she would vote for Brexit in a second EU referendum . The Prime Minister , who backed Remain during last year 's Brexit vote , said she would `` look at everything '' and `` come to a judgment '' . It came as Donald Tusk has signalled for the first time that EU negotiators are taking a `` no deal '' outcome seriously after it emerged that Brexit talks will be put on hold today . The European Council President said that if the talks continued at a `` slow pace '' without sufficient progress being made , `` we will have to think about where we are heading '' . The Prime Minister yesterday initially declined to answer the question about how she would vote , dismissing it as `` hypothetical '' because Britain will leave the EU in March 2019 . But after being pressed repeatedly on how she would vote she said : `` I could sit here and I could say I 'd still vote Remain or I 'd vote Leave , just to give you an answer . I 'm being open and honest with you . `` What I did last time round was I looked at everything and came to a judgment and I 'd do exactly the same this time round . '' She added : `` But we 're not having another referendum . That 's absolutely crucial . We are going to deliver on the vote of the British people , we are going to deliver Brexit . 29th March 2019 , we come out of the European Union . '' The comments risk antagonising Eurosceptic Conservative MPs , who are already concerned about the UK being bound by European Court of Justice rulings during a transition period after Brexit . It will also put pressure on other Cabinet ministers who voted Remain in EU referendum . Damian Green , the First Secretary , said last night : `` My views on Europe are well known and I do n't resile from anything . '' Meanwhile Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , snapped that `` Brexit is not a game '' in an ill-tempered riposte to Mrs May 's comment that `` the ball is in their court '' . Jeremy Corbyn will attempt to exploit the stand-off by visiting Brussels next week , where he hopes to conduct his own talks with EU officials together with the shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer . Theresa May will arrive in Brussels Continued on Page 4 David Goodhart : Page 16 Editorial Comment : Page 17 Continued from Page 1 next Thursday for a two-day meeting of the European Council , at which she is likely to be told that insufficient progress has been made on Brexit for trade talks to begin . It is understood that Mr Corbyn could also be in Brussels on Thursday . He is likely to meet Labour MEPs and sources said other meetings with EU officials might be arranged . Negotiators had been expected to talk about the so-called Brexit `` divorce bill '' during this week 's round of talks , but it has emerged that after discussions on citizens ' rights and the Irish border on Monday and Tuesday no talks on money will be held today . David Davis travelled to Brussels for lunch with Mr Barnier yesterday , and will return tomorrow for a press conference despite nothing happening today . Asked whether the ball was in his court as he left the lunch , Mr Barnier snapped : `` Brexit is not a game . Do n't forget . '' Mr Tusk , who leads the meetings of EU leaders , said he hoped the UK would make sufficient progress by December so trade talks could be approved when the European Council meets for the final time this year . It emerged yesterday that Britain may join a trade alliance with the US , Canada and Mexico after Brexit under plans being considered by ministers . The Prime Minister also refused to rule out suggestions that she is preparing to hold reshuffle , saying that people can `` speculate to their heart 's content '' . Mrs May said that EU citizens currently living in the UK will be able to stay regardless of whether there is a deal . However she raised questions over whether they would enjoy the same benefits . 'We 're not having another referendum . March 29 2019 , we come out of the EU '
Hiscox to set up EU hub in Luxembourg after Brexit
INSURER Hiscox will set up an EU hub in Luxembourg following Brexit , a move it says will not affect any of its 1,200 UK-based staff . Echoing comments made by US insurer AIG when it unveiled its post-Brexit plans earlier this year , the group said Luxembourg was chosen because of its `` pro-business position , well-respected regulator , and is close to many of our major markets '' . The decision is another win for Luxembourg as it competes with other European cities to win business post-Brexit , with Hiscox following rivals AIG and property insurer FM Global in choosing Luxembourg as its EU base . The insurance provider underwrites risks in a range of areas including terrorism and kidnappings . It said that it would hire around 10 people covering compliance , risk and internal audit on the ground - meaning nobody would be forced to relocate , a spokeswoman said . It is not known who will lead the new office , which will underwrite all of Hiscox 's retail business on the continent . Pressure is heating up for financial firms as they ready themselves for Brexit negotiations that could restrict the type of services they can provide to clients on the Continent . Lloyd 's of London chairman John Nelson said earlier in the year that `` we have to assume risk of a harder Brexit '' after the insurance market announced that it would open a base in Brussels to weather any impact . Nicolas Mackel , the head of Luxembourg for Finance , the country 's trade promotion body , said that he was `` delighted '' by Hiscox 's decision , calling it a choice which `` Luxembourg 's international outlook and rich talent pool '' . Hiscox announced the location of its EU hub alongside its trading update for the three months to March , noting that premium income rose 17.3pc to £751m following a strong performance in its retail business . However chief executive Bronek Masojada sounded a warning that its London Market unit `` continues to face challenging conditions '' with double-digit declines in its marine , energy and US large property accounts and a trading environment he said was reminiscent of the Nineties .
Scotland Scottish businesses do n't need a bespoke Brexit deal , says Mundell ; 'No evidence ' separate Brexit necessary for SCOTLAND
SCOTLAND 'S businesses do not want or need a bespoke Scottish Brexit deal , David Mundell insisted yesterday . The Scottish Secretary said the Prime Minister was trying to secure the best access to the single market for all British businesses , without any barriers , wherever they were based . Although UK ministers were still considering the Scottish Government 's plan for a separate Scottish deal , said Mr Mundell , he had not seen any evidence to suggest it would help Scottish firms . He criticised the SNP 's plans as Nicola Sturgeon , the First Minister , hardened her approach , telling MSPs she was determined to `` save '' Scotland from Brexit . Mr Mundell was speaking after a meeting in London of the Joint Ministerial Committee of ministers from the devolved administrations and the UK Government . The committee discussed the Scottish Government 's Alan Cochrane : Page 16 plan for a bespoke Scottish deal , but broke up without agreement . Mr Mundell said afterwards : `` If there is evidence that , for some reason , there should be a differentiated Scottish arrangement , then of course that will be properly looked at and considered . `` But at the moment I do n't have any evidence to suggest that SCOTLAND would benefit from a differentiated arrangement from the rest of the UK . `` If we can get that access to the single market , without barriers and without tariffs , then that 's exactly what SCOTLAND 's BUSINESSes are looking for . That 's what SCOTLAND 's economy needs . '' He added : `` That 's why we should , in my view , all come together and focus on achieving that outcome for the United Kingdom . '' Ms Sturgeon said she would not dilute her demands for SCOTLAND to remain in the single market . Giving perhaps her clearest hint to date that she will call a fresh referendum on independence , she said : `` I am determined to `` save '' Scotland from Brexit . It 's not just the case that the Tories are running towards Brexit , they want to drag SCOTLAND kicking and screaming over that Brexit cliff-edge and I 'm determined they are not going to get away with this . '' She added : `` Time is fast running out for the UK Government to convince us that they care one jot about SCOTLAND 's interests , and if they do n't then SCOTLAND does face a choice . `` Do we go down the damaging path set out by Theresa May with all the impacts that we know that will have and in the knowledge that our voice does n't matter within the UK , or do we decide to take our future into our own hands and take control of the future of our own country into our own hands ? '' Ms Sturgeon said she believed that decision should be taken by the Scottish people . David Davis , the UK Brexit minister , stressed the importance of using the exit process from the EU to bind the United Kingdom tighter together . Speaking after the meeting in London , he said the Scottish Government 's proposals for a separate Scottish dealrepresented an `` important contribution '' , but that further discussion was needed about the details . `` As the Prime Minister made clear in her speech , Brexit is a chance for us to build a stronger UK and strengthen the Union between our four nations , '' Mr Davis said . `` It is only by us coming together that we can fully grasp the opportunities that our departure presents . We will use the latest thinking and analysis shared at today 's meeting to inform our work to deliver an exit that works for the whole of the UK . '' He also stressed that the UK Government would make sure the `` right powers '' were devolved to SCOTLAND after Brexit . Michael Russell , SCOTLAND 's Brexit minister , said after the talks that there was a `` great frustration building up '' over the UK 's handling of Brexit . He said Mrs May 's speech this week had `` pre-empted '' much of their discussion , but there was agreement the Scottish Government 's paper on Brexit would be taken forward by `` technical discussion and bilateral discussion '' .
Transition deal would cost UK two more years of free movement ; Draft Brexit negotiating guidelines reveal EU 's tough new stance on trade , migration and fishing
FREEDOM of movement in Britain could continue for up to two years after Brexit , if British negotiators cave to fresh demands from Brussels ahead of talks over an UK-EU transition deal . The bloc wants EU citizens arriving in the UK before 2021 to be allowed to live and work in the UK indefinitely as the price for a Brexit transition period . Theresa May must secure transition to reassure anxious businesses but agreeing to the demand risks the fury of Brexiteers who want March 29 , 2019 to spell the end of freedom of movement in Britain . Capitulation would mean an extra 18 months to two years of unlimited EU migration , with people arriving benefiting from the same protected status as EU citizens living in Britain before `` Brexit Day '' . Draft instructions for Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , have revealed the bloc 's toughened stance ahead of transition period talks . The transition agreement will come into force after Brexit Day , effectively `` deep-freezing '' the UK 's membership of the single market and customs union for about two years , giving businesses and the government valuable time to prepare for departure . In December , the UK and European Commission agreed that EU citizens living in Britain before the cut-off date would have their residency rights protected after Brexit . That deal , along with agreement on the so-called Brexit Bill and the Irish border , secured `` sufficient progress '' at December 's EU summit . EU leaders then gave the go-ahead for talks on the transition period , Mrs May 's next significant Brexit hurdle , to begin . The EU now wants the cut-off date to be pushed back to the end of the transition period and the special status for EU citizens extended to those arriving in the UK before the last day of transition at the end of 2020 . People arriving in Britain after Brexit but before 2021 could stay and work in the UK indefinitely . Central and Eastern European countries , including Poland , are behind the demand , according to the Financial Times , which obtained the draft negotiating mandate . The EU has also demanded stricter terms on trade agreements and fishing rights , complicating negotiations . The document requires the UK to seek Brussels ' permission to remain part of trade agreements struck by the EU after March 29 2019 . As things stand , Britain would fall out of those agreements , including pacts with Canada and South Korea . The diplomats strengthened language prohibiting Britain from entering into new agreements with non-EU countries to replace the lost deals `` unless authorised to do so by the union '' . They also moved to underline that Britain 's share of fishing catches in UK waters was not open to negotiation . The share has been fixed for decades under the relative stability `` quota arrangement '' .
The battle for Brexit is far from over - it needs to begin again now ; Great political shifts are never final - the PM must start campaigning on the issue that will define her
There is no such thing as permanent victory in politics . History never ends : triumphs are fleeting ; majorities can turn into minorities ; and orthodoxies are inevitably built on foundations of sand . Communism was supposed to be discredited forever after the collapse of the Berlin Wall ; yet many young people in Britain and America now call themselves socialists . Progress is never guaranteed in politics : there are just ups and downs and swings of the pendulum . This applies to Brexit too , of course : those who thought that Leave 's victory on June 23 somehow settled the question were deluded . The good news is that it remains likely that we will leave the EU in 2019 . Theresa May is fully committed and will be canny and steely in her negotiations . But the Remainers are staging a fight-back which is beginning to inflict serious damage on the Brexiteer cause . Every piece of bad news is blamed on Brexit ; an endless supply of reports , economic `` forecasts '' and articles explain how leaving the EU is self-evidently bound to hurt us , slash our GDP , make us the world 's laughing stock and wreck our prosperity . Even Ed Miliband and Peter Mandelson are back . Remarkably , given that the insurgents were meant to have seized power , the propaganda wars have been one-sided : the Government is n't really taking part , and the other Brexiteers have vacated the battlefield . Unless Mrs May decides to change tack , and becomes much more aggressive in defence of the policy that will come to define her , the Brexiteers will have only one option left : reconstitute a version of Vote Leave and relaunch a full-throttled , independent campaign . One thing is clear : concern is mounting in Eurosceptic circles . It 's not just the specifics of how we leave the EU that are still up for grabs . Some Remainians still hope that withdrawal can be delayed long enough for it never to happen ; others are discussing whether Article 50 could be reversed once it 's invoked . The High Court case about whether the Government has the right to trigger the process itself , or whether Parliament needs to vote on it , is being followed closely by the financial markets . Traders , to their great shame , are desperate for any scrap of information that they could interpret as signifying that Brexit will be stopped or at least that we will remain permanently in the customs union , the single market and just about everything else . The election - by more than half of the MPs eligible to vote - of hard-core Remainer Hilary Benn to lead the Brexit Select Committee , defeating Brexiteer Kate Hoey , will be interpreted by some as another sign of a growing anti-Brexit revolt in the Commons . The European elites can not believe their luck . They are making increasingly tough statements that are being taken at face value by the Remainian echo-chambers in Britain . The plan is working : the aim is to demoralise the UK establishment , encourage the Government to be unambitious in its negotiations and rattle the business and financial establishment , thus undermining popular support for leaving . Among the more idiotic claims that have been aired in recent days is that we no longer need airport expansion : some supposed `` experts '' believe that the demand for aviation will now grow much less quickly after Brexit ( non-EU countries never build new airports , of course ) . In any normal circumstances such claims would be shot to pieces by a pro-Brexit campaign within minutes of their publication . But that 's just it : there no longer is a pro-Brexit campaign . Liam Fox , Boris Johnson and David Davis are making good speeches , and are building an extensive new administrative apparatus ; but the full might of the Government is n't meaningfully behind the Three Brexiteers . There is no war room , no rebuttal unit , no 6:30am meetings , no coordinated counter attacks . For every anti-Brexit economic prediction , there needs to be a pro-Brexit one ; for every case made for the customs union , another must be made to end it . We need to see numbers , data , arguments and financial modelling , backed by the full force of the state machinery . The real scandal is not that the Remainians are playing this game . It is par for the course : general elections do n't mean that the defeated opposition disappears for five years , and that the Government 's manifesto is nodded through . Political warfare does n't end on the day a new prime minister walks into Downing Street : the opposition 's job is to derail the government at every opportunity to snatch power back . Why should it be any different after a referendum ? No , the real problem is that the Government is operating under the ridiculous assumption that the referendum somehow depoliticised a raw , passionate struggle , magically turning it into a technocratic , managerial question . Yet governments can never stop fighting for their policies ; they need to sell their ideas afresh every day and take the public and opinion-formers with them every step of the way . The fact that the May Government was entrusted with one big mission - rather than having to choose one - does n't change this . It needs to pretend that it invented the idea of Brexit , for that is what history and the electorate will eventually come to think . It must learn to believe passionately in it , and take all attacks on it personally . The Prime Minister in particular needs to own Brexit , not just in terms of eventual delivery but in every other way too . Unless she defines it and controls it , she will allow others to do so , to her and the country 's great disadvantage . Prior to the referendum , David Cameron had 50 of the best civil servants camped out in the Cabinet Office , waging war against Brexit ; the Prime Minister needs to create a similar body , making the opposite case . She needs to hire a senior Eurosceptic campaigner to run it . Her relationship with the Chancellor will also be key : she needs to remind him that his job is to reach for greatness rather than merely to minimise damage . If the Government does n't launch a new campaign for Brexit , somebody else will have to . They will need to set up a new campaign vehicle , hire some of the operatives who masterminded the Leave vote and go back to their donors for funding . This can not wait until after Christmas . The Battle for Brexit must begin - again - now . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Do the Brexit mutineers think that undermining Theresa May will help her get the best deal ? ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - The Brexit rebels ( Letters , November 16 ) claim to want Britain to negotiate a good deal . Could they explain how undermining the Prime Minister will achieve this ? Barry Cook Rufford , Lancashire sir - The Brexit `` mutineers '' state : `` We have accepted the result of the EU referendum and accept that our country is leaving the European Union . '' You could have fooled me . Sid Davies Bramhall , Cheshire sir - Only the most naive would believe the rebels ' claim that they want merely to improve the Brexit Bill , rather than delay it . This is simply not true . Indeed , it seems clear that at least some of the rebels would sooner have a Corbyn administration than part with their beloved EU . What the Government and the Conservatives need to realise is that if Brexit does n't happen soon then a justifiably furious electorate will sweep them away in disgust and the hard Left really will be in power . Terry Smith London NW11 sir - The signatories point out that `` many of us are lawyers '' . This may explain the lack of commercial perspective in terms of adopting a negotiating position , as well as the failure to grasp the enormous opportunities for Britain once we have left the EU . Adrian Johnson London SW19 sir - The letter would be more plausible if the list of signatories had not been headed by Ken Clarke : a well-known Europhile , famous or infamous , depending on your point of view , for his anti-Brexit stance . Malcolm Francis Symonds Ashtead , Surrey sir - The MPs say they are not being obstructive just for the sake of it ; but then , to adapt Mandy Rice-Davies , they would , would n't they ? I presume Mr Clarke would also argue that having private discussions with Michel Barnier behind closed doors , without instruction to do so , was not being `` obstructive '' . Their history suggests that pessimism about any Brexit result is their default position . Maybe we should listen instead to people such as Sir James Dyson , who offer a much more upbeat message . Peter Thompson Sutton , Surrey sir - Why do so many of our MPs lack the confidence to assume their democratic responsibilities ? They would rather cling to the skirts of the EU and have our laws decided by unelected bureaucrats , who have tied us up in red tape , restricted our trade with the rest of the world , ruined our fisheries , complicated our agriculture and changed the cultural identity of our society - while overcharging us for the privilege . We were a successful sovereign nation for hundreds of years . The majority of British voters had the courage to reclaim that sovereignty . Yet our representatives , while paying lip-service to Brexit , seek to frustrate this by complicating the process . Pauline Coleman Painswick , Gloucestershire sir - Theresa May 's plan to enshrine a Brexit leaving date in law ( report , November 16 ) is all very well - but , should that date come and go without Brexit , who would address the failure and who would take the blame ? Bruce Denness Whitwell , Isle of Wight sir - It seems that poor Mrs May is in a no-win situation : she is castigated for failing to give clarity in the Brexit process and yet , as soon as she gives clarity in the form of a definitive date for leaving , she is roundly criticised . David Parsons Deepcut , Surrey
Scotland SNP veteran lambasts Sturgeon 's Brexit 'posturing '
A FORMER deputy leader of the SNP has launched a stinging attack on Nicola Sturgeon , accusing her of misleading the public over Brexit and putting the independence movement in jeopardy with her calls for a new vote on breaking-up Britain . Jim Sillars described SNP threats to block Brexit legislation or stop the Great Repeal Bill as `` fantasy posturing '' . He also accused the Scottish Government of `` sloppy thinking '' , said it lacked intellectual rigour and claimed most independence supporters were guilty of `` docile '' acceptance of everything Ms Sturgeon said . The veteran nationalist added that her `` obsession with Brexit '' was playing into the hands of the Tories and there was no appetite among the public for a vote at present . He said : `` An obsession with Brexit and a referendum is allowing the Tories to gather large numbers of 2014 No voters into their fold to reject a referendum they do not want . `` Ruth Davidson must purr with pleasure every time Sturgeon speaks or sends a letter to Theresa May . '' He said that until the ink was dry on the final Brexit deal , and time was taken to consider what that meant for Scotland 's relationship with the rest of the UK , there could be `` no deployment of the case for independence and a second referendum '' . Writing in the Daily Record , he added : `` The voters grasp this basic truth . It 's time Sturgeon and her cabinet did too . '' Mr Sillars said in the article that false and misleading claims could damage the goal of independence . The Great Repeal Bill will allow the UK Parliament and devolved administrations to repatriate European Union laws following Brexit . Ms Sturgeon has said any attempt at a `` power grab '' by diminishing the responsibilities of the Scottish Parliament in areas such as farming and fishing would be `` unacceptable '' and her spokesman has suggested the Scottish Government could withhold legislative consent if powers are removed from Holyrood . But Mr Sillars said the Westminster Act that set up the Scottish Parliament , and the Supreme Court ruling that said the devolved administrations did not have a legal veto on Brexit , made the position clear on any such intervention by Holyrood . He added : `` Surely , our First Minister , a lawyer , has read and understood the Supreme Court 's judgments . Surely she knows that talk of throwing a spanner in the Brexit works is misleading , meaningless waffle . '' He added : `` Since no rational Scottish Government can believe their own propaganda on stopping Brexit , what is really behind this exercise ? `` I suspect it is to engender feelings of anger in Scotland that we 're being ignored and not treated as an equal in this United Kingdom , with a resultant surge in Scottish patriotism . '' He said : `` Make no mistake , I too want a second referendum , but I do n't think manufacturing grievance by issuing false and misleading claims is the way to achieve that goal . '' A spokesman for the SNP said Mr Sillars was `` wrong on several counts '' , adding : `` Firstly , the SNP Government has not claimed it could block the Brexit Bill - but we have made clear we would not vote for legislation which stripped powers away from Holyrood . `` Secondly , a majority of people in Scotland believe Holyrood should have the right to decide on an independence referendum , and that Theresa May is wrong to try and block it . ''
Scotland Trump 'wants EU to break up in wake of Brexit vote '
DONALD TRUMP supports the breakup of the European Union in the wake of Brexit , an outgoing US ambassador has suggested . Anthony Gardner , who is departing as ambassador to the EU , said that senior figures in the president-elect 's transition team had been asking EU officials which countries will follow Britain in voting to leave the bloc . Mr Trump has made no secret of his support for Brexit and has repeatedly praised Nigel Farage . Mr Gardner was highly critical of Mr Trump 's position on Brexit and the EU . `` To think that by supporting fragmentation of Europe we would be advancing our interests would be sheer folly , '' he said . `` It 's lunacy . '' He added : `` For us to be the cheerleaders of Brexit and to be encouraging Brexit Mark 2 , Mark 3 , is the height of folly . '' Describing calls to EU institutions from Trump 's aides in recent weeks , Mr Gardner said : `` That was the one question that was asked - basically , 'What 's the next country to leave ? ' . Which is kind of suggesting that the place is about to fall apart . `` It 's just reflective of the general perception , a misperception , a perception that Nigel Farage is presumably disseminating in Washington and it 's a caricature . '' Meanwhile , Mr Trump attacked the former MI6 operative who prepared a dossier claiming Russia had explosive intelligence on him as a `` failed spy '' . Mr Trump said Christopher Steele , who spent two decades with the Secret Intelligence Service , collaborated with his political rivals to concoct `` phoney allegations '' . He dismissed the alleged conspirators as `` sleazebag political operatives '' , noting that Russia has denied collecting compromising information about him . Theresa May was forced to distance herself from the contents after the Russian embassy in London suggested Mr Steele may still be working for the British Government . The Prime Minister insisted that the Government had nothing to do with the `` dirty dossier '' . A rare bottle of whisky signed by Mr Trump has sold for £6,000 at auction in Glasgow - more than double the expected price . The 26-year-old Glendronach was bottled in 2012 to mark the opening of Trump International Golf Links in Aberdeenshire . The Trump Files : Pages 8 and 9 Charles Moore : Page 20 John Hughes-Wilson : Page 21
Scotland Sturgeon is accused of using Brexit fears to 'muddy the waters ' about Union dividend ; Brexit will be deeply damaging , says First Minister
NICOLA STURGEON was accused last night of a `` cynical '' attempt to deflect attention from Scotland 's multi-billion pound deficit by claiming Brexit could cost the country billions every year . The analysis by the Scottish Government of the cost of leaving the EU was released 24 hours before official figures that could reveal the biggest ever gap between what Scotland raises in taxes and what it receives from Westminster . Opponents said the First Minister was trying to `` muddy the waters '' and boost the case for another independence referendum while ignoring Scotland 's multi-billion pound `` Union dividend '' . One pro-Union group said Scotland 's deficit for 2015-16 was expected to be even higher than the £15 billion figure revealed in March , when opposition parties said the data had devastated the case for separation . The new Scottish government analysis of Brexit claims Scotland 's GDP could be between £1.7 billion and £11.2 billion lower per year by 2030 . It said Brexit would hit Scottish tax revenues by up to £3.7 billion annually . Ms Sturgeon claimed the figures were evidence of the need to protect Scotland 's relationship with Europe . She also revealed plans yesterday to appoint a Brexit minister to lead the Scottish Government in talks with the UK Government . However , Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , said Ms Sturgeon was using Brexit to deflect from the `` underlying fragility '' of the Scottish economy . She claimed the Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland ( Gers ) figures being published today had been brought forward from their normal release date to avoid `` pre-election scrutiny '' next year . The data , which will show the full scale of the collapse in oil revenues , has been released each March for the last five years . The Tories said that if the revenue figures were issued next March , as expected , that would fall during the parliamentary session and two months before council elections in May . Ms Davidson added : `` The First Minister is in danger of losing the plot completely . Her own government 's figures will show that Scotland benefits from a multi-billion Union dividend . `` And yet , in order to revive her independence obsession , she is trying to pretend these facts do n't exist . Scotland benefits from being a member of the UK , and the UK benefits from our being there . It is time Nicola Sturgeon ended this charade , took her threat of a second independent referendum off the table , and got back to the day job of sorting out the mess her government has made of our public services . '' Alastair Cameron , director of the pro-UK organisation Scotland in Union , said the economic hit caused by Continued on Page 6 Continued from Page 1 Brexit would be far outweighed by the damage caused if Scotland were to leave the UK . He added : `` By rushing out these speculative and selective Brexit figures in a cynical attempt to muddy the waters ahead of the Gers report , Nicola Sturgeon has all but admitted she has no answers to the economic questions about independence . While there is evidence that Brexit could harm the Scottish economy , she has failed to recognise this would be vastly outweighed by the damage caused by turning our back on our biggest trading partner - the rest of the UK , a market nearly four times as big . `` Our membership of the UK has protected us from the sharp tax rises and deep spending cuts to our schools and hospitals that would be an inevitable consequence of the fall in oil prices if Scotland had been independent . '' But Ms Sturgeon claimed at a press conference in Edinburgh that the `` old argument '' that the UK offered financial security for Scotland no longer held water . She added : `` Brexit will be deeply damaging to Scotland 's economy and to our finances . `` If it turns out simply not to be possible to protect Scotland 's interest through the UK , it must be open to the Scottish people to consider afresh , and in this very different context , the question of independence . However , I am very clear that we will enter these UK [ Brexit ] discussions in good faith . '' According to the Scottish Government paper , leaving the EU could make European exports more expensive , deter overseas investors , restrict labour , increase skills shortages and reduce productivity . A spokesman for the UK Government said the real uncertainty for Scotland 's economy was due to talk of a second independence referendum .
Hammond loosens the purse strings with £3 bn for Brexit ; Brexit ; Chancellor told to spend now to show Europe that Britain is serious about walking away from talks
BRITAIN will set aside £3billion on preparations for Brexit , including leaving the EU without a deal , Philip Hammond announced as he faced calls from Conservative Eurosceptics to spend the money now . The Chancellor provoked Cabinet splits last month by saying that the UK should not spend money on preparing for leaving the EU without a deal until `` the very last moment '' . However , he announced in his Budget that the Government is setting aside money to prepare for `` all eventualities '' , including leaving the EU without a deal . `` No one should doubt our resolve , '' he said . Conservative MPs pointed out that the first half of the money will not be spent until next year , while the second half will not be released until 2019-20 - by which time the UK will already have left the EU . Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , is among Eurosceptic MPs who have repeatedly argued that Britain should invest in preparing for a no deal Brexit to show the EU that it is serious about walking away . David Jones , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , said : `` I am pleased to see the Chancellor has set aside £3billion for Brexit over the next two years . `` However , he should now actually be spending some of that money . We need to show the EU that preparations are being made and also need to give reassurance to business . '' Mr Hammond said : `` We are determined to ensure that the country is prepared for every possible outcome . We have already invested almost £700million in Brexit preparations . `` Today I am setting aside over the next two years another £3billion . `` And I stand ready to allocate further sums if and when www.needed.No one should doubt our resolve . '' He concluded his Budget speech by saying that the `` biggest boost '' for businesses and families would be to make `` early progress '' to securing a deal on Brexit . However , Tory Eurosceptic MPs raised concerns after the Treasury suggested that the UK could continue to pay £3.5 billion a year after Brexit . Jacob Rees-Mogg said : `` I can not believe that those wise figures in Her Majesty 's Treasury could have made a schoolboy error of just assuming that money paid out in one year would continue indefinitely . `` This is I feel rather like spotting an error in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack - something that it is very rare to do and indicates an occasional failing . '' The Government clarified that the Office for Budget Responsibility , the official forecaster , had included the EU spending in forecasts because it had assumed that after Brexit it would be `` recycled fully into extra domestic spending . '' The OBR said that it had only been able to make `` broad brush '' assumptions about Brexit because the future relationship with the EU is subject to negotiations . It said : `` Given the uncertainty regarding how the government will respond to the choices and trade-offs it faces during the negotiations , we still have no meaningful basis on which to form a judgment as to their final outcome and upon which we can then condition our forecast . '' However , it did downgrade its forecasts for net migration from 185,000 in 2021 to 165,000 in 2022 on the assumption that the Government will go on to introduce tighter immigration controls . This will still fall short of the Government 's target of cutting net migration to `` tens of thousands '' . The watchdog also assumes that Brexit will result in slower import and export growth due to new frictions in trade between the UK and EU . 'We need to show the EU that preparations are being made and also need to give reassurance to business '
House of Lords threatened with abolition if it delays Brexit
THE House of Lords was yesterday warned it will face abolition if it frustrates Brexit , as it emerged that rebel Tory MPs are plotting to delay triggering Brexit until the end of the year . Government sources and Conservative MPs told the House of Lords that its existence will be called into question if it tries to delay or frustrate plans to leave the European Union . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , urged peers to do their `` patriotic '' duty and support Brexit . However pro-European Conservative peers are prepared to defy the Government whip and back three amendments which have the potential to derail Theresa May 's plans for a clean Brexit . One of the motions is expected to demand that Brexit negotiations can not be triggered until after German and French elections later this year . Some Tory peers are also expected to back a Liberal Democrat amendment calling for a second referendum before Britain leaves the European Union . A third amendment likely to be backed by Tory peers will demand that the UK retains tariff-free access to the single market . Around 20 Tory peers are prepared to join Liberal Democrat , Labour and a number of cross-bench peers in a bid to delay Brexit . One Conservative peer told The Daily Telegraph : `` The Commons needs a reality check . We are driving off a cliff-edge and nobody is doing anything about it . '' However Oliver Letwin , a former cabinet minister , yesterday said that a debate should be held on abolition or full-scale reform of the House of Lords if peers try to frutrate Brexit . Speaking during the business statement , Mr Letwin asked Commons Leader David Lidington : `` Would he find time in government time for a debate , should the Lords seek to delay beyond the end of March the passage of our accession to Article 50 , for this House to discuss the possibility of either the abolition or full scale reform of the Lords ? '' Mr Lidington said he was `` optimistic '' a debate would not be required , adding he believed the Lords would be `` very cognisant '' of the will of the public shown by the referendum result .
May calls in Gove to save her from leadership challenge ; Prime Minister brings in former foe in reshuffle aimed at shoring up support for a hard Brexit
THERESA MAY attempted to head off a potential leadership challenge last night by handing Michael Gove an unexpected return to the Cabinet in a move designed to shore up support for a hard Brexit . Mr Gove 's appointment as Environment Secretary in the Cabinet reshuffle paves the way for him to become a key adviser on Brexit , as well as a powerful ally of the Prime Minister in getting any Brexit deal through the Commons . The appointment suggests Mrs May is prepared to address complaints that she is too autocratic and unwilling to work with her critics . The move came as a surprise because she has had a frosty relationship with Mr Gove since they fell out over government policy on extremism in 2014 . With Brexit negotiations due to start next week , Mrs May appears to have been given a stay of execution by her party , who are desperate to keep the talks on track and do not want to risk any move that might lead to another general election . George Osborne , the former chancellor , said yesterday that Mrs May is a `` dead woman walking '' and several Tory MPs indicated that a leadership coup in the summer remains likely . Tonight , Mrs May will face the wrath of the backbench 1922 Committee of Conservative MPs , who demanded that their monthly meeting with the Prime Minister be brought forward by a day so they could vent their fury over the catastrophic election campaign . By bringing Mr Gove back into the fold , Mrs May has sent a signal to Boris Johnson and David Davis - the `` hard Brexiteers '' most likely to replace her in any leadership coup - that she remains committed to delivering their vision of Brexit . Mr Gove replaces fellow Brexiteer Andrea Leadsom , who becomes Leader of the House , a key role in which she will be charged with working with the whips office to steer Brexit legislation through Parliament . Mrs May also appointed Damian Green - a high-profile Remain supporter - to the job of First Secretary of State . It came as : Allies of Boris Johnson said it was a matter of `` when , not if `` he makes a fresh bid to become Tory leader . Mrs May refused to say whether she intends to serve a full five-year term . The DUP deal was mired in problems as Tory MPs questioned its legitimacy and the Irish premier warned it could jeopardise the peace process . Backbenchers told a weakened Mrs May she must drop key manifesto pledges from next week 's Queen 's Speech if she wants it to be passed . Jeremy Corbyn predicted he will be Prime Minister by the end of the year and said he is ready for another general election . Mrs May insisted yesterday she was `` getting on with the job '' despite widespread reports of plots to oust her and announced she would be flying to France to meet President Emmanuel Macron tomorrow as she attempts to show that Brexit will not be affected by the loss of her majority . Initially Mrs May had planned a widespread reshuffle if she won a large majority and wanted to replace Philip Hammond as Chancellor , as well as demoting critics such as Liam Fox . But after losing her majority she has also lost much authority and has had to leave virtually all of the major Cabinet ministers in place , with the notable exception of bringing in Mr Gove . Mrs May has faced calls to soften her Brexit negotiating position , with Mr Hammond , Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , and the DUP all favouring a `` jobs first '' Brexit with the emphasis on the economy rather than on cutting migration . However , Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader and Brexit cheerleader , said : `` Gove has been brought back because he is a keen Brexiteer and so people do n't think we are abandoning the Brexit process . `` There is no watering down of Brexit . Even Labour has said we are not going to stay in the single market . `` It helps having Michael Gove in the Cabinet because he is very clear that we should take control of our borders , our laws and our money . '' Mr Gove 's return is a remarkable turnaround for an MP whose relationship with Mrs May had been in a dire state . He had also made an enemy of Boris Johnson after he supported his leadership bid last year only to `` betray '' him by running himself , taking many of Mr Johnson 's supporters with him . Both ended up pulling out of the contest . Yet Mr Johnson was among the first to welcome Mr Gove back into the Cabinet . He tweeted : `` It 's a GOVErnment of all the talents . Welcome back to Michael ! '' Mr Gove said : `` I 'm flattered Theresa May has asked me to rejoin her team . I was quite surprised , I have to say . `` I was down in Surrey enjoying the afternoon with a friend when suddenly the phone rang . There was an invitation to go to No 10 . I knew today was reshuffle day but genuinely did n't Continued on Page 2
Markets are breathless ( and clueless ) about Brexit
If Socrates was right and the only true wisdom is in knowing you know nothing , then the markets are currently displaying their collective genius ; they clearly have n't got a clue whether the UK will vote to leave the European Union and what that will mean for investments if it does . Yields on the UK 's 10-year , 20-year and 30-year government bonds all hit record lows yesterday in reaction to polls and betting odds suggesting that Brexit is now looking more likely . But what this means is open to interpretation . The relationship between bond yields ( which move inversely to prices ) and economic forecasts are , to put it mildly , complicated . Traditionally the prices of government bonds go up and their yields fall when investors are worried . But that is because government bonds are seen as low risk . So does the rally in UK gilts mean investors are concerned about the health of the UK economy after Brexit or that they 're sanguine about its safe haven status ? The UK Treasury and the Remain campaign have repeatedly said that the UK 's borrowing costs will rise in the event of Brexit . The Leave campaign has therefore seized on the fact that gilt yields have fallen following the publication of pro-Brexit polls as evidence that so-called Project Fear is not working . Yesterday morning Douglas Carswell , the UK Independence Party member of parliament and prominent Leave campaigner , tweeted : `` Bond markets looking good . `` Lot [ sic ] of international investors happy to buy UK gilts ahead of Brexit . '' City analysts might argue that this view could be construed as a touch rose-tinted . It is more likely that investors have been persuaded by the economic consensus , which has predicted that Brexit might lead to some economic pain ( though no one really knows how much ) , and believe this could result in Bank of England having to cut interest rates and maybe even restart the printing presses with more quantitative easing . This would , in turn , push up the price of the current stock of gilts and hence result in lower yields . Some go as far as to point out that if the market thought Brexit was a good thing , investors would be selling bonds to invest in some of the assets , such as equities , that would better help them ride the upswing . In that case gilt yields would be rising . But they 're not . 'The Leave campaign has seized on the fact that gilt yields have fallen ' In the meantime , the FTSE 100 has fallen through the 6,000 mark with nearly £100bn wiped off the value of blue chip stocks in the last four trading days . The FTSE 250 , which is a better gauge of the UK economy , has tumbled in June as the polls have narrowed . But , equally , the equity markets are only back to where they were in February - hardly the most dramatic of sell-offs . The clearest indicator of international sentiment towards the UK is the value of the pound . It has held up for much of the campaign but has been falling as we get closer to the June 23 vote . But is that a bad thing ? There are plenty who would argue that it is currently too high and a fall will help the UK 's exporters . On the flip side , a sharp fall in sterling following Brexit , were it to occur , would make imports more expensive and therefore increase the possibility of inflation . If that looked like happening the Bank of England might feel it was too risky to cut rates to dampen any economic turmoil and might even feel it had to hike them . That would result in the prices for government bonds falling and yields rising . On top of this is the possibility that foreign investors might stop seeing the UK as a safe haven and sell their holdings of gilts . There 's no clear evidence of this happening yet . Foreign investors own about a quarter of all UK government bonds and the latest data from the Bank of England shows this proportion is unchanged . 'A post-Brexit fall in sterling would make imports more expensive ' But , if a sell-off did occur following Brexit , it could put downward pressure on prices resulting in rising yields . A poll of 1,750 investment professionals conducted by the CFA institute has found that nearly 69pc think a vote to leave the EU would lead to an immediate increase in benchmark 10-year UK government bond spreads over German Bunds . But that expectation that yields will rise in the event of Brexit appears to contradict what has happened - they 've fallen - as the chances of Brexit have increased . Muddying the water further is the fact that these asset prices are , unlike the polls , not only looking at the UK referendum but are also pricing in worsening worries about the global economy in general and a low inflation environment . How much of the movement in asset prices is down to the referendum and how much is down to what is going on in the rest of the world is really anyone 's guess . Confused yet ? You 're not alone . The price of government bonds yields could just as easily rise or fall in the event of Brexit and both sides of the argument are likely to read a justification of their opinion into either scenario . Investors are probably best off keeping out of it if they can . 'The Leave campaign has seized on the fact that gilt yields have fallen ' 'A post-Brexit fall in sterling would make imports more expensive '
Cameron 's 'fixer ' brokers Brexit peace deal ; Long road to the deal Sir Oliver Letwin heads off Tory rebellion over leaving date with amendment to allow greater flexibility
DAVID CAMERON 'S former `` fixer '' last night brokered a potential peace deal between Theresa May and Tory rebels that could avoid a second Brexit rebellion in the space of a week . The Prime Minister is understood to be willing to accept a compromise proposed by Sir Oliver Letwin over the Brexit date being enshrined in law following talks with both sides . An amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill tabled by Sir Oliver would enable Mrs May to save face by keeping the Brexit date of March 29 , 2019 on the Bill , while also allowing Parliament to vote to change the official Brexit date if negotiations with Brussels over-run . Sir Oliver said last night he was `` absolutely confident '' his amendment would be passed when it is put to a vote next Wednesday . Crucially , his amendment was co-signed by Bernard Jenkin MP , one of the most vocal Eurosceptics on the Tory backbenches , and Jeremy Lefroy MP , one of the Tories who was planning to rebel . Dominic Grieve , the rebels ' ringleader and a former attorney general , last night gave his support to the plan , and Government sources indicated Mrs May was receptive to the idea , though one Tory rebel described it as a `` serious step down for the Prime Minister '' . Mrs May , who suffered her first Parliamentary defeat on Brexit this week when 11 Tory rebels joined Labour in demanding a `` meaningful vote '' on the final deal with Brussels , had been facing a second defeat after the mutineers said the Brexit date must not appear on the Bill . They argue that enshrining Brexit day in law will give the Government no flexibility , meaning Britain could crash out without a deal if negotiations with the EU over-run by a matter of days or weeks . Sir Oliver 's amendment allows for the date of Brexit to be changed by Parliament if necessary , mirroring the process for extending the Brexit negotiations , which can only be done if all 28 EU member states agree to extend the two-year period specified under Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty . Sir Oliver told The Daily Telegraph : `` It means that the date remains on the face of the Bill but if the UK Government or the EU uses the Article 50 process to create extra time for negotiations then the Government does n't have to start all over again . '' Sir Oliver was David Cameron 's policy chief and is a former chairman of the Conservative Research Department . He no longer holds any official position within the party , but remains one of the most influential voices on the backbenches . He added : `` I 've talked to Dominic Grieve and he and his friends are likely to be content with it . I have n't spoken to anyone in Downing Street but I 'm confident that the Government will accept it . This is not something I 've just dreamed up in the bath . '' Government sources said they were `` looking closely '' at the amendment but had not yet accepted it . Vicky Ford , a Conservative MP who came close to rebelling this week before deciding to vote with the Government , said : `` I hope that there is some flexibility and I know that the Government is listening . `` We should try and get this all resolved over the next few days so that we can all go away for Christmas and then get down to the hard work of getting this trade deal agreed . '' Countdown to departure Milestones the EU and UK have to pass Now Exploratory UK-EU talks can begin on the future relationship , the second phase of Brexit negotiations , which include trade and transition . Jan 29 2018 European Affairs ministers meet to sign off the commission 's text . This is expected to be a formality . UK-EU negotiations on transition begin . March European Council summit to set out guidelines for trade talks , which can then formally begin . Donald Tusk expects these to be more difficult than any negotiations up to now . October Deadline for Brexit agreement to be finalised ahead of ratification by the EU 27 and European Parliament . Mr Tusk says it will be `` dramatically difficult '' to achieve an agreement by this time . March 2019 Brexit deal should by now be ratified but it could be derailed if MEPs or even one single country , including Britain , rejects it . March 29 2019 Britain leaves the EU and the transition period begins . 2021 After a period of `` about two years '' , the transition period ends and Britain is cut off from the single market , customs union and other EU structures . 'I 'm confident that the Government will accept it . This is not something I 've just dreamed up in the bath '
Brexit war of words as two sides remain deadlocked ; Stalemate threatens to delay trade talks as UK is accused of 'nostalgia ' over single market demands
DAVID DAVIS demanded that the European Union put `` people above process '' yesterday after Brussels ' chief negotiator claimed there had been `` no progress '' during Brexit talks . The Brexit Secretary attacked the EU 's rigid approach to the third round of negotiations that closed in Brussels yesterday with the two sides deadlocked over fundamental issues and with warnings that trade talks will not start in October as originally planned . During a bad-tempered press conference in the headquarters of the European Commission , Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , said : `` There has been no decisive progress on any of the principle subjects . '' He added : `` Time is passing quickly and was short to start with . '' Mr Davis said : `` Our discussions this week have exposed yet again that the UK 's approach is substantially more flexible and pragmatic than that of the EU as it avoids unnecessary disruption for businesses and consumers . We urge the EU to be more imaginative and flexible in their approach to withdrawal on this point . '' Mr Barnier chided Britain for unrealistic expectations of single market access after Brexit , saying the UK demands suggested a `` nostalgia '' for an organisation it had decided to leave . `` I would n't confuse a belief in the free market for nostalgia , '' Mr Davis shot back . Mr Barnier had said : `` I see a sort of nostalgia in the form of specific requests that would amount to enjoying the benefits of the single market without being part of it . Brexit means Brexit and leaving the single market means leaving the single market . '' Last night it emerged the EU is demanding billions of pounds after Brexit for aid to Africa , loans to Ukraine and environmental projects in Europe , including bridges for wildlife . Mr Barnier said there were `` joint obligations towards third countries '' which need to be addressed `` seriously and rigorously '' . The ongoing row will cause particular embarrassment for Theresa May , who spent much of yesterday assuring business leaders in Japan that Brexit was going smoothly and they could invest in the UK with confidence . Mrs May , who had meetings with the bosses of Toyota , Nissan and Hitachi , later went to a state banquet with Shinzo Abe , the prime minister , apparently unaware of what was going on in Brussels . The exchange came after four days of talks that brought little progress on the issues of Ireland , citizens ' rights and the financial settlement to leave the EU . This week , The Daily Telegraph reported that French officials had suggested the UK should seek a transition deal as a means of breaking the impasse . Guy Verhofstadt : Page 16 Editorial Comment : Page 17
'There can be no turning back ' ; Theresa May prepares for parliamentary battle as opposition parties plot to thwart clean Brexit
JEREMY CORBYN and Nicola Sturgeon were last night plotting to undermine Theresa May 's plan for a clean Brexit as the Government insisted there was `` no going back '' on the vote to Leave . After the Supreme Court ruled that Parliament would have to pass a new law triggering Article 50 : ? Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , called for full access to the single market after Brexit and said he will table legislation demanding that the terms of any final deal are sent back to Brussels if Parliament rejects them ; ? The SNP said that it is prepared to table 50 amendments , including a proposal to block Brexit entirely , while the Liberal Democrats will seek a second referendum and oppose triggering Article 50 ; ? A dozen pro-European Conservative MPs are also prepared to join forces with Labour and the SNP in an attempt to force the Government formally to set out its negotiating strategy . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , is expected to publish the Article 50 legislation tomorrow and has warned MPs and peers against trying to `` thwart '' or `` delay '' Brexit . He yesterday insisted that there would be `` no going back '' on the result of the EU referendum and described attempts to block Brexit as `` patronising , undemocratic and improper '' . Sir Edward Leigh , a former Tory minister , said the Government should be prepared to call an `` immediate general election '' if its opponents try to undermine Brexit . However , the Prime Minister is confident that she will be able to face down parliamentary opposition and ministers believe they could trigger Brexit weeks earlier than her end of March deadline . The Government hopes to pass the legislation in the Commons within a fortnight , with potential all-night sittings and the first vote scheduled for next week . The Conservatives believe that will leave sufficient time for debate in the Lords , where the Government does not hold a majority . `` We will let the Lords talk until they wet themselves , '' one Government source said . Iain Duncan Smith , a former work and pensions secretary , said : `` This is an attempt to yet again try to tie the Government 's hands and delay Brexit . `` The Prime Minister must stick to her guns and get this Bill through as fast as possible . '' The Supreme Court yesterday ruled that the Government must table legislation before triggering Article 50 and beginning the process of exiting the European Union . However , ministers secured the support of three dissenting justices , with one of them warning that judicial intervention in political matters was `` fraught with risk '' and was not `` constitutionally appropriate '' . Judges also ruled that the Government does not need permission from Scotland and other devolved administrations before triggering Article 50 . The ruling brought a furious response from Ms Sturgeon , the Scottish First Minister , who claimed that the need for a second independence referendum was `` ever clearer '' . The SNP has promised to put forward 50 `` serious and substantive '' amendments to the Bill , including a proposal that the UK would stay in the EU under a `` revised '' membership if MPs reject the final deal . It also left Labour in disarray . A spokesman for Mr Corbyn initially suggested that Labour 's amendments to Article 50 legislation would `` seek to build in the principles of full , tariff-free access to the single market '' , only to remove the line from a second press release half an hour later . Labour is preparing to table at least four amendments , including one that would require the Government to take a final deal back to Brussels if Parliament votes against it . Mr Corbyn is ultimately expected to impose a three-line whip to support the Article 50 legislation , but dozens of Labour MPs - including shadow ministers - will rebel and vote against it . Kate Hoey , a Eurosceptic Labour MP , warns today in an article for The Daily Telegraph that it will be `` incredibly damaging '' for the party if it is seen to obstruct Brexit . `` This could be a real threat to our party 's future , '' she says . There were also growing signs of a rebellion among pro-European Conservative MPs . A dozen of them called on the Government to publish a White Paper to set out its broad strategy before Brexit . The scale of the potential rebellion and the small Tory majority means that ministers could be forced to back down and publish the paper or face a potential Commons defeat . Mr Davis yesterday told the Commons : `` I trust no one will seek to make it a vehicle for attempts to thwart the will of the people or frustrate or delay the process of exiting the European Union . '' Ministers are privately warning that the Government is prepared to flood the Lords with hundreds of Conservative peers if it tries to block Brexit . Lord Blunkett , a Labour peer and former home secretary , said it would be `` foolish in the extreme '' and `` unthinkable '' for Lords to block Brexit . INSIDE Brexit reports Pages 2-7 Opinion Page 16 Editorial Comment Page 17 SCOTTISH NATIONAL PARTY Plans to table amendments to the Article 50 Bill , including one that seeks to block Brexit entirely LIBERAL DEMOCRATS All MPs told to vote against Article 50 in an attempt to force a second referendum LABOUR Called for full access to the single market and wants to force the PM to publish a Brexit plan
Scotland Brussels expected to back UK over checks at Irish border
BRUSSELS will support Britain in its row with Ireland over the future of customs checks after it leaves the European Union , Brexit negotiators believe . Leo Varadkar , the Irish Prime Minister , surprised the British Government earlier this month by suggesting that there should be a new customs border in the Irish Sea . A formal position paper , published on Wednesday , will see ministers stick to their plan for a `` light touch '' customs border between Ireland and Northern Ireland using technology and spot checks . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , yesterday acknowledged that the dispute is likely to be `` problematic '' as he called for `` invisible '' customs checks . However , Brexit negotiators are increasingly confident that Brussels will support Britain over the dispute . Speaking in Edinburgh , Mr Davis said he expects an agreement over the free movement of people between Ireland and Northern Ireland will be `` straightforward '' . He said : `` I was sitting next to an Irish banker at a dinner of financial services , and he said what am I going to do ? How am I going to be able to travel between Britain and Ireland . `` I said the same way you have been doing since 1923 when the Common Travel Area was established . That bit ought to be very straightforward . The bit that 's more problematic is making the border invisible in the way that it is now . '' On Tuesday the Government will publish a paper on customs arrangements after Brexit , followed by the paper on Northern Ireland . However Michel Barnier , the EU 's Brexit negotiator , is refusing to negotiate on the future of Britain 's relationship with the EU until after significant progress has been made in Brexit divorce talks . Mr Davis hopes that the publication of the position papers will help drive forward negotiations . He said : `` We need to get on with negotiating the bigger issues around our future partnership to ensure we get a deal that delivers a strong UK and EU . '' An ally of Mr Davis said : `` David is trying to change the dynamic and drive negotiations forward .
Scotland Juncker 's furious take on Brexit dinner ; The Telegraph Election 2017 ; German newspaper paints picture of disastrous meeting between Prime Minister and EC president
AS JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER , the president of the European Commission , left Downing Street on Wednesday night , he and his team appeared to be in good spirits . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , was seen throwing her head back with laughter in the lobby of Downing Street as Martin Selmayr , Mr Juncker 's chief of staff , made a joke . Both Downing Street and Brussels subsequently hailed the meeting as `` constructive '' . On Sunday , however , a very differ-ent version of events emerged in a German newspaper which suggested that Mr Juncker had launched a scathing attack on Mrs May . The report claimed that Mr Juncker warned Mrs May that Brexit `` can not be a success '' , adding that he was leaving Downing Street `` 10 times more sceptical '' . He and his officials now believe the chance of Brexit negotiations failing is `` over 50 per cent '' . The following day , the newspaper reported , Mr Juncker had called Angela Merkel and described Mrs May as `` deluded '' and `` living in another galaxy '' . Mrs Merkel subsequently accused Britain of suffering from `` Brexit delusions '' . Mrs May yesterday dismissed the reports as `` Brussels gossip '' , but conceded that negotiations will be `` tough '' . May 's 'pre-emptive strike ' According to Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung , the meeting descended into acrimony almost immediately as Mr Juncker demanded to know why Britain had blocked EU budget negotiations . Mrs May said that because of the election any decision that would bind the hands of the next government could not be made . Mr Juncker and his officials , however , regarded the block as a `` pre-emptive strike '' ahead of Brexit , suspecting Mrs May was trying to make his life `` hell '' in a bid to improve her negotiating position . Davis under fire After half an hour of talks Mrs May and Mr Juncker went to dinner where they were joined by Michel Barnier , the European Commission 's chief negotiator for Brexit , and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . In a bid to break the ice Mr Davis reportedly highlighted a legal challenge he brought against the Government as a back-bench MP over the UK 's surveillance powers in the European courts . Mrs May was `` not amused '' . `` The visitors wondered whether Davis would still be in charge of the negotiations after the election , '' the German newspaper reported . Early expat deal ruled out Mrs May told Mr Juncker that she wanted to settle the issue of the rights of the 3million EU migrants living in Britain and the 1 million Britons living in the EU by the end of June . Her suggestion is reported to have `` astonished '' Mr Juncker . `` I think you underestimate this , Theresa , '' he is reported to have said . Mr Juncker is said to have pulled two thick files from his bag - the accession treaty with Croatia and the free trade deal with Canada , both of which are thousands of pages long - saying the divorce treaty and future free trade agreement would be just as complex . Talks in the open The Prime Minister suggested talks could take place in monthly , four-day blocks which would remain confidential . The European Commission said this would be `` impossible '' . 'Brexit can not be a success ' Mrs May painted a `` rosy picture '' of a post-Brexit Britain which would be open to the world and closely integrated with the Single Market . `` Let us make Brexit a success , '' she said . According to the report Mr Juncker said that Britain could no longer remain a member of the Customs Union and would be worse off than it is today . `` Brexit can not be a success , '' he said . Mrs May appeared `` surprised by this '' , the report suggested . With the meal less than half way through , Mr Juncker responded : `` The more I hear , the more sceptical I become . '' Battle over the bill One of the most contentious parts of the discussion was over Britain 's Brexit divorce bill . The EU wants the UK to pay up to £50billion to fulfil its obligations as it leaves the bloc . Mrs May told Mr Juncker that the UK is not legally obliged to pay `` a penny '' . But he said that if the UK fails to meet its obligations it will undermine a potential free trade deal . He also suggested it would mean that the parliaments of all other EU nations would have to sign off on the deal , putting the process at risk : `` Why should they pick up London 's bill ? '' A call to Angela Merkel The following day Mr Juncker spoke to Mrs Merkel at 3pm and reportedly said : `` Theresa May is living on another galaxy , she is deluding herself . '' An hour and a half later Mrs Merkel told the Bundestag : `` I have the impression some in Great Britain still harbour illusions about it [ Brexit ] . That would be a waste of time . '' Mrs May responded directly to Mrs Merkel , warning that her rhetoric demonstrated that all 27 members of the EU are `` lined up against us '' . Brussels gossip ? The Prime Minister yesterday insisted the talks had been constructive . However she added : `` Every vote for me and my team will strengthen my hand in those negotiations . `` And when it comes to June the 8th , people have a clear choice . There 'll be 27 European countries on one side of the table . `` Who do they want to see standing up for Britain on the other side of the table - me , or Jeremy Corbyn ? '' EU officials warned after the meeting that is now `` more likely than not '' that Brexit talks will fail . Mrs May told EU delegates at the meal : `` Let us make Brexit a success . '' But Mr Juncker thought otherwise . Delegates said they were `` astonished '' by Mrs May 's push for a deal on EU migrants to be sorted `` by the end of June '' . Mrs May appeared to play hardball over the divorce bill , insisting the UK does not legally owe the EU any money . According to the report Mrs May appeared 'p***** off ' with Mr Davis during the meal for highlighting a case he once brought against the Government as an MP over surveillance powers . The PM reportedly urged that the monthly talks stay secret . The EU said this was `` impossible '' as it had to consult member states . 'Who do they want to see standing up for Britain on the other side of the table - me or Jeremy Corbyn ? '
The season of goodwill ? A frosty snub from Osborne to IDS suggested not ; Sketch
It is no secret that , in their Cabinet days , George Osborne and Iain Duncan Smith were n't the best of friends . To judge from what happened at yesterday 's Brexit debate , I 'm going to guess that relations have n't improved . Since his demotion , Mr Osborne has rarely been seen in the chamber . So it was a pleasure to spot him lurking near the back , exchanging whispers with colleagues , and stroking his chin as if it were a Bond villain 's cat . After a while I glanced at the clock . Mr Osborne had been present for an hour and 20 minutes . A long time . Was he plotting a dramatic intervention ? If he was , we sadly did n't get to hear it , because then the Speaker invited a speech from Mr Duncan Smith . Immediately , Mr Osborne got up and left . I do n't know whether Mr Duncan Smith registered this slight from his party colleague . But I assume not , because he then started taunting Labour for being divided . Labour had called the debate to force the Government into publishing its plan for Brexit . To get its own back , the Government had tabled an amendment to force Labour into voting for Article 50 to be invoked by the end of March . `` Facing defeat , the Government has caved , '' maintained Sir Keir Starmer . The shadow Brexit secretary is a recent addition to Labour 's front bench . He is a heavy , forbidding figure , with an unblinking glare and a hard , bony face . Essentially he looks like a kneecap with eyes . Labour , he insisted , was not trying to `` frustrate '' Brexit ; merely to `` shape the debate '' and avoid `` a hard Brexit '' . David Davis looked at him testily . He has argued before that there 's no such thing as `` a hard Brexit '' . `` To be honest , '' retorted the Brexit Secretary , `` I do n't even know what 'hard Brexit ' means . '' `` Hard Brexit means hard Brexit ! '' parped a heckler . Mr Davis said MPs must give the Government leeway in its EU negotiations ; otherwise , it would be like trying to thread a needle `` with 650 people jogging your elbow '' . Hilary Benn ( Lab , Leeds Central ) , looked exasperated , insisting that MPs needed clarity , not the occasional hint . `` When Moses came down from the mountain bearing the tablets , '' he snorted , `` they did not contain 'The Ten Hints ' ! '' The debate was growing increasingly partisan . But then in stepped an unlikely peacemaker : Ed Miliband . The former Labour leader said he shared the view of two leading Tories . During a visit to the Commons library , he 'd been impressed by a pamphlet the two had written in 2007 , entitled `` Restoring Parliamentary Authority : EU Laws and British Scrutiny '' . `` Our feeble system of scrutiny undermines Parliament 's ability to check or restrain government actions in Europe , '' they 'd written . `` We therefore need a system that gives Parliament real powers over ministers , enough time to scrutinise , and the transparency to restore public trust in the process . '' The pamphlet 's authors , said Mr Miliband , were Nick Timothy - now Joint Chief of Staff in Downing Street - and Theresa May . 'The Brexit debate was growing more partisan . But then in stepped an unlikely peacemaker : Ed Miliband '
Tory rebels stall Brexit Bill ; Theresa May faces battle over flagship legislation as Remain MPs support hostile amendments Chancellor accused of sabotage as EU says talks are deadlocked
THERESA MAY 'S plans for Brexit were in disarray last night after it emerged her flagship Brexit Bill has been put on hold because of a potentially disastrous Tory rebellion . The EU Withdrawal Bill had been scheduled for scrutiny by MPs next week , but has now been taken out of the parliamentary calendar because the Government faces defeat on more than a dozen hostile amendments . It came on the day that Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , admitted that `` no deal '' was now a real possibility after talks in Brussels reached deadlock . There were also calls from a former Conservative chancellor for Mrs May to sack Philip Hammond for attempting to `` sabotage '' Mrs May 's Brexit plans . The developments added to a growing sense in Westminster that Brexit is grinding to a halt because of opposition in Brussels and in Parliament to the Government 's strategy . A total of 300 amendments and 54 new clauses have been tabled to the EU Withdrawal Bill - which will take EU laws into domestic legislation to provide continuity when the UK leaves the EU in 2019 - of which 13 have enough support from Tory MPs to defeat the Government . If Mrs May was defeated on the Bill it would seriously reduce her already waning authority , meaning whips must strike deals with the Tory rebels to ensure they toe the party line . Rebels are unhappy over the Government 's desire to secure so-called `` Henry VIII powers '' , which give ministers the right to make legislative changes without full parliamentary scrutiny . It is the latest evidence of the battle royal that Mrs May faces in the coming months to keep Brexit on track . She also faces discord in Cabinet , with Lord Lawson urging Mrs May to remove Philip Hammond from her top team . The former Chancellor said Mr Hammond 's actions over the past few weeks had been `` unhelpful '' and irresponsible . Mr Hammond prompted fury among his Cabinet colleagues on Wednesday by saying that money should only be spent on preparations for a `` no deal '' outcome `` at the very last moment '' . His comments appeared to undermine Mrs May 's attempts the previous day to put pressure on the European Union by talking up the chances of no deal . He was rebuked just hours later when Mrs May took a friendly question from her pro-Brexit colleague Iain Duncan Smith in the Commons , allowing her to reassure MPs that money will be spent when needed . Ministers are increasingly convinced that Mrs May will soon reshuffle her Cabinet to restore her authority . The prospect of Brexit talks collapsing without a deal being reached moved a step closer yesterday as Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , made his most explicit admission to date that `` no deal '' was a real possibility . Mr Barnier told a press conference at the European Commission 's head quarters : `` No deal would be a very bad deal . To be clear , on our side we will be ready to face any eventualities and all the eventualities . '' Mr Barnier said talks were deadlocked after five rounds of negotiations , with huge divisions between the two camps remaining , especially over the so-called Brexit divorce bill . He confirmed he would not recommend to EU leaders that they should allow him to begin trade talks with Britain when they gather at a Brussels summit next week . It also emerged yesterday that a Commons debate on the EU withdrawal bill , scheduled for next week , has been postponed with no new date yet fixed . It is understood that the delay has been caused by extra administrative work created by the sheer number of amendments tabled by MPs , but the delay will add to the sense of Brexit being put on hold . Asked whether Mr Hammond should remain as Chancellor , Lord Lawson told the BBC : `` I fear not . I fear that he is unhelpful . He may not intend it but in practice what he is doing is very close to sabotage . '' He added : `` The really important thing now is that we prepare for the no deal outcome . '' Downing Street insisted Mrs May retained full confidence in her Chancellor . Boris Johnson and Liam Fox , two leading Brexiteers , played down suggestions of a split in the Cabinet over preparations to leave . At the end of the latest round of Brexit talks , Mr Barnier described the impasse as `` disturbing '' and said there was `` no question '' of the EU making concessions on the financial settlement , Ireland and citizens ' rights . David Davis , the Brexit secretary , called on EU leaders , who meet in Brussels on Oct 19-20 , to grant Mr Barnier the flexibility to begin talks on Britain 's future relationship with the www.EU.No 10 echoed the calls . Mr Barnier hinted that he would ask EU governments , including Germany , to expand his mandate . While that is unlikely to include full trade negotiations , it could allow `` scoping '' of the future relationship and the transition deal .
May heads for Brexit without vote by MPs ; Public 's decision is final , says Downing St in blow to last hope of Remain campaigners PM told she can trigger Brexit without MPs ' backing
THERESA MAY will not hold a parliamentary vote on Brexit before opening negotiations to formally trigger Britain 's withdrawal from the European Union , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . Opponents of Brexit claim that because the EU referendum result is advisory it must be approved by a vote in the Commons before Article 50 - the formal mechanism to leave the EU - is triggered . However , in a move which will cheer Eurosceptics , it is believed the Prime Minister will invoke Article 50 without a vote in Parliament . It had been suggested - by Tony Blair , and Owen Smith , the Labour leadership candidate , among others - that Remain-supporting MPs could use a vote to stop Brexit . But sources say that because Mrs May believes that `` Brexit means Brexit '' she will not offer opponents the opportunity to stall Britain 's withdrawal from the EU . A Downing Street source said : `` The Prime Minister has been absolutely clear that the British public have voted and now she will get on with delivering Brexit . '' Mrs May has consulted government lawyers , who have told the Prime Minister she has the executive power to invoke Article 50 and begin the formal process of exiting the European Union without a vote . Her decision will come as a blow to Remain campaigners , who had been hoping to use Parliament to delay Brexit or halt it entirely . A majority of MPs , a total of around 480 , campaigned for Britain to stay in the EU at the last election . The House of Lords is also overwhelmingly in favour of Britain remaining in the union , meaning that obtaining formal parliamentary approval for Brexit could take years . Mr Smith last week set out plans to block Article 50 in Parliament . He said : `` Under my leadership , Labour wo n't give the Tories a blank cheque . `` We will vote in Parliament to block any attempt to invoke Article 50 until Theresa May commits to a second referendum or a general election on whatever EU exit deal emerges at the end of the process . I hope Jeremy [ Corbyn ] will support me in such a move . '' Mr Blair made a similar suggestion earlier this year , as he proposed that Britain should be open to the idea of holding a second referendum . The former prime minister said : `` If , as we start to see the details emerge of what this new world we are going into looks like , what are the practical effects , then Parliament has got a role . The country should carry on being engaged in this debate , it should carry on expressing its view . '' A group of lawyers has mounted alegal challenge in an attempt to force Mrs May to hold a parliamentary vote . The case , which will be heard in the High Court in October , argues that Article 50 can not be invoked until the European Communities Act of 1972 is repealed . However , government lawyers are confident that they will win , paving the way for Article 50 to be triggered at the beginning of next year , which could see Britain leave the European Union in 2019 . Sir Bill Cash , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP and leading Brexit campaigner , said : `` It sounds emphatic and that 's what we want to hear . `` There were people who are threatening to try and stop Brexit . The bottom line is that there is nothing that could possibly be allowed to stand in its way . Everyone in Europe is expecting it , the decision has been taken by the British people and that 's it . Let 's get on with it . '' It came as a senior Czech official warned Britain that unless it triggers Article 50 soon `` the goodwill that still exists will start to disappear '' . Tomas Prouza , the Czech secretary of state for EU affairs , issued the warning following a meeting of leaders from the Visegrad Four - Poland , Hungary and the Czech and Slovak republics - and Angela Merkel in Warsaw yesterday . The UN has been accused of trying to shut down political debate in Britain after it blamed MPs for fuelling a rise in hate crimes around the EU referendum . A report by the UN said politicians had `` failed to condemn '' racist abuse and used `` divisive '' and `` anti-immigrant '' rhetoric during the campaign . Andrew Bridgen , the MP for North West Leicestershire , dismissed the suggestion and said the UN was attempting to close down `` honest debate '' .
Scotland Heseltine 'should lose whip ' ; Brexit reignites old feud between Tory elder statesmen
THERESA MAY is under pressure from her MPs and peers to remove the Conservative whip from Lord Heseltine for suggesting a Jeremy Corbyn government might be preferable to Brexit . Lord Tebbit , the former minister , questioned his ex-colleague 's loyalty and said he should be banned from sitting on the Tory benches in the Lords . The former deputy prime minister said yesterday it was a `` terrible dilemma '' whether to vote Labour to stop Brexit , adding that : `` There are people in the Conservative Party who are seriously wondering which way to vote . '' He suggested earlier this week that a Corbyn government would be less `` damaging '' than Brexit because Labour could only cause `` short-term '' damage whereas Brexit would be `` a long-term disaster '' . The peer has been a constant critic of Brexit , and was sacked as a government adviser in March after leading a Lords rebellion calling for a `` meaningful vote '' on the final Brexit deal . Lord Tebbit , the former Conservative Party chairman , said : `` I think it is unprecedented for a man in receipt of the Conservative whip to suggest that a Corbyn government would be preferable to a British government governing the UK , given that the alternative he is advocating is Brussels . It must call into question whether his loyalty is to the UK or a foreign power . '' Their feud dates back to 1990 , when Lord Heseltine challenged Margaret Thatcher as party leader . Lord Tebbit helped run her campaign . Both were seen as likely successors , but when she resigned , Lord Tebbit supported John Major , who beat Heseltine in the final ballot . Lord Tebbit once described Lord Heseltine as a `` serial assassin '' after he undermined the leaderships of Iain Duncan Smith and William Hague . The Bow Group , a think tank whose patrons include Lord Lamont and John Redwood MP , called for Lord Heseltine to have his whip withdrawn . Ben Harris-Quinney , its chairman , said : `` The Brexit negotiations can not be led by a Conservative Government that allows outright sabotage to go unaddressed . '' Yesterday , Lord Heseltine told Sky News : `` The people who seem the most intolerant of debate are the very same people who have used the freedom of debate to argue the Brexit case . ''
Remain campaigners vow to 'stop the Brexit train wreck '
LEADING Remain campaigners have vowed to exploit the `` meaningful vote '' on Brexit in a bid to `` sway public opinion '' and keep the UK in the EU . Tory rebels last week defeated the Government as they succeeded in forcing ministers to enshrine a vote on the final Brexit deal in law . While the pro-European Tories denied that they were trying to block Brexit , a leading Remain campaigner has now vowed to use the vote to try to `` stop the train wreck '' of Brexit . Lord Malloch-Brown , a former Labour foreign minister and senior diplomat , is to take a lead role in trying to coordinate opposition to Brexit . It came as Labour 's front bench clashed over the possibility of a second EU referendum . Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , told BBC One 's The Andrew Marr Show that `` the Labour Party does n't support a second referendum '' . But speaking on BBC Radio 5 Live 's Pienaar 's Politics just minutes after his colleague 's comments , Tom Watson , Labour 's deputy leader , said `` you should n't rule anything out '' when engaged in `` complex negotiations '' . Lord Malloch-Brown told The Guardian : `` The aim will be to shift public opinion by the time MPs come next autumn to have the meaningful vote that was agreed last week . We can not know precisely the deal that the meaningful vote will be on , but it will be the moment to stop the train wreck . '' Calls to frustrate the Brexit process were quickly condemned as undemocratic by Eurosceptic MPs . Andrew Rosindell , the MP for Romford , said : `` These people will be judged by history , denial of democracy and a shameful underhanded attempt to derail the will of the people . ''
Davis promises votes on Brexit measures ; Cabinet minister bows to MPs threatening rebellion over 'dangerous ' powers in new legislation
DAVID DAVIS is prepared to back down in the face of a rebellion by pro-European Tory MPs and ensure that there are votes on the most controversial aspects of Brexit , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . Pro-European Tories have threatened to join Labour , Liberal Democrats and the SNP in a rebellion over the Government 's use of `` Henry VIII powers '' in the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill . They have raised concerns that the Bill , which transfers EU laws and regulations on to the UK 's statute books , could give ministers `` dangerous '' powers to change and amend legislation without a vote in Parliament . Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , reassured Tory MPs in the Commons that he will look at `` mechanisms '' to ensure that there is a `` fully democratic and open process '' . The Telegraph understands that ministers are likely to recommend that a joint committee of peers and MPs is established to assess which amendments need more scrutiny by Parliament . It comes ahead of a pivotal vote in the Commons on Monday with the second reading of the Brexit Bill . Labour has vowed to oppose it , but pro-European Tory MPs have said they will support it for now but could rebel in October . A minister told The Telegraph that pro-European MPs are `` grandstanding '' in public but more willing to work with the Government in private . It came as Mrs May said that she will not sack two Eurosceptic ministers over a letter signed by more than 30 Tory MPs urging the Prime Minister not to give ground over Brexit . Nicky Morgan , the chairman of the Treasury select committee , suggested that Downing Street should look into the roles of Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , and Suella Fernandes , an aide to the Chancellor . Both were accused of helping to orchestrate the letter , but Downing Street said that no action will be taken against them . Andrew Rosindell , the Eurosceptic Tory MP for Romford , said : `` This is naked opportunism from by the diminishing pro-EU lobby who will find any excuse to try and get Brexiters out of a position of authority . A number of us MPs wo n't stand for it . '' It came as Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said that he has `` rock solid confidence '' that Britain will be able to agree a Brexit trade deal before it leaves the EU . Mr Johnson also said that it is not `` beyond the wit of man '' to resolve the issue of the Irish border after Brexit . Talks with Brussels are currently in deadlock amid acrimony . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator , said that leaked Home Office plans for a crackdown on EU migration after Brexit had `` poisoned the diplomatic well '' . The Government was yesterday accused of an `` unprecedented attempt to rig Parliament '' by stacking key committees which scrutinise legislation with Tories . Downing Street said : `` The adjustments provide for maximum scrutiny with minimum disruption and delay , both to parliamentary proceedings and to the governance of the country . ''
British Retail Consortium warns of Brexit cost on imports
THE British Retail Consortium is ramping up its pressure on the Government to ensure that Brexit trade talks are focused on keeping shop prices low for consumers once the UK leaves the European Union . Richard Baker , chairman of the BRC , has today written to Liam Fox , International Trade Secretary , to spell out what he believes to be `` an irrefutable case for a consumer-first strategy '' to Brexit . Last week Theresa May set out her blueprint for Brexit by saying she would trigger article 50 , the formal process to leave the bloc , by March next year . Fears about a `` hard Brexit '' sent sterling tumbling to its lowest point for 31 years last week and has fuelled concerns about the health of existing trade relationships with the Continent . Mr Baker argues that while most of the attention has been on exports in the post-Brexit era , the potential impact on imports could mean rising costs for retailers and consumers . `` The retail industry is the UK 's biggest importer , and has huge experience of importing from every corner of the world . We will be engaged in a constructive dialogue with Government that will bring our experience to bear on the Brexit talks to the benefit of everyone in the UK , '' he added . Mr Baker , who is also chairman of Costa owner Whitbread and sofa retailer DFS , has argued that the fiercely competitive sector has very little margins left to absorb the added costs from import tariffs and administrative burdens . If the UK fell back on to World Trade Organisation rules , the average duty on meat imports could be as high as 27pc , while clothing and footwear would attract tariffs of 11pc to 16pc , the BRC says . Sourcing women 's clothing from Bangladesh would also be 12pc higher . Retailers are already threatened with higher importing costs due to the slump in sterling , which is expected to hurt major retailers ' profitability next year , when currency hedges wind up .
'No appetite ' for bonfire of EU regulations after Brexit BODY : By James Crisp Brussels Correspondent THE City of London has `` no appetite '' for a bonfire of EU regulations after Brexit , representatives of UK-based financial firms said yesterday , as they unveiled plans for a dispute resolution body to limit how far British law can change after the UK leaves the bloc . The panel of unelected judges would have the power to strip access to the EU from a sector where fresh British laws moved too far away from standards set by Brussels . It is inspired by the EFTA court for EU relations with countries such as Norway . The EFTA court takes instruction from EU judges but is not technically under the direct jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . Ending the ECJ 's supremacy over British law is a red line for Britain in the Brexit negotiations , which continue this week in Brussels . Negotiators are trying to break the deadlock over the so-called Brexit bill , Ireland and citizens ' rights . The EU is refusing to discuss the future trading relationship until it judges sufficient progress has been made on those three issues . After Brexit , Britain 's financial services industry will lose its `` passporting rights '' , which give barrier-free access to the single market . Continued access will need to be renegotiated in Brexit divorce talks and will most likely be cemented in the form of a free trade agreement . Most free trade deals are struck with the goal of bringing regulatory standards closer together but there is expectation that Britain , which already has EU standards in British law , will move away from them over time . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , has said that UK and EU standards for financial regulation will diverge after Brexit , as Britain seeks a competitive edge to safeguard London 's status as Europe 's pre-eminent financial hub . That worries Brussels , which fears lower standards could attract investment away from the EU . It is also under pressure from countries such as Germany and France , which hope that Frankfurt and Paris could poach London 's crown . The International Regulatory Strategy Group ( IRSG ) , which is sponsored by the City of London and TheCityUK , wants a free trade agreement based on regulatory alignment between Britain and the EU . `` There is no appetite in the City of London for a bonfire of regulations , '' said Mark Hoban , chair of the IRSG , which is backed by foreign firms including Deutsche Bank , JP Morgan , Goldman Sachs and BNP Paribas .
It is possible to build a consensus on Brexit
Can the government deliver Brexit ? With the Tory-DUP deal in doubt , it looks impossible . But despite appearances , there is a growing consensus on Brexit , and if the Government can survive it should be able to broker a compromise that can get through Parliament . The compromise involves negotiating a transitional arrangement , such as several years ' membership of the European Economic Area , that gives Britain and the EU extra time to strike a long-term trade deal . This would n't deliver any Brexit priorities instantly , like immigration controls or an end to massive EU budget payments . But so long as it 's temporary , this approach would deliver Brexit over time while avoiding the economic shock of a chaotic exit without a deal . Most importantly for the Government , it stands a good chance of getting through Parliament , which ca n't yet be said for the legislation outlined in the Queen 's Speech . A transitional deal would help to defuse the current row over a `` soft '' versus `` hard '' Brexit . Instead of choosing one or the other , the Government would start softly while it sorts out permanent terms , such as tariffs and regulatory cooperation , and then exit fully when everything is agreed . Many Brexiteers wo n't voice their support for this position loudly , but behind the scenes , and even occasionally in public , they have always acknowledged its advantages . It removes the cliff-edge of the Article 50 process , which was designed to put the exiting state under maximum pressure , and allows businesses time to prepare for changes . The Government would probably always have wanted such a deal anyway , but the election has forced its hand by empowering pro-Remain MPs . To get a decent outcome , Britain needs to conduct Brexit negotiations with confidence and that means that it needs Parliament on board . Remain MPs and peers will find it hard to resist Brexit legislation if the Government is explicit about its desire for a soft transition , which would significantly reduce the risk that Britain leaves with no deal . It would also gain support from those who want to keep Britain as close to the EU as possible . A `` soft '' Brexit transition is n't without dangers , of course . It might well suit France and Germany to keep Britain in a halfway house , paying into the EU budget without wielding any power . Many Remainers will no doubt hope we get stuck there . But it 's unlikely that future British governments would put up with such an untenable position and , to insure against it , the transition could be designed with a time limit . Building this consensus is well within reach . But to get there , the Government has to make a definitive offer to its rivals in Parliament . Standing in my friend 's kitchen as a pan full of tomatoes sizzled on his hob , I found myself staring , for the second time in a week , at the burntout husk of Grenfell Tower . My friend lives about five minutes ' walk away , in a pleasant , new-build flat . The council allowed the site to be developed a few years ago to provide affordable homes and is planning a similar demolition and redevelopment of the surrounding Silchester Estate , a neighbouring collection of dreary tower blocks . Many estate residents are resisting the plans , however . The Grenfell Action Group , the residents ' group for the tower , has campaigned against the Silchester scheme on the basis that it amounts to `` social cleansing '' , despite the fact that it would provide every existing council tenant with a brand new flat . The alternative to pulling down the ageing estate is , of course , to refurbish it . Having debated a similar set of options for Grenfell Tower , the council fatefully decided to keep tenants in place and renovate instead of rebuilding , ending up with the catastrophe we saw last week . Now , the latest conspiracy theory doing the rounds locally is that the council deliberately burned the building down so that it could be developed instead . In reality , councils everywhere are dealing with a legacy of decrepit housing thrown up decades ago . Staring out of the window at the result of the refurbishment , it was clear that the consequences of making the wrong decision stay with us for many years . He 's had less than two months in government and Emmanuel Macron has already lost three ministers . The youthful French president was elected to bring vigour and renewal to French politics , trading on his status as an outsider to suggest that he would vanquish the useless , corrupt ancien régime . His slate of parliamentary candidates , who just won a majority in the National Assembly , is half made up of total political novices who have never held office before . The ex-ministers giving Mr Macron such grief are , by contrast , experienced politicians felled by potential ethics issues to do with nepotism or use of public funds . The hope must be , I suppose , that his brand-new MPs wo n't be carrying around such baggage . As Ukip showed , however , political novices come with their own set of vulnerabilities , from off-colour social media posts to funny attitudes about the use of EU money . Mr Macron will be lucky if his current predicament is the only scandal to mar his squeaky-clean image . FOLLOW Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
May instructs her ministers to make the most of Brexit ; New leadership ; PM issues challenge at first Cabinet meeting before holding talks with Merkel about UK 's role in Europe
BRITAIN must not be `` defined by Brexit '' and everyone should prosper from the `` opportunities '' of leaving the European Union , Theresa May has said before the first meeting of her Cabinet . The Prime Minister will today tell ministers that it is their `` duty '' to improve education and skills and ensure that social mobility is `` at the heart of my Government '' . She says that ministers must `` deliver success on behalf of everyone in the UK '' after a Brexit and not just for the `` privileged few '' . Mrs May will tomorrow travel to Berlin for her first face-to-face meeting as Prime Minister with Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor . Downing Street confirmed that they will discuss Brexit despite the insistence of European leaders that no negotiations should take place until the formal process of leaving the EU has begun . She will use the meeting to insist that Britain will not turn its back on the Europe after Brexit , but instead build stronger partnerships with EU nations . Boris Johnson , the new Foreign Secretary , yesterday used his first Brussels summit to vow that Britain will not `` be in any way abandoning our leading role in European participation and co-operation of all kinds '' . Mrs May , speaking before her first Cabinet meeting , said : `` Brexit means Brexit - and we 're going to make a success of it . It will be the responsibility of everyone sitting around the Cabinet table to make Brexit work for Britain . `` And it will also be their duty to deliver success on behalf of everyone in the UK , not just the privileged few . That is why social justice will be at the heart of my government . `` So we will not allow the country to be defined by Brexit ; but instead build the education , skills , and social mobility to allow everyone to prosper from the opportunities of leaving the EU . '' It comes after she vowed in her first speech as Prime Minister last week to help working-class people who are `` just managing '' to cope with life . She said that she wants to `` fight against the burning injustices '' of poverty , race , class and health and give people back `` control '' of their lives . After Cabinet the Prime Minister will hold her first meeting of the National Security Council , during which she will lead discussions on the global threats facing Britain and the safety of British nationals overseas . Mrs May has ruled out claims by Nicola Sturgeon that Scotland will have a veto over when Britain leaves the European Union . On Friday she told Scotland 's First Minister that she would not start the Brexit process until she had agreed a `` UK approach '' . Ms Sturgeon claimed that her comments put the Scottish Government in a `` very , very strong position '' over when Britain triggers Article 50 and begins the formal process of leaving the EU . But Downing Street yesterday made clear that the Prime Miniser will have the final say as to when Britain leaves the EU . Mrs May yesterday made her first visit to Wales as Prime Minister and said that she wants the Welsh Government to be `` involved and engaged '' in Brexit negotiations . She said she recognised concerns on the loss of EU funding and described the meeting as `` very constructive '' . The Prime Minister said that a £24 billion deal by a Japanese company to buy one of Britain 's biggest technology companies shows the UK is `` open for business '' . Her backing came after she spoke directly to the chief executive of Soft-Bank , the Japanese company buying ARM Holdings . She said she had received assurances that SoftBank will double the workforce in the UK and retain its Cambridge headquarters . During his appearance in Brussels , Mr Johnson spoke French at the breakfast meeting as he sought to build bridges with ministers who were angered after he compared the EU 's ambitions to Hitler 's aim to create a superstate . The French foreign minister said Mr Johnson did not apologise . ''Build the education , skills and social mobility to allow everyone to prosper from leaving the EU '
The future is precarious as May learns the wrong lessons in defeat
One of the images conjured up during Britain 's referendum campaign as a way of making the argument for Leave was that of being `` tethered '' or `` shackled '' to a `` corpse '' . Faintly distasteful though this idea might have been , it was both effective and partially true . At the time , many EU members were still deep in the economic doldrums , with crushing levels of unemployment , the Continent was wracked by financial and political crisis , Europe 's experiment with monetary union had come within a whisker of sparking worldwide economic Armageddon , and populism both of the Right and Left was rampant . Britain , by contrast , seemed like a haven of stability , with a relatively strong centre-Right government , record levels of job creation , and a rising tide of inward investment . Who in their right mind would want to remain part of Europe 's ruinous construct ? But that was then . Little more than a year later , the tables have turned 180 degrees . The Government is in chaos after one of the most ineptly run election campaigns in living memory , the long haul back to a balanced budget and a nation that once again lives within its means is derailed , and virtually all the economic indicators are turning negative . In Europe , meanwhile , the populist tide is ebbing fast , the economy is growing strongly again , and a pro-business reformer has been swept to power in France , together with the parliamentary majority that might enable him to actually implement his programme . Even Italy seems to be stepping back from the brink , with the Five Star movement in ragged retreat . Something akin to a blood transfusion seems to have taken place ; the corpse is transformed into Britain . You can almost smell the schadenfreude blowing in from the Continent . The symbolism of yesterday 's meeting between Theresa May and Emmanuel Macron could scarcely have been greater - the one humiliated and fighting for her political life ; the other triumphant , having cruelly snatched the landslide election victory Mrs May had been counting on , and shipped it off to France . Where does this once unimaginable reversal in fortunes leave the UK economy and the challenge of Brexit ? Start with Brexit , where Mrs May 's determination to carry on with the negotiating strategy she had settled on ahead of the election looks for the moment to be the right approach . Given that it is what both the Government and the EU have been planning for , there seems little point at this stage in ripping it up and starting again with a different set of objectives . What is clear , however , is that Mrs May is no longer in control of the outcome - parliament will decide on whatever deal emerges . It may well be that Brexit purists will have to swallow their principles and accept Norwegian or Swiss-style arrangements , including continued budgetary contributions , no more than minor tweaks to free movement , and some degree of European Court of Justice rule . On many levels this would seem unsatisfactory , but even for hardliners some form of Brexit is presumably preferable to no Brexit at all . A soft Brexit may be the only form of it parliament can agree on . The other option would be to leave the EU without any deal , but such an economically disruptive outcome is very unlikely to be acceptable to MPs and , barring accidents , is therefore not really an option at all . Steve Baker , a hardliner appointed last night as Brexit minister , seems in anticipation already to have nuanced his position from the virtually raw form of Brexit he once advocated to a medium-rare one . Obviously , it takes two to tango . The point is often made that it may actually suit the newly empowered Mr Macron to have as complete a divorce from Britain as possible , so as to reinvigorate the old Franco/German partnership and establish it once again as the true source of decision-making in Europe . And certainly , he will attempt to use Brexit to shift as many jobs as possible from the UK to France . But beyond the former investment banker 's ambitions for poaching finance and manufacturing , his approach , like Germany 's , will otherwise be instructed by purely pragmatic considerations , and that essentially means ensuring a relatively soft form of Brexit . Mr Macron has only a small window of opportunity to impose his reform agenda on France ; the honeymoon will soon be over and the pushback under way . A no-deal Brexit would be to risk upsetting Europe 's still fragile economic recovery , killing off Mr Macron 's intended tax cutting and labour market revolution , such as it is , before it even gets under way . A bad deal is , therefore , as unattractive for him as it is for Britain . Europe desperately needs its economic sweet spot to continue . So much for Brexit ; what of prospects , post the election debacle , for the UK economy ? It is much harder to be optimistic on this front . The housing market seems fast to be grinding to a halt , consumer spending is under pressure from rising inflation , and investment is being hit by Brexit uncertainty . Paralysed by the loss of its majority , the Government also appears clueless on what to do next . By most accounts , Mrs May has read the PA Labour surge as a vote against austerity and , egged on by her newly elected Scottish MPs and her enforced alliance with the Democratic Unionist Party - socially conservative , but fiscally profligate - seems minded to abandon it entirely . In anticipation of some form of upset on the rocky road to Brexit , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , has already created the space for a limited fiscal stimulus , but he 'll be under pressure to go further . If this was done in the form of tax cuts , then it might even be welcome but the Prime Minister seems to want to go the other way - to ape Labour in taxing , borrowing and spending more . Mrs May was commendably contrite in her message to the parliamentary party the other night , but she appears to have drawn all the wrong lessons from her defeat . At no point did she back away from the anti-business , anti-free market agenda she set out in her disastrously misjudged election manifesto . The conclusion she 's drawn is that we need more welfarism , not less . Both politically and economically , we seem with breathtaking speed to have entered an extraordinarily dangerous place . Not since the financial crisis has the future looked so precarious . 'Something akin to a blood transfusion seems to have taken place ; the corpse is transformed into Britain '
EU steps up talks with Labour ; Brussels seeks Brexit assurances from Corbyn over fears Theresa May 's Government will collapse ; Tory Party turmoil ; May 's weakness 'part of EU 's calculations '
EU NEGOTIATORS have `` significantly '' increased back-room talks with Labour because they are becoming concerned Theresa May 's administration will collapse before Brexit is complete . Brussels is seeking assurances from Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , that he will honour agreements reached with the Conservatives if he comes to power . Sources have told The Daily Telegraph that there has been `` a significant change in tone '' from Brussels towards Labour since the general election and meetings since then have been at a higher level and more frequent . Both Mr Corbyn and Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , have held meetings with Michel Barnier , the European Union 's chief negotiator , and Frans Timmermans , the first vice-president of the European Commission , and others including members of the Brexit negotiating teams . Meanwhile , Sir Nigel Sheinwald , Britain 's former permanent representative in Brussels , said the Prime Minister 's vulnerability was now a `` destabilising '' influence on the negotiations . Mrs May 's calamitous conference speech , and her failure to unite her party behind her Brexit plans , has caused concern in Brussels ahead of the resumption of Brexit talks on Monday . The Prime Minister will travel to Brussels on Oct 19 for a meeting of the European Council , which is expected to refuse to allow Brexit negotiators to begin trade talks with the UK . It will mean no progress will be made on trade talks until at least December , when the council next meets . While it is in the interests of EU negotiators to pile pressure on Mrs May before then , The Daily Telegraph has been told that they are genuinely concerned that the talks may be rendered irrelevant if she is forced from office and there is a change of government . To guard against having to reset the entire process , sources say they are taking Mr Corbyn `` increasingly seriously '' and some believe Labour has a more realistic approach to Brexit . Since Sir Keir set out the party 's ambition for a status quo Brexit transition period in August , the communication between Labour and the EU has Continued on page 4 Laurence Dodds : Page 18 Editorial Comment : Page 19 Continued from page 1 intensified . EU negotiators believe Mr Corbyn and Sir Keir could soon be in power and want to know where they stand in case it is they who take over the talks . Leading Brussels figures have told The Daily Telegraph that Brexit will continue with or without Mrs May but admitted the European Commission was increasingly anxious about promises made by her team being kept by a future government . One well-placed Brussels source , familiar with the highest levels of EU policymaking , said : `` Corbyn is beginning to be taken seriously in Brussels . `` He has been a mystery on European affairs through the referendum and since . People did n't quite know what he wants or what he thinks but that is changing . '' The source added : `` You have to believe that the other side 's negotiating position is genuine and you have to believe that whatever you agree along the way is going to be implemented in the future . There has to be a belief there is a consensus in the country that extends beyond the Government and to the future governments . That exists now but will it last ? '' Sir Nigel , who was Britain 's permanent representative to the EU from 2000-2003 , said Mrs May 's precarious position was `` destabilising '' . He said : `` The Europeans are getting to know the likes of David Davis and Philip Hammond and are getting along with them . '' He suggested that Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , or Mr Hammond , the Chancellor , becoming prime minister `` might be a more stable option for the Europeans '' , although he said Brussels had factored in Mrs May 's weakness when planning its strategy for the talks . `` The uncertainty about the balance of power and the personal authority of the Prime Minister is part of their calculations , '' he said . One EU source said : `` Some take the view that there has to be a cathartic crisis on the UK side before things get serious . Others are beginning to take seriously the prospect of no deal . ''
Brexit Britain must court Donald Trump ; established 1855 BODY : Much of politics is about perspective . When Theresa May met Donald Trump at the White House and congratulated him on his election victory , the Left howled with rage . Yesterday , Emmanuel Macron , the French president , was host to the same man at France 's Bastille Day celebrations and was congratulated . France is right to court the world 's strongest power ; so is Britain . Why does one earn praise for it while the other is ridiculed ? Because the criticism is informed by political subjectivity , a subjectivity that is also misrepresenting Brexit . Most voters , even those that voted Remain , have come to accept that Brexit will happen . A small but powerful minority refuse to give in , and in terms so hyperbolic that it questions their common sense . Lord Adonis , for example , has likened Brexit to appeasement in the 1930s . The comparison is tasteless and inaccurate . Appeasement represented a withdrawal from international responsibilities , yes , but Brexit represents a withdrawal from European parochialism . It is Europe , not the UK , which is inward-looking , protectionist , overregulated and arcane . Britain has long strained at the leash of its EU membership precisely because its ambitions lie further afield . If appeasement could be crudely characterised as putting off difficult decisions , Brexit is actually about embracing change - and it is the militant Remainers who embody procrastination . This week they stepped forward with a list of demands related to the Great Repeal Bill , ranging from petty grabs for devolved powers to attempts to render Brexit moot by , say , keeping the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice or maintaining all of the EU 's employment laws . And then there is the absurd demand that Britain remains within the single market for an indefinite period , which would leave many asking why Britain voted to leave at all . The Government must not compromise with those who seek to undermine the stated will of the people . Nor should it back away from inviting Mr Trump to visit Britain . The two issues are linked : Britain 's future is as a free trading nation with global influence . What militant Remainers denounce as Brexit 's challenges , the clear-eyed can see as opportunities . It is up to the Government to explain this , and to inject greater ambition and passion into the case for Brexit .
City needs deal this year over post-Brexit trade , says head of FCA
LONDON and Brussels should agree this year on a transition deal that eases financial firms into Brexit so that companies are not forced into making quick decisions about moving jobs and operations from the UK , the head of the City watchdog has said . In his first big speech tackling Brexit , Financial Conduct Authority chief Andrew Bailey said companies should not be pushed into moving location once the UK leaves the EU . There are concerns that banks are starting to implement Brexit contingency plans because they fear a `` cliff edge '' switch to a post-Brexit landscape once the two-year negotiation period ends in 2019 . Senior City figures have been pushing for early agreement on a longer transition period that would smooth the way forward for the UK 's enormous financial services sector , stopping banks , asset managers and insurers from making hurried decisions . `` It would be regrettable all round if we put firms into this position where they feel they 're in a bind because they have to do practical implementation of contingency planning before they know the context in which they 're going to be working in the future , '' Mr Bailey said . `` We need it to be known during the course of this year . '' London is a global powerhouse for finance , in part because many big international businesses have headquartered their European operations in the British capital . But other EU cities are now vying to attract companies that are fearful of losing access to the EU 's single market after the UK leaves the trading bloc . Barclays has already found new , bigger office space in Dublin as it ramps up plans to increase its presence in Ireland ahead of Brexit , while it emerged yesterday that Deutsche Bank is pressing ahead with plans to shift jobs from London to Frankfurt . Three big Japanese securities firms - Nomura , Daiwa and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group - recently announced they are applying for licences to set up subsidiaries in the German city . Mr Bailey argued that `` authorities should not dictate the location of firms '' but that `` we should allow open markets to shape those choices '' . He added : `` When I hear people say that firms need to relocate in order to continue to benefit from access to EU financial markets , I start to seriously wonder . Does Brexit have to mean abandoning the benefits of free trade and open markets in financial services ? It should not . '' Brussels has pushed back on the idea of an early deal on transition , with EU negotiator Michael Barnier saying that such an arrangement would only be discussed once a `` clearer picture '' of the UK 's broader post-Brexit relationship with the EU has taken shape . The FCA chief said that the concept of `` equivalence '' - where different countries provide market access because they have similar regulatory regimes - could be the basis for the UK 's future financial services ties with Europe . He suggested that equivalence `` backed up by effective joint supervisory oversight '' would be better than switching the location of the UK 's huge clearing industry , which Brussels wants to move back into Europe .
Civil Service to hire 8,000 staff to prepare for Brexit as Davis hails 'acceleration ' in talks ; Europe
THE Government has spent half a billion pounds on Brexit preparations and will create up to 8,000 civil service jobs by the end of next year to ensure the UK is ready . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , told the Cabinet that there had been a `` significant acceleration '' in preparations for Brexit , with 300 programmes already under way . Ministers are preparing for a `` range of outcomes '' , including the possibility of leaving the European Union without a deal . As Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , said he was prepared to `` speed up '' Brexit negotiations , Mr Davis said that more than 3,000 new posts had already been created in Whitehall departments as part of a `` huge cross-Government effort '' . They include 300 lawyers , who are expected to help with the process of transferring EU laws onto Britain 's statute book . HMRC is also planning to recruit up to 5,000 extra staff as it prepares for new customs arrangements . Theresa May also told the Cabinet that a new EU exit and trade sub-committee was being created `` to support the intensification of our domestic preparations '' . It will be led by Damian Green , the First Secretary of State . Mr Davis told the Lords EU select committee yesterday that the Brexit withdrawal agreement would `` probably favour '' Brussels . He said : `` In the infamous - or famous - words of the European Union nothing is agreed until everything is agreed . The withdrawal agreement on balance will probably favour the union in terms of the things like money and so on . Whereas the future relationship will favour both sides and will be important to both of us . '' Mr Davis said he was seeking an `` intensification '' of talks but insisted Britain was on course to leave the EU in March 2019 . He said : `` We want to get on with the process - we are not holding up the process . `` We offered them the beginning of next week - they could n't do it . So it 's the latter part of next week when it will be when the negotiators engage . And I 'll be out there on Friday . ''
Scotland Brexit 'a mistake , not a disaster ' Cameron admits in Davos video
DAVID CAMERON has admitted that Brexit is not the disaster he repeatedly predicted during the EU referendum . The former prime minister , criticised as the architect of what was described as `` Project Fear '' ahead of the referendum , said the UK 's withdrawal from the EU would be `` difficult '' . In a conversation caught on camera with Lakshmi Mittal , the Indian steel tycoon , at the Davos summit in Switzerland , Mr Cameron was heard saying : `` It 's frustrating - as I keep saying it 's a mistake , not a disaster . It 's turned out less badly than we first thought . It 's still going to be difficult . '' His comments came as Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , backed Boris Johnson 's call to use the UK 's Brexit dividend to boost NHS funding , declaring it `` absolutely unthinkable '' for the health service not to benefit . Meanwhile , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , put himself on a collision course with Eurosceptic MPs after he said Brussels could impose new laws on the UK during a transition period . Mr Cameron 's comments at the World Economic Forum are not the first time he has been caught out by a live microphone . In 2014 he was recorded saying the Queen had `` purred '' down the line after he told her Scotland had voted against independence . Mr Cameron spearheaded the campaign to keep the UK in the EU , having taken the decision to offer the nation a vote on the subject . He described Brexit as the `` gamble of the century '' before the poll on June 23 , 2016 . Mr Cameron was criticised after George Osborne , then-chancellor , published an official Treasury document in April 2016 which warned Brexit would cost UK households £4,300 a year . He resigned as prime minister in the immediate aftermath of the result . His comments in Davos came after Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , was given a dressing-down by Theresa May in front of ministers at a Cabinet meeting on Tuesday after his plan to hand the NHS an extra £100million per week was widely briefed to the media . The Prime Minister said the NHS would be a `` top priority '' for the money Britain would save once it stopped paying into the EU budget but she stopped short of promising an exact figure . Mr Johnson received the backing of Dr Fox on Wednesday . He told Today on BBC Radio Four : `` Exactly how we spend the dividend that comes from leaving the European Union will be determined by the priorities we face at the time . I find it absolutely unthinkable that health would not be amongst the top of those . '' Mr Johnson was chided by up to eight senior ministers for briefing the media . However , the criticism is unlikely to deter him from speaking his mind on Brexit as he is reportedly preparing to make the `` liberal case '' for withdrawal in a speech next month . Meanwhile , Jacob Rees-Mogg warned Britain could be left as the EU 's `` lackey '' during the Brexit transition period after Mr Davis said Brussels could impose new laws on the UK after the point of withdrawal in March 2019 . Mr Davis told the Brexit Select Committee the UK would accept the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , continue to play by the rules of single market and make EU budget contributions during a two-year transition . His comments prompted Mr Rees-Mogg , a leading Brexiteer and the chairman of the influential European Research Group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs , to claim Britain would effectively be a `` vassal state '' of the EU .
Scotland Cable attacks the elderly for voting Leave
SIR VINCE CABLE has been accused of `` patronising '' pensioners after claiming they `` comprehensively shafted young people '' by voting for Brexit . The 74-year-old Liberal Democrat leader accused older people who backed Brexit of `` masochism '' and said their views had been `` coloured by nostalgia from an imperial past '' . Writing in the Mail on Sunday , Sir Vince said that referring to Brexiteers as `` martyrs '' was dangerous . He said : `` To describe such masochism as martyrdom is dangerous . We have n't yet heard about 'Brexit jihadis ' but there is an undercurrent of violence in the language , which is troubling . We have already had the most fervent of Brexiteers , such as Nigel Farage , warning of civil unrest if the 'will of the people ' is frustrated . `` Brexiteers may well be frustrated since the practical difficulties of Brexit , as well as the costs , could result in Brexit never happening . But the last thing the UK needs is further polarisation . '' He added : `` Another concern is that the self-declared martyrs may be planning to sacrifice other people rather than themselves . It is striking that the martyrs appear predominantly elderly . '' Sir Vince said this `` martyrdom of the old comes cheap , since few have jobs to lose '' as he framed the Brexit debate as a battle between young and old . He said : `` The old have comprehensively shafted the young . `` And the old have had the last word about Brexit , imposing a world view coloured by nostalgia for an imperial past on a generation much more comfortable with modern Europe . '' But he was criticised by Frank Field , the 75-year-old Labour chairman of the pensions select committee and leading member of the Vote Leave campaign group . Mr Field told The Daily Telegraph : `` Not only is he patronising , he is undermining his own base because he must have been elected by older voters . '' Editorial Comment : Page 15
Why small businesses should not expect a smooth Brexit
Europe has 23m small and medium-sized enterprises . They are the backbone of the European economy , accounting for 99pc of all companies in the EU and 67pc of employment . That amounts to approximately 58pc of gross value added in the non-financial economy . And yet , as a Boston Consulting Group ( BCG ) report commissioned by AFME reveals , however much disruption Brexit may cause , it wo n't necessarily be big business which suffers the most , but rather the small and medium businesses who will be propping up our post-Brexit economy . This applies to SMEs in the rest of the EU as well as in the UK . We came to this conclusion after analysing how companies and investors in the current EU28 could be affected by the impact of a hard Brexit on the wholesale banking services they consume . BCG 's researchers spoke to more than 62 chief executives and treasurers of corporates , investment firms and SMEs , along with 10 industry associations which represent a wide range of companies and sectors . What was striking from the responses was that SMEs could find themselves the hardest hit unless they take action now . There are three reasons for this . First , the banking-related effects of a hard Brexit could lead to a higher cost of capital for SMEs and more restricted access to wholesale banking services . While the exact figures will vary , there is a real risk of fragmentation unless industry and policymakers can work together for a solution that benefits EU businesses and consumers . Secondly , while the scale and bargaining power of individual large corporates and investors mean that many of them would be able to navigate the wholesale banking impacts of a hard Brexit , SMEs would undoubtedly find it harder . That 's because not only are SMEs more likely to find their access to wholesale banking services restricted , but the cost of making adjustments - such as forming new banking relationships - can be material for them . SMEs tend to choose a local bank and stay loyal to them . In fact , 60pc of SMEs currently only use one bank for their business banking because of higher costs and greater difficulty than large corporates when building new relationships . In the event a local UK bank chooses not to establish a subsidiary in the EU27 , or that a hard Brexit results in banks having to change their services for existing customers , developing a new banking relationship could be timeconsuming , taking anywhere from six months to replicate what SMEs currently do in the UK . Thirdly - and crucially given the above - 55pc of the SME participants who commented in the report admitted that they had made no plans so far for Brexit . Worryingly , the assumption from corporates - small and large - is that their banks will continue to provide financing and be there in the same guise . Some 44pc of the SMEs interviewed expect their banks to absorb any additional costs caused by Brexit . However , this may be overly optimistic . The loss of passporting may cause some banks operating through a UK banking licence to withdraw from the EU27 , reducing the capital available to companies and investors . Other banks are likely to use subsidiaries to maintain cross-border operations , but this could be costly . We can not presume that the plumbing underpinning the banking system will continue to function seamlessly . The most likely result is that the European financial and banking markets become less integrated - ultimately limiting access to markets and raising costs . To mitigate such adverse effects of Brexit on end users , our interviewees made a number of suggestions . These included a transition period to give banks and their clients time to adjust , as well as `` grandfathering '' of existing contracts in order to minimise the legal and operational disruption to banks and their clients . Above all , businesses told us that they want the status quo preserved . The majority hope Brexit negotiations will result in similar levels of access to and costs of wholesale banking services as they have today . They feel strongly that the political negotiations should keep in mind the impact of Brexit on real economy end users . The continued stability of pan-European capital markets and future economic growth depend on it . Simon Lewis is the chief executive of the Association for Financial Markets in Europe 'However much disruption Brexit may cause , it wo n't necessarily be big business which suffers the most '
Scotland Brexit impact study never took place , says minister
THE Government can not reveal impact assessments for Britain 's economy in the wake of Brexit because they `` do n't exist '' , David Davis has admitted . The declaration before the Brexit select committee has put the Brexit Secretary on collision course with MPs who accused him of a `` total dereliction of duty '' as he said that `` no systematic impact assessment '' had been undertaken by the Government . A month ago , the House of Commons demanded ministers hand over the assessments and were left disappointed at the paucity of material released , prompting suggestions that Mr Davis may be in contempt of Parliament for failing to comply with the exact wording of a motion agreed by MPs - something rebuffed by the committee after agreeing the Government had complied with the terms of the motion . Yesterday Mr Davis told the committee the reason his Department for Exiting the European Union had not handed over the impact assessments was that such work had not been done . He said : `` The motion asked for things that do n't exist . That 's the point . It asked for things that do n't exist . I had tried to get as close to that as I could within the parameters that my duties as a minister allow . '' In June , Mr Davis said the Government had `` 50 , nearly 60 sector analyses already done '' on the impact of Brexit and in October added work had been undertaken in `` excruciating detail '' . But he said yesterday that sectoral analyses were not the same as an impact assessment . The revelation prompted Labour 's Angela Eagle to accuse Mr Davis of a `` dereliction of duty '' while others called on him to resign . 'The motion asked for things that do n't exist . That 's the point . It asked for things that do n't exist '
Brexit negotiations are happening in a parallel universe
The description is shocking.Theresa May is plagued by deluded Tory nativists determined to push for a catastrophic rupture with Europe . British society is cracking up . A once liberal nation is succumbing to dark forces . The British people have fatally misjudged Europe 's resolve , and have no inkling of what will hit them as the awful logic of Brexit unfolds . This in a nutshell is what EU officials , strategists , and business leaders are being told in Brussels . `` Britain is no longer the rational , stable country that we are used to . There is a nationalistic , almost revolutionary mood , '' said Garvan Walshe , a former Tory strategist and now head of the advisory BrexitAnalytics . The situation for EU nationals living and working in the UK is now so hostile that many will no longer want to work in the country whatever happens . Companies must start preparing for this exodus of talent . Mr Walshe told a packed gathering at the European Business Summit that the British mistakenly think they hold strong cards in the Brexit talks . They flatter themselves on a competitive edge in new technology and innovation , when the country is instead sitting on an economic time-bomb . `` The UK faces mediumterm fiscal insolvency , '' he told them , warning that the country had been kept afloat by foreign capital flows that are now in jeopardy . Some might cavil at this claim . Britain borrows in its own currency . The Bank of England is able to create unlimited amounts of sterling to buy Gilts . The country can not face fiscal insolvency . If there is a risk , it is of a different kind : inflation and a declining currency . Mr Walshe said Downing Street had misjudged everything . It had failed to secure `` opt-outs '' on European Court jurisdiction and migration , failed to secure a framework for talks in which the divorce bill and a future trade deal would be discussed at the same time , failed to `` divide and rule '' an unified EU-27 , and failed in its prayers for a eurosceptic upset in France . Mr Walshe told company executives that the chief question is whether Britain will fall back to the World Trade Organisation by agreement , or crash into a WTO default in a traumatic walk-out . His advice to firms with operations in the UK is to assume the worst and prepare for political breakdown . They should not wait for a transition . We are already in the transition phase.Companies must take action now . The one blessing is that the EU will at least take pity on a blighted Britain . `` It is not in the interests of the EU to have a pauperised , 'emmiserised ' UK so close to them , '' he said . Readers can judge for themselves whether this accurately reflects the mood in Britain , or the state of British politics , or the `` game theory '' brinkmanship by both sides in the Brexit talks . What is interesting is that none in the Brussels audience challenged Mr Walshe 's assumptions during questions , and many still think that Brexit can and will be reversed . The established narrative in EU capitals and the European press is that Britain has gone off the rails and is committing egregious self-harm . There were murmurs of approval at this forum when German finance minister Wolfgang Schauble predicted that `` the British people will learn very soon that Brexit was a mistake '' . Nobody suggested in any Brexit session that the EU itself might have misjudged the political dynamics , or made a mistake in trying to dictate even the terms of negotiation - as if Britain is as vulnerable as Greece , or akin to an EU accession country jumping through hoops to gain admission . It is taken for granted that the EU sets the rules in these talks . Yet there is an alternative view . Wolfgang Münchau argues in Eurointelligence that the EU has been caught off-guard at every stage of the saga . `` We have argued for some time that the main risk to the entire Brexit process is a source of cognitive dissonance on the part of the EU , which has a long history of misjudging UK politics , '' he said . The EU side never took Brexit seriously in the first place , and therefore gave nothing of substance in the final talks with David Cameron . This complacency is in striking contrast with the `` devolution max '' offers to Scotland before the referendum . Mr Münchau said they laughed at Mrs May 's pledge that `` Brexit means Brexit '' only to learn that she was deadly serious . Now they are repeating the error over her `` better-no-dealthan-a-bad-deal '' pledge . The EU elites bought into `` Bregret '' hopes , overestimating the influence of `` hard Remainers '' . They seem largely unaware of the `` Re-leaver '' phenomenon , the big bloc of Remainers who stoically accept the verdict of the referendum and want to get on with Brexit . `` The EU is now finding out that the Brexit negotiations are going to be different from the talks with Greece in 2015 , '' he said . A leaked memo from the European Commission suggests that the two key officials , Michel Barnier and Jean-Claude Juncker , have been shocked by British resistance . They are belatedly waking up to the risk that the UK will walk out if pushed too crudely on the ( EURO ) 100bn divorce bill , and if it is made to sign before talks start on the future relationship . Events will determine whether Mr Walshe or Mr Münchau is closer to the mark . What is clear is that the EU and the UK are now living in a parallel universe . This has the makings of a suspense thriller . They laughed at 'Brexit means Brexit ' . Now they are repeating the error with 'better no deal than a bad deal '
May 'lacks the courage to face complexity of leaving EU '
THERESA MAY is failing to summon the courage to acknowledge the `` complexity '' of leaving the European Union , the head of the senior civil servants ' union has claimed . Dave Penman , the general secretary of the FDA , has said the Prime Minister 's refusal to openly discuss the difficulties of Brexit with ministers could bring Whitehall to breaking point . In an interview with the Guardian , he warned that the `` politics around Brexit are the biggest risk to Brexit '' . Mr Penman , who represents 19,000 senior civil servants , called on Mrs May to give departments more resources . He said : `` The civil service is either going to have to be given more resources to deal with Brexit and its usual work or it will have to change its priorities . And the Government does n't want to admit to either . '' Mrs May tabled an amendment earlier this month which forced a Commons vote on whether Parliament agreed that Article 50 , which begins formal talks to leave the EU , should be triggered by the end of March . Downing Street has also committed to presenting MPs with a Brexit `` plan '' after criticism from backbenchers . Mr Penman warned : `` It is pure politics that is defining the Brexit debate and forcing May to say , 'This is not a big , difficult job , and it is all in hand ' . `` Ministers lack the political courage to admit how complex and time-consuming this will be . '' The Cabinet Office said the civil service was `` fully focused '' on delivering Brexit and that the Government was being equipped with `` the right people and the right skills '' for the process .
Be wary on sterling as the traders may be getting it laughably wrong
Boom : the pound took off like a rocket ; proving , once again , how little financial traders really understand politics . To close watchers of the Article 50 court case , it was becoming clear that after a series of unconvincing arguments , the Government was dangerously close to losing . It was n't priced in , however , and so sterling gained as much as two cents against the dollar in the space of three hours yesterday . The ruling changes the whole ball game , making the next two years even more unpredictable than they were before . We 'd better get used to some wild markets moves . The central thesis of yesterday 's voracious sterling buyers was this : the ruling means Brexit wo n't happen . Their logic seems compelling . The courts have handed control of Brexit to Parliament , which is dominated by MPs who strongly favour Remain . MPs on both sides of the House - Kenneth Clarke for the Tories and David Lammy for Labour - have already said they would vote to veto Brexit as soon as they get the chance . So even if Brexit does happen , they now think it will be a soft , friendly version that allows everything to carry on as normal for the City of London and for Britain 's economy . Given the overwhelmingly negative view of Brexit among financial types , this is seen as a strong boost for GDP and the pound . Once again , the traders could be getting it laughably wrong . There are still two clear routes to a Brexit that will involve a sharp break in Britain 's trading relationship with the EU , even if the Government is forced to hold a General Election campaign as a result of the court ruling . For the City , the ruling could actually worsen its position . Although this government understands the importance of financial services to the economy , an election campaign that places Brexit centre-stage could whip up some toxic rhetoric against London 's elite international bankers and immigration . The first possibility is that Parliament will probably fall into line and , despite its misgivings , vote to trigger Article 50 . The decision to leave the EU was supported by the largest number of votes ever cast in British history . For Labour MPs , the danger of defying that vote is clear : it was supported by swathes of working-class voters in northern industrial towns . These voters were previously the bedrock of Labour support , until last year , when they switched in their millions to UKIP . Any Labour MP who defies a trend like that faces electoral oblivion . More interestingly , many of the staunchly pro-Remain Tories who were outspoken during the campaign will be reluctant to be seen as thwarting the will of the people . One of those was Anna Soubry , a former business minister . Even before the Article 50 ruling this week , she told me that Parliament would never vote against Article 50 being triggered . `` I do n't know anyone except for Ken [ Clarke ] who 's said they 'll vote against Article 50 , '' she said . `` Do you really think Parliament is going to turn around to all those disenchanted , disillusioned people and stick two fingers up ? '' If they do , she warned : `` There 'll be people on the street '' . One caveat , however : she coyly refused to divulge how she herself will vote . Even if Soubry is wrong , however , Brexit will still happen . Theresa May is committed to it for both electoral and democratic reasons . So if she can not get legislation through this Parliament to trigger Article 50 , she will find a way to hold a General Election . The Fixed Term Parliament Act makes this a little complex , but where there is a political will , there 's a way . Many in Westminster are already expecting a springtime poll . Given the state of the Labour party , May is on course for a landslide . Recent projections suggest that she could sweep up enough votes from Labour and UKIP for a 150-seat majority . With her eyes firmly fixed on the patriotic working classes , there is no electoral advantage to her in promising a watered-down Brexit . This would be a dangerous election campaign for the City . EU market access for Britain 's financial sector is one of the top concerns voiced by pro-Remainers who want Britain to stay in or cling on to single market membership . But anyone making that argument is open to what is still a potent charge : they are defending the evil bankers . Labour has already claimed that May is trying to engineer `` a bankers ' Brexit '' . The fact that the City of London includes much more than banks and contributes over a tenth of government revenues means little to its ideologically driven opponents . Outside electoral politics , however , there is one significant barrier to Brexit that the Article 50 ruling does create : the House of Lords . Unlike the Commons , whose members are sensitive to the evolving whims of their voters , the Lords need have no fear of electoral chastisement . Years of Labour government have left the Chamber packed with pro-EU Blairite peers who , as the tax credits row showed last year , are not afraid of vetoing government policy . And yet , I 'd still bet on Brexit . As Soubry concedes , a Brexit veto by any branch of Parliament will turn the atmosphere poisonous very quickly . Instead of blocking the referendum result , it is far likelier that it would result in a sharply accelerated programme of Lords reform . The logic of the Article 50 ruling is that an early election is far likelier than it was on Wednesday . May would probably return to government on a landslide and therefore have much more freedom from the demands of two conflicting groups - the Osbornite Remainers and the zealous Brexiteers . It says a lot about May 's inscrutability that this still does n't tell us much more than before about how she will play Brexit . None of this changes the fundamental logic that the EU should , in economic terms , be open to a reasonable deal for the City and British trade . Parliamentary scrutiny will hopefully improve the quality of the Government 's negotiation , providing MPs do n't demand unreasonable levels of transparency . But the ruling does mean that we are in for a very dramatic , unpredictable and bumpy ride . There 's just one rule that will hold true : never trust a trader on politics . 'The decision to leave the EU was supported by the largest number of votes ever cast in British history '
Davis : EU ca n't cherry pick on trade deal
THE European Union must not be allowed to `` cherry pick '' a free trade deal that excludes the City of London and financial services , David Davis warns today . Writing in The Daily Telegraph the Brexit Secretary tells Brussels that the UK wants `` the full sweep of economic cooperation '' and with minimal barriers to trade in goods and services . His intervention represents a direct challenge to Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , who has repeatedly said that the final Brexit deal can not include financial services . The issue is likely to be one of the most controversial of the second phase of Brexit negotiations this year amid concerns that the EU is seeking to mount a Brexit land-grab on the City . In his article , Mr Davis deliberately adopts the language of Mr Barnier , who has repeatedly said that Britain can not `` cherry pick '' the benefits it wants from the Single Market after Brexit . Mr Davis says : `` I do not believe the strength of this cooperation needs change because we are leaving the European Union . Many of these principles can be applied to services trade too . Given the strength and breadth of the pan-European economic relationship , a deal that took in some areas of our economic relationship but not others would be , in the favoured phrase of EU diplomats , cherry picking . '' It comes after Mr Barnier said last month that there was `` no place '' for financial services in a free-trade agreement , claiming that Britain had only itself to blame for leaving the EU . David Davis comment : Page 8
Voters have disarmed our Brexit negotiators - we 'll get a worse deal ; If the PM does n't have the backing of Parliament , the EU will have no incentive to concede anything
Deal or no deal ? On Thursday , Britain took its best options for Brexit off the table . Although the Government said that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' , its ultimate goal was to ensure that we never faced that choice . The election has , however , made a good deal impossible and so the choice between `` no deal '' and a `` bad deal '' now looks inevitable . Unfortunately , the election has also now ensured that the consequences of `` no deal '' would be immeasurably more damaging . Let me explain . Negotiations with the EU were always going to be difficult and nasty . I was cautiously optimistic , however , that shared interests and mutual reasonableness would eventually result in a workable deal , delivering Brexit without a crippling economic cost . This option is now gone for the foreseeable future . The reason that is that implementing it requires passing a series of enormous , controversial Bills through Parliament , covering everything from immigration to fisheries . There is little chance that Theresa May , or any Conservative Prime Minister , can steer any such legislation through both Houses . From the most pious of peers to the pro-Remain Scottish Tories , our new Parliament heavily favours the softest of soft-boiled Brexits . The Government will not get the support it needs to implement anything else . This will prove deadly to the Brexit negotiations . The British delegation will arrive for talks in Brussels carrying a pile of paper that no one can vouch for . It is like turning up to fight a duel with a dead fish . Britain can huff and puff and make as many demands as it likes . The EU 's negotiators will simply stare at us across the table and think to themselves : `` Whom do they speak for ? Can they deliver any of this ? Will this Prime Minister even be here next week ? '' Confident that our newly elected Parliament would do almost anything to avoid talks collapsing , the EU will have overwhelming incentive to concede nothing . Expect an enormous Brexit bill , EU court authority over its citizens ' rights , continuing regulatory meddling and so on . The deal on offer could be so bad that it would simply be better to stay in the EU single market or European Economic Area for the time being . This is , of course , many Remainers ' preferred choice . It is not a good option , however . Although it guarantees continued tariff and customs-free trade and offers us some recourse to dispute particularly discriminatory EU regulation , it does not do anything that a reasonable voter could expect Brexit would do . It does not end free movement or the jurisdiction of EU courts . It could well increase our annual budget payments by abolishing the rebate . It is much worse than simply remaining a member of the damn club - and will be viewed as a total betrayal of the referendum result . None the less , this is our likely option one . Naturally , Brexiteers will consider any possible www.alternative.No deal is better than a bad deal , right ? Well , perhaps , before . But the new paralysis in Parliament has dramatically heightened the dangers of a `` no deal '' scenario . If the Tories had a large majority , withdrawing from the EU without a deal would have been painful , but the Government could have mitigated some of the risks . It could have passed a Budget including cash to upgrade immigration and customs capacity , put EU law into British law for the time being to provide some legal certainty and temporarily replicated EU tariffs to ensure international trade could continue smoothly . It would still have been a rough ride , but minimally cushioned by the government . None of these preparations are possible , however , if Parliament will not pass them . The only way for us to quit the EU without a deal in such a situation is for the Government to sit tight and let the time run out on negotiations . At that point , in March 2019 , Britain would crash out with no plan in place . Businesses and investors would not know if their legal contracts were enforceable . Border and customs officials would have no idea how to process the queues of people and lorries . Planes taking off from runways in Luton would not know if they had permission to land in Lyon . Millions of EU citizens here and Britons abroad would be in limbo . All of this is bad enough , without the additional risk from Britain 's enormous current account deficit . Every year , our economy requires a vast inflow of cash from abroad to keep going . That means any market freeze triggered by a Brexit -related legal vacuum could send sterling into freefall and generate an instant debt www.crisis.No responsible government can take such risks . This leaves a nightmarish choice : betray Brexit or risk disaster . Either choice is electoral poison for the Conservatives . It is quite possible that whoever is then our prime minister will instead opt for another election or referendum to avoid making it . There are many Remainers who , calculating that Friday 's result will lead to an ultra-soft Brexit , are rather pleased . I voted Remain , but I am not among them . Mrs May had judged her Brexit policy well and although her plan carried economic risks , I thought they were tolerable given the unequivocal referendum result and the likelihood that , in the end , we 'd strike a decent deal with the EU . By contrast , the Brexit betrayal might avoid a short-term hit to the economy but will be deeply damaging to our democracy . Voters will draw one conclusion from it : the more we vote for change , the more things stay the same . This can only result in further gains for the political extremes - Ukip and the hard Left . It is small consolation to know that Labour voters are just as split on Brexit as the Tories . Jeremy Corbyn owed his unexpected gains to an electoral alliance of anti-Brexit young people and the pro-Brexit working class , who endorsed his fiscal giveaways only on the condition that Labour , like the Tories , would take us out of the single market and end free movement . This alliance would shatter immediately were Mr Corbyn ever to gain power . The bad news for Conservatives is that , thanks to their `` victory '' , it is they who have been left facing pistols at dawn armed with nothing but a dead fish . Mrs May is trying to proceed as normal , but must know that everything has changed . The sooner Tories work this out and accept that , for now , a `` soft '' Brexit staging post is the only palatable option , the better . Their battle for a `` real '' Brexit must now be won again , in the years to come . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Nowhere to run , nowhere to hide , Labour must pray for quick Brexit ; Sketch
Never mind a hard Brexit . Labour need a quick Brexit . And when I say quick , I do n't mean in two years ' time . I mean they need Brexit to happen today or , at a push , tomorrow . Maybe , at the absolute latest , next week . Because until Britain actually leaves the European Union , and the public finally forms a consensus about whether Brexit has been a success or a failure , Labour are stuffed . That 's not an exaggeration . They 're stuffed . Political debate , for the next two years and beyond , both inside the Commons and out , is going to be dominated by Brexit : the most important , and most viciously divisive , issue of our age . And Labour do n't have a position on it . Arguably , they ca n't have a position on it . Almost all their MPs voted Remain - yet most of their seats voted Leave . But then , to further complicate the problem , polling suggests two-thirds of Labour voters voted Remain . And as for their unshiftable leader , nobody seems certain which side he was on , even now . So what can Labour do ? What can they say ? Who are they for ? The parties for Brexiters are Ukip and the Tories . The parties for Remainers are the Lib Dems and the SNP . All four have been clear where they stand on Brexit . Not Labour . Unable to be the party of the 52 per cent or the party of the 48 per cent , they 've tried claiming to be the party of the 100 per cent - while sounding like the party of the 0 per cent . There 's no way round it . They need Brexit to be over and done with , so that they can put the whole miserable debate behind them and start again . Until then , they 're going to have more and more days like yesterday . For Labour , and in particular their leader , PMQs was hopeless . In response to Theresa May 's big Brexit speech from Tuesday , Jeremy Corbyn was reduced to grumbling - twice - that she 'd given it at Lancaster House , rather than in the Commons . `` Restoring parliamentary democracy while sidelining Parliament , '' he muttered . `` The Prime Minister is not so much the Iron Lady as the Irony Lady ! '' The Irony Lady ? It 's hard to believe that sounded good even at the meeting . It did get a few laughs - but only , I 'm afraid , from disbelieving Tories . Labour MPs remained silently impassive , perhaps trying to pretend they had n't heard it . Dennis Skinner - their Commons heckler-in-chief for nearly 50 years - just stared . Mrs May is n't well suited to PMQs . But here she thwacked Mr Corbyn about as if he were a shuttlecock . `` There is a difference between us - and it 's very simple , '' snapped the Prime Minister imperiously . `` When I look at Brexit , or any other issue , I consider it , I set out my plan , and I stick to it . It 's called leadership - he should try it some time ! '' Tory MPs practically groaned with pleasure . Labour MPs , meanwhile , gazed helplessly up at the Commons clock - willing it to turn to 2019 . The Irony Lady ? It 's hard to believe that sounded good even at the meeting
Sturgeon insists she 's not bluffing over threat to hold new vote on independence
NICOLA STURGEON yesterday insisted that she is `` not bluffing '' about her pledge to hold a second referendum on Scottish independence if Britain leaves the Single Market after Brexit . Scotland 's First Minister told The Andrew Marr Show on BBC that she felt that the Prime Minister had `` no plan '' for Brexit and said she wants Scotland to `` take control '' of its own future . Asked if she was `` bluffing '' because she knew she could not win a second referendum , Ms Sturgeon said : `` They will be making a big mistake if they think I am in any way bluffing . '' She added that if Theresa May decides to leave the Single Market it would give Scotland `` the opportunity to decide whether it wants to be driven off a hard Brexit cliff by Right-wing Tory Brexiteers or whether it wants to take control of its own future '' . She told how discussions with Mrs May about Brexit had left her `` frustrated '' . She said : `` I do n't feel as if I know any more about her negotiating objectives than I did six months ago . '' Asked if she seriously thinks `` there is no plan '' , the First Minister said : `` Yes I do '' . She added : `` I say that with a lot of regret as that puts every part of the UK into a very perilous position . '' She highlighted her meeting with Mrs May in October : `` I 'm not exaggerating too much when I say the Prime Minister sat on the other side of the table at that meeting and said 'Brexit means Brexit ' and not a lot more . `` I came out of that meeting more frustrated , after a meeting of that nature , than I have ever been before . '' Ruth Davidson , Scottish Conservatives leader , accused Ms Sturgeon of using Brexit as a means of whipping up support for independence . She said : `` The First Minister needs to start acting in the interests of all Scots , not simply playing to her nationalist base . '' Editorial Comment : Page 17
Britain to ditch its 'unfair ' fishing quotas after Brexit ; Fishing quotas face post-Brexit overhaul
BRITISH fishermen will be able to catch hundreds of thousands of tons more fish after Brexit because it will be able to overhaul `` unfair '' fishing quotas , the fisheries minister suggested . George Eustice said Brexit will provide a `` good deal '' for fishermen because current quotas give a `` disproportionately large '' share of catches to fishermen from the European Union . He said after Brexit the UK will strike new `` reciprocal '' arrangements with the EU which will give fishermen a greater share of catches in British waters and abroad . He said that during Britain 's membership of the EU , negotiations about fishing quotas had stalled because of the `` institutionalised inertia '' of Brussels . He told The Daily Telegraph : `` It 's pretty clear Brexit can be a good deal for British fishermen because we regain control . The equation is that they have one million tons of UK fish and we get about 150,000 tons of various species . `` There are areas we would hope to get a better deal , particularly with cod and plaice . The truth is , things will change in a very fundamental way . In the Channel the French get twice as much plaice and three times as much Dover sole as we do . There is an imbalance . '' Mr Eustice believes that fishermen in the Channel and the West Country Continued on Page 4 Continued from Page 1 in particular could benefit from reforms to fishing quotas . He highlighted Britain 's `` incredibly low '' share of plaice and sole in the English Channel , with a similar situation for cod and haddock in the Celtic Sea . He said there is no `` balance '' to Britain 's fishing agreements with the EU , and it `` benefits more from access to the UK than the UK benefits from access to them '' . Mr Eustice insisted that Britain will continue to fish sustainably after Brexit . It came as French fishermen accused their British rivals of `` plundering '' scallops in the Channel , saying Brexit could leave UK trawlers free to increase their catches without the constraints of EU regulations . Daniel LefÈvre , head of the Lower Normandy Fisheries ' regional committee , said : `` Not only are the English pillaging a resource that we 've been protecting for more than 30 years , but the scallops they fish and freeze are coming back to be sold in France , competing with our fresh scallops . '' The French say they are already subject to stricter fishing limits than the British , and they fear Brexit will now disentangle UK boats from the web of EU rules . Mr LefÈvre said under national regulations French fishermen face strict quotas , while the British are subject to `` more lenient '' rules .
Brexit Britain faces 'huge bill ' for market access
PHILIP HAMMOND last night refused to rule out making substantial payments to the EU after Brexit in order to secure market access for British-based financial service firms . Asked during a trip to Berlin whether the UK would be prepared to pay for access to the EU markets for City firms , the Chancellor was pointedly noncommittal . `` We will talk about all of these things , '' he said . The question of UK payments emerged after Bloomberg , the news agency , reported that Germany would demand `` substantial '' payments to EU budgets in exchange for market access as part of any `` deep and comprehensive '' trade agreement after Brexit . Mr Hammond 's implicit acknowledgement that the UK may well need to `` pay to play '' in Europe after Brexit is likely to inflame passions among Brexiteers who have repeatedly warned such payments would be unacceptable . Theresa May promised last year in a Lancaster House speech that the `` days of Britain making vast contributions to the European Union every year will end '' after Britain quits the bloc . However trade experts warned that such payments may be unavoidable if the UK wants the `` high levels of access for goods and services '' that Mr Hammond demanded in a speech last night at the Die Welt economic summit . Joe Owen , senior researcher at the Institute for Government , and co-author of a new report on the UK 's trade options after Brexit , said demands for budget contributions from the EU were to be expected . `` If you look at other EU deals , then the EU is likely to request some contribution in exchange for 'deep and comprehensive access ' - in the same way EEA states , like Norway , contribute to EU development funds . '' The German position on trade talks emerged after The Daily Telegraph revealed that Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , was firmly against the UK idea of `` managed divergence '' from the EU , believing it amounted to the UK wanting to `` have its cake and eat it '' . According to Bloomberg , German officials said that the UK must choose between the Swiss or Norwegian models if financial services are to be included in any post-Brexit trade deal . In a combative speech in Berlin , Mr Hammond confronted the Franco-German hard line on Brexit , warning Brussels that it must stop trying to `` punish '' Britain for leaving the EU . He told German business leaders that the EU has so far been silent on what it wants the future relations with the UK to look like , but that inputs would be required on both sides . Mr Hammond said : `` They say 'it takes two to tango ' : Both sides need to be clear about what they want from a future relationship . I know the repeated complaint from Brussels has been that the UK has n't made up its mind what type of relationship it wants . But in London , many feel that we have little , if any , signal of what future relationship the EU27 would like to have with a post- Brexit Britain . ''
No excuse for Brexit delays , Whitehall told
MINISTERS have warned Whitehall that there can be no more excuses for delaying Brexit preparations , including readying the UK for the prospect of leaving the EU without a deal . A team of 100 officials in David Davis 's Brexit department will this month urge mandarins to intensify preparations for leaving the EU as they return a series of delivery plans to Whitehall . Mr Davis 's department will subsequently produce monthly `` progress reports '' to ensure each Government department is enacting the plans . It comes as his allies raised concerns that he will be marginalised if Boris Johnson is handed a `` supercharged '' Brexit role in a forthcoming reshuffle . Mr Davis 's department is moving to galvanise Brexit preparations after Eurosceptic Cabinet ministers , including Michael Gove and Mr Johnson , warned that Whitehall is failing to do enough to prepare for leaving the EU . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , provoked a row earlier this year after insisting that taxpayers ' money will not be spent on preparing for Brexit without a deal until the `` last moment '' . A Whitehall source said : `` In the New Year the Government is moving from planning phase to a delivery phase . We will be removing the excuses some departments have for not being ready . `` The intention is to ensure we are ready to deliver Brexit whatever is negotiated in Brussels , and while the chance of a 'no deal ' scenario has fallen , we will still be prepared . '' Cabinet reshuffle : Page 6 Editorial Comment : Page 17
'Take it or leave it ' vote on Brexit deal ; Davis gives MPs final say but concession raises fears of Remainer rebellion Tory rebels expected to vote against law on Brexit date
PARLIAMENT will be given a `` take it or leave it '' vote on Brexit after ministers agreed to enshrine the deal in law in a significant Government concession . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , yesterday announced that MPs and peers will be given a binding vote on the final deal with Brussels . However , the climbdown has prompted fears that pro-EU MPs will attempt to frustrate Brexit by tabling amendments in the hope of delaying or even postponing Britain 's departure . Last night Mr Davis warned that Britain will leave the European Union without a deal in March 2019 if MPs vote down the Government 's final agreement with Brussels . Mr Davis 's concession came less than 24 hours before the Commons was due to begin debating the next stage of the EU Withdrawal Bill , which transfers thousands of European laws and regulations on to the UK 's statute books . The Government is facing a huge rebellion over the proposed move , with more than 400 amendments tabled by MPs from all parties . The Brexit Secretary 's intervention was an attempt to avert the crisis , and comes after the Government was forced earlier this year to get Parliament 's support for invoking Article 50 after a legal challenge . Tory rebels said that the vote was `` pointless '' because it means Parliament can not change the terms of the final deal . Anna Soubry , a former minister , said the Government `` might get a nasty shock '' . The Brexit Secretary told the Commons the new law , which will cover areas including citizens ' rights , the so-called divorce bill and a transition period , will provide `` certainty and clarity '' as Britain leaves the EU . He was asked by Owen Paterson , the Eurosceptic Tory MP , whether Britain will leave `` without an agreement '' if MPs vote down the deal . He replied : `` Yes . '' He later added : `` It 's a meaningful vote , but not meaningful in the sense that some believe meaningful [ to be ] , which is that you can reverse the whole thing . '' Mr Davis said that while he was prepared to go back and talk to Brussels if the Commons attempted to make changes to the deal , he was doubtful that the timetable would allow any alterations at that stage . He was backed by European sources who last night warned the UK that the deal will not be changed at the 11th hour . One source told The Daily Telegraph : `` If the UK Government comes back at 11pm on March 29 2019 saying the House of Commons has amended 'x , y and z ' , then we would need to go back to Council and Parliament . `` But it is extremely difficult to imagine member states will start this whole process again once it has been ratified , particularly given how challenging the time is already . '' The move infuriated pro-European Tories , who are now preparing to rebel against Government plans to enshrine the date that Britain leaves the EU in law . Heidi Allen , a Tory rebel , said that the vote will be `` pointless '' if Britain fails to secure a deal with Brussels until the `` 11th hour '' . `` There 'd be no time , '' she said . Antoinette Sandbach , another pro-European Tory MP , said : `` The announcement is meaningless if , for any reason , the timetable slips beyond March 2019 . '' Tensions over Brexit within the Conservative Party will increase today as the Bill begins its next stage in the Commons . Up to a dozen Tory MPs are expected to say that they will vote against plans to enshrine the date that Britain leaves the EU in law . Nicky Morgan , the Remain-supporting former education secretary , yesterday accused the Prime Minister of being `` tin-eared and tone-deaf `` on Brexit . Labour will decide at a meeting of its shadow cabinet this morning whether to join Tory rebels in opposing the Government 's amendment writing the exit date into law . The party will risk alienating Brexit-supporting Labour voters if it does so , but may find the chance of inflicting a defeat on the Government too difficult to resist . Over the next month MPs will debate more than 400 amendments , running into 186 pages . Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general and leading Brexit rebel , suggested that he will not drop an amendment of his own demanding a meaningful vote . He suggested that the Brexit deadline should be extended if Parliament votes to amend the final deal to allow talks with Brussels . It came as Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , said that Labour would allow the European Court of Justice to retain some of its influence over UK law after Brexit .
EU 's rigid nature is main threat to any deal
There has been a significant evolution in the UK 's position on Brexit in recent weeks . The Cabinet now appears united behind Philip Hammond 's view that a smooth Brexit requires a transition period of years , rather than months , between the UK 's formal withdrawal and a final deal coming into force . On Wednesday , the Chancellor expressed his hope that UK and EU negotiators begin discussing a transitional deal by autumn . Ministers ' new stance on a transition , which broadly respects the EU 's position on the need for some role for supranational judicial supervision and a continuation of free movement and budget payments , should make it easier to conclude a deal . It is now the EU 's inflexibility that poses the bigger risk of a breakdown in the talks . On Thursday we learnt that the European Commission 's Brexit negotiator , Michel Barnier , has briefed ambassadors of the other 27 EU states that the start of the second phase of Brexit talks could be delayed by two months to December , which would further eat into the limited time available before Brexit day in March 2019 . Barnier reportedly noted that it is `` very unlikely '' that the somewhat vague threshold set by EU ministers of `` sufficient progress '' in the first phase of talks will be met by October , which would allow discussions to advance from the issues of citizens ' rights , the Northern Irish border and the `` Brexit bill '' to the future UK-EU relationship . The obvious and most politically presentable way of settling the budget dispute , at least in the UK , is to tie the issue to that of the transitional period . The current EU budget formally expires in 2020 but , due to long-term commitments , requires funding up to around 2022-23 . Both sides agree a transition is required and continued UK participation in the EU single market and programmes could run alongside its continued contribution to , and receipts from , the EU budget . The number is a political negotiation , not easily defined by the EU 's legal texts . Despite Jean-Claude Juncker telling The Financial Times it will be at least ( EURO ) 60bn ( £53.7bn ) , we still do n't have an official figure from the Commission . The various numbers being bandied around were always going to be reduced in net terms because , if the UK must honour its commitments to EU spending schemes , the EU must honour its commitments to UK farmers , universities and so on . After this transitional period , reduced UK contributions could follow the Norway model whereby it contributes to any schemes it continues to participate in . It is important to remember Barnier 's role is that of technocrat . He must rigidly stick to the political negotiating mandate set by EU ministers back in May , which outlined the EU 's stance on the sequencing of the talks and is where the phrase `` sufficient progress '' comes from . This was intended to send a message to the UK that the EU would not talk about the future trading relationship until it was confident the UK would act reasonably over the issues thrown up by withdrawal , such as the potential hole in the budget . However , while the UK position has developed rapidly in the space of just a few days , the EU position has not been updated to reflect the emerging consensus on the need for a transition . The other major issue being negotiated , the protection of citizens ' rights in the UK and the rest of the EU , has reached an impasse over Brussels ' demand the ECJ supervise these rights in the UK . This is despite the fact that Sigmar Gabriel , the German foreign minister , last month said that instead of extra-territorial ECJ jurisdiction over the UK , he would welcome `` a joint court that is staffed by Europeans and Britons , which in principle follows the decisions of the ECJ '' . For all the EU 's talk of transparency in the negotiations , and its publication of various technical position papers , there has been hardly any public debate in , or between , EU member states about the kind of long-term or even transitional deal they would like with the UK . This is why it is so difficult to compromise . The EU does not actually know what it wants to have achieved at the end of the process . Stephen Booth is director of policy and research at Open Europe 'Barnier must rigidly stick to the political negotiating mandate set by the EU '
Corbyn forced to dismiss three Brexit rebels ; Humiliated Labour leader removes shadow ministers after they backed Queen 's Speech amendment
JEREMY CORBYN was forced to sack three shadow ministers last night when they joined dozens of Labour MPs rebelling against the party over Brexit . In a serious blow to Mr Corbyn 's authority , 49 Labour MPs defied the party whip to back a Queen 's Speech amendment tabled by their backbench colleague Chuka Umunna . They included the shadow foreign minister Catherine West and shadow housing ministers Ruth Cadbury and Andy Slaughter , all of whom were sacked by Mr Corbyn , and shadow transport minister Daniel Zeichner , who resigned . The vote exposed a major rift within Labour over Brexit , as Mr Umunna had called for Britain to stay in the single market , in direct contravention of official Labour policy . It was a humiliation for Mr Corbyn , who had hoped to defeat the Queen 's Speech and force Theresa May 's resignation , but instead found himself to be the victim of a revolt . The Conservatives pounced on the vote to accuse Labour of `` total chaos '' over Brexit . Mr Corbyn 's decision to sack three people indicated the depth of anger felt by the leader and his team , who had issued a three-line whip ordering all Labour MPs to abstain from the vote . It also burst the Labour leader 's postelection bubble after his party had appeared more unified as a result of its general election gains . Mr Corbyn will now be forced to carry out another unintended reshuffle , as he did after shadow ministers were among 47 MPs who defied him by voting against Article 50 in February . Mr Umunna 's amendment , which was defeated by 322 votes to 101 , called for Britain to remain in the single market and the customs union , but failed to tempt any Tories in favour of a `` soft '' Brexit . Coupled with the passing of the Queen 's Speech , it means Mrs May has now come through the first major Parliamentary test of her pact with the DUP . James Cleverly , a Conservative MP , said : `` When it comes to Brexit , Labour are in total chaos . There is deep division at the heart of the Labour Party on the most crucial issue facing the country today - they still ca n't agree on the fundamentals and would get the worst Brexit deal at the highest price . `` Whilst Jeremy Corbyn 's chaotic team bicker over their position on Brexit , we 're getting on with the job of government . '' Mr Corbyn hit back by suggesting it was the Tories who were `` in chaos '' after a week in which ministers disagreed over Brexit and Downing Street performed a double U-turn on public sector pay . Gareth Thomas , one of the Labour rebels , said he had voted against his own party because he wanted to `` send a message to Theresa May about the importance of access to the single market and customs union '' after Brexit . Mr Zeichner , the Labour MP for Cambridge , said : `` I 'm a passionate pro-European and straightforward politician so I 've taken the hard decision to resign as shadow minister to back the single market . '' Labour 's manifesto said the party `` accepts the referendum result and will put the national interest first '' . Mr Corbyn wants Parliament to be given a `` meaningful vote '' on the final Brexit deal and says Britain should negotiate a deal that provides the same benefits as staying in the single market . 'There is deep division at the heart of the Labour Party on the most crucial issue facing the country today '
Scotland Corbyn may be forced to sack Diane Abbott over Brexit vote
JEREMY CORBYN could today be forced to sack one of his closest allies as he faces a Brexit rebellion by more than 50 Labour MPs . The Labour leader has imposed a three-line whip requiring his MPs to support legislation that will enable the Government to trigger Brexit . It means he could be forced to sack Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary who did not vote on Article 50 last week because she said she had a migraine . Clive Lewis , the shadow business secretary , could also be forced to quit the front bench after the Government rejected Labour 's amendments . Theresa May will also face a rebellion with up a dozen Tory MPs expected to defy the party 's whip and vote for the rights of EU citizens living in the UK to be guaranteed before Brexit negotiations begin . The Government last night comfortably defeated attempts by Labour to give MPs a `` meaningful '' vote on Brexit after Mrs May succeeded in dividing pro-European Conservative and Labour MPs . Ministers headed off a rebellion by committing to giving MPs a vote on a final Brexit deal before it is referred to the European Parliament . However , they insisted that MPs would have to `` take or leave '' the final deal , meaning that Mrs May is prepared to leave the EU without a trade deal in place if Parliament rejects it . Labour wants the Government to go back to Brussels to renegotiate the deal if Parliament rejects it . Downing Street insisted that the move did not represent a significant change in the Government 's approach . Labour was left in chaos as Keir Starmer , the shadow brexit secretary , hailed the move as a `` significant concession '' while Labour backbenchers suggested it was meaningless . There were also significant splits among pro-European conservatives . Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general , was criticised by Ken Clarke after saying he was persuaded by the Government 's commitment . Despite suggestions that up to 30 Tory MPs could defy their party whip and back the Labour amendment just seven chose to do so . There was a heated debate between Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , and Gavin Williamson , the chief whip , on the floor of the Commons shortly before the vote was called . Mrs Morgan abstained as the Labour amendment was defeated by 326 votes to 293 . George Osborne , the former chancellor who has said he is prepared to join the `` fight '' over Brexit , was absent from the vote . Last week 47 Labour MPs defied Mr Corbyn by voting against triggering Brexit . The Labour leader is expected to allow junior shadow ministers to rebel without significant repercussions . Members of the shadow cabinet , however , will have to quit . Determined Tory MP votes after chemotherapy session A Tory former minister diagnosed with cancer left hospital yesterday to back the Government 's Brexit Bill despite feeling `` pretty grim '' . Nick Boles , the former business minister , has been off sick since October , but he was in Parliament to vote despite having spent the last week receiving chemotherapy . Colleagues offered their support and thanks to him .
McDonald 's backs UK with move to London ; Global fast-food chain demonstrates its faith in Brexit as it abandons its base in Luxembourg
THE British economy has received a post-Brexit vote of confidence from one of America 's best known companies after McDonald 's announced it will move its non-US operations to London , abandoning its base in Luxembourg . The fast-food giant has chosen the UK to establish a new holding company to collect hundreds of millions of pounds a year in royalties from its international franchise operations . Announcing a radical shake-up to its corporate structure , central to which is shifting its tax domicile from Luxembourg to the UK , the company backed Britain 's prospects post-Brexit , saying its strengths would endure after it leaves the bloc . `` The reasons for changing the location of the corporate structure to the UK were sound before Brexit and remain so beyond it . These strengths are unlikely to change as the UK negotiates leaving the European Union , '' said a McDonald 's spokesman . McDonald 's is the latest multinational company to up its invest in the UK since June 's Brexit vote , following a string of technology giants including Apple , Google and Facebook . The announcement was welcomed at No 10 , with the Prime Minister 's spokesman saying continuing investment by international companies would secure growth and boost jobs . McDonald 's new UK domicile will collect the majority of the royalties from licensing the company 's global intellectual property rights outside the US and will be supported by the `` significant number of staff `` the company already employs in the capital . `` This change has a clear business rationale in matching our corporate structure to our new functional structure , '' the company spokesman added . The UK already has one of the lowest corporate tax rates among major economies at 20pc , compared with 35pc in the US , 33pc in France and a combined burden on profits in German of between 30pc and 33pc . McDonald 's move to Britain , its biggest European market , comes as complex international tax structures come under pressure from coordinated moves to ensure profits are taxed where they are made . In recent years Britain has thrown its weight behind moves by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to stamp out complicated tax avoidance schemes . The move has however been viewed by some as a rebuke to the EU , which is investigating the chain 's tax affairs and could yet demand nearly $ 500m ( £397m ) in back taxes . EU officials have claimed McDonald 's Luxembourg structure , agreed with the Grand Duchy 's government , amounted to illegal state aid . The EU has been grilling the burger giant as part of a crackdown on member states offering tax incentives for companies to set up shop . McDonald 's denies claims that it has avoided tax , saying that between 2011 and 2015 it paid more than $ 2.5bn in corporate taxes in the EU , at an average tax rate approaching 27pc .
Brexit in doubt as May mired in Irish border row ; Crunch talks in Brussels as Hunt fears Brexit may fail
THERESA MAY goes into a crunch meeting with EU leaders today admitting she is yet to find an answer to the Irish border problem . And a Cabinet minister has suggested for the first time that Brexit might not happen . The Prime Minister has until tonight to meet an EU deadline for Britain to make `` satisfactory progress '' on the issues of money , citizens ' rights and Ireland in order to trigger trade talks later this month . She had hoped today 's meetings in Brussels with Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , and Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , would be the moment when trade talks would be unlocked , but government sources were highly pessimistic about the prospect of a breakthrough , leaving the entire Brexit timetable in jeopardy . The news came as Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , told Conservative rebels that if they did not back Mrs May in the negotiations , `` we will have no Brexit '' . An official government statement said there were `` plenty of discussions still to go '' and downplayed the importance of today 's meeting , describing it only as `` an important staging post '' on the way to trade talks . However , with just 10 days to go until next week 's European Council summit , when EU leaders will decide whether trade talks can begin , Mrs May is rapidly running out of time to keep Brexit on track . With no agreement in sight between London , Dublin and Belfast on the border issue , the Prime Minister is likely to ask for a last-minute extension to today 's deadline . Whitehall sources bitterly complained last night that Leo Varadkar , the Irish premier , had `` moved the goalposts '' by insisting on guarantees over the future border arrangements now , having earlier said the issue could be thrashed out once trade talks were under way . Ireland is holding out for an assurance that it will have `` regulatory convergence '' with Northern Ireland , effectively meaning the border would move to the Irish Sea . But the Democratic Unionist Party ( DUP ) , on which Mrs May relies for her Parliamentary majority , says it will not accept anything that is similar to staying in the customs union or the single market . One government source said there was `` absolutely no prospect '' of ministers going against the DUP 's wishes , adding : `` The things that the Irish government wants us to sign up to are things that no British government could sign up to . '' Mr Hunt 's warning is aimed at Tory backbenchers who have hinted that they would vote against a deal that involved paying £40billion or more for the Brexit bill or that gave the European Court of Justice any powers in British law after Brexit . Such a scenario would risk ousting Mrs May from Downing Street and triggering a general election that could , if Jeremy Corbyn emerged as the victor , result in Labour calling a halt to Brexit . Mr Corbyn said over the weekend that he had not yet decided whether Labour would hold a second referendum on Brexit if the party gained power . Mr Hunt is the first Cabinet minister to raise the prospect that Brexit might not happen , and his comments reflected nervousness in Tory ranks as today 's meeting approached . Mrs May will travel to Brussels with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who will meet Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator . Mr Barnier will compile a report on Wednesday on whether `` sufficient progress '' has been made , which will be sent to the leaders of the other 27 EU member states before they meet at the EU Council on Dec 14 and 15 . Mrs May is desperate for the EU Council to agree that trade talks can begin , as any further delay would mean talks were unlikely to start before March , when the council next meets - a full year after Article 50 was triggered and only 12 months before Britain formally leaves the EU . She may now ask Mr Barnier to delay today 's deadline by 24 hours , though Whitehall sources said they believed they had until the date of the EU Council meeting to solve the Irish border issue . Ireland is threatening to veto trade talks unless Britain guarantees there will be no hard border , but Nigel Dodds , the DUP leader in Parliament , said any solution that involved an all-Ireland customs regime would force Northern Ireland `` further and further away '' from its main market , the UK . He said the Irish government had adopted an `` aggressive stance '' on Brexit which was `` causing real damage to Anglo-Irish relations '' . He added : `` They ca n't impose what is a good solution for the Irish Republic on the rest of us . '' Asked if the DUP might threaten to withdraw support for Mrs May 's Government , he said : `` The DUP does n't need to issue any threats whatsoever , because we 're very , very clear that the Government understands that anything that results in the undermining of the Union ... we would n't go with that . '' Simon Coveney , the Irish foreign minister and deputy prime minister , was equally firm , telling the BBC : `` We can not allow some kind of collateral damage or unintended consequence of Brexit to have the re-creation of a border . ''
Scotland Tories and Labour hold secret talks on soft Brexit ; The Telegraph Election 2017 ; Cross-party commission offers way forward , says Hague
SENIOR Cabinet ministers are engaged in secret talks with Labour MPs to secure cross-party backing for a soft Brexit , it has emerged . Some of the most senior members of Theresa May 's team have been discussing how to force the Prime Minister to make concessions on immigration , the customs union and the single market . There have also been discussions of a cross-party Brexit commission to agree common ground between the parties and ensure an orderly withdrawal from the EU . Labour is expected to use the talks as leverage to demand an end to the public sector pay freeze among a series of concessions in next week 's Queen 's Speech . Mrs May is understood to have been `` aware '' of the plot for several days but so far has done nothing to stop it . Meanwhile , Ruth Davidson used her newfound influence in Westminster to tell Theresa May she must pursue a softer `` open Brexit '' that prioritises free trade over cutting immigration . The Scottish Conservative leader met the Prime Minister before sitting in on the political cabinet meeting at No 10 after her 13 Scottish MPs effectively kept Mrs May in power . She claimed afterwards there was a `` clear recognition '' that the Government must seek a general consensus and that it must prioritise the economy . In an article today 's Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary and staunch Brexiteer , says it is vital that the Government can `` achieve a deal that can command the widest possible support '' . Last night Mrs May was cheered at the first meeting of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tory MPs since losing her majority as she told them : `` I got us into this mess and I 'll get us out of it . '' `` In other developments : Senior Conservatives suggested Mrs May will be allowed to continue as Prime Minister until 2019 ; Downing Street announced the Queen 's Speech could be delayed by the need to reach an agreement with the DUP about what will be in it ; The start of Brexit talks was put back after the EU said the election result had caused uncertainty in Brussels ; Labour 's policy on Brexit descended into chaos as two of Jeremy Corbyn 's most senior frontbenchers contradicted the Labour leader . Brexit will dominate whatever remains of Mrs May 's premiership , and the Conservatives behind the talks with Labour MPs believe Mrs May will have no choice but to accept their demands in order to ensure her Brexit plans are not blocked by Parliament . MPs who favour a soft Brexit or oppose it altogether outnumber hard Brexiteers in the new Commons . Labour and Tory MPs forged alliances when they campaigned side by side in the EU referendum , and last night senior sources in both parties confirmed that talks are ongoing and look set to intensify over the coming weeks . One senior Tory source said the election has made clear that the Conservatives are `` no longer in control of the Brexit process . Conservative MPs fear that losing a key vote on Brexit would weaken Mrs May 's so much that she could be forced to stand aside . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Lord Hague , the former Tory leader , Continued on Page 3 Continued from Page 1 puts forward a plan for how a crossparty commission would work . Gaining cross-party support , he says , will require a change in `` the emphasis given to the UK 's objectives , with a clear indication that economic growth will have priority over controlling the number of people entering the country for work '' . He also suggests that Britain could join the European Economic Area for two years as a staging post to full Brexit . Yvette Cooper , one of Labour 's most senior and credible figures on immigration , also called for cross-party talks . Ms Davidson 's position , putting the economy ahead of immigration , would flip Mrs May 's stated priorities in a `` hard Brexit '' , and is very far from the Prime Minister 's former position that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' . The bloc of 13 Scottish MPs will take the Tory whip , but Ms Davidson plans to use their influence to change government policy on Brexit . She said it was clear around the cabinet table that there was `` a recognition that , as we are in the minority , we will have to reach out and work with others '' . She told BBC Scotland : `` There was also a clear understanding that the prime pursuit ... is to make sure that we look after the economy and that we prioritise free trade . '' Ms Davidson also made it clear that `` as we leave the European Union we must leave the Common Fisheries Policy and ensure a good deal for our fishing communities '' . It is understood Ms Davidson also discussed with the Prime Minister plans to keep up the pressure on Nicola Sturgeon to take a proposed second independence referendum off the table . Sources close to the Scottish Tory leader believe Ms Sturgeon will have to break her silence before Thursday 's First Minister 's Questions , or face further political damage . Yesterday Ms Sturgeon met her much reduced group of 35 MPs outside the Houses of Parliament . The First Minister called for a `` short pause '' in Brexit negotiations in order to secure a cross-party , four nation agreement - a suggestion that was quickly rejected . A spokesman for Mrs May said : `` We gave a commitment right at the very outset of this process to consult with the devolved administrations and that remains the case . '' Ms Sturgeon has been asked repeatedly since a disastrous election that saw the SNP lose 21 MPs , including Alex Salmond and Angus Robertson , the party 's Westminster leader , if she will now take indyref2 off her agenda . But she has so far only said she will reflect on the result , while admitting that the issue played a part in the outcome .
Scotland Europe to hold no sway over UK courts post-Brexit , insists May
THE European Courts will have no influence over Britain after Brexit , Theresa May will promise in a major speech next week . The Prime Minister will declare in a speech due to be made on Tuesday that the UK will not be in the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) from the moment it leaves the EU in 2019 , sources said . Her promise will be a direct rebuke to EU leaders who have in recent days claimed that Britain will remain under the rule of the European courts for several years after Brexit . Joseph Muscat , the prime minister of Malta , which currently holds the EU presidency , this week said the ECJ would still be `` dishing out '' judgments to the UK as part of any transitional deal with Brussels to allow access the single market after Brexit . However , Mrs May will make clear that Britain will no longer abide by the court 's rulings , in remarks that will be heavily criticised by EU leaders . Her speech will also set out a detailed plan for a new immigration system after Brexit , it is understood . Sources told The Daily Telegraph earlier this month that she intends to make it clear to EU leaders that the UK is prepared to walk away from the single market if Brussels attempts to insist that Britain continues to abide by freedom of movement rules after Brexit . Mrs May 's speech is seen by Downing Street insiders as vital to defining her leadership and is designed to counter claims that she has no plan for Brexit . One source described it as a `` gamechanger '' that will be her `` most significant '' intervention since walking into Downing Street last summer . Senior Tories who backed the Leave campaign are calling for Mrs May to use the speech to say that Britain will leave both the single market and the customs union . Michael Gove , the former justice secretary , in a newspaper article yesterday warned Mrs May against a `` fake Brexit '' that is rejected by voters . He called on her to tell EU leaders that Britain will quit the single market `` because being in means accepting the unfettered free movement of people and the unchallenged supremacy of EU courts '' . He said that she must also pledge to leave the EU customs union because membership `` means accepting high tariff barriers towards the rest of the world and no freedom to strike our own trade deals '' .
Brexit opponents accused of being detached from reality
A LEADING businesswoman has accused politicians and financial leaders who dismiss the Brexit vote and election of Donald Trump of being `` detached from reality '' and operating in a `` narrow comfort zone '' . Helena Morrissey , a senior investment manager , said `` those at the top '' have failed to learn the lessons from the financial crisis and now risk ignoring the significance of the Brexit vote . She was speaking after Mark Boleat , the policy chairman at the City of London Corporation , said he had `` no doubt '' that London would remain the world 's `` leading financial centre '' after Brexit . In another significant boost for Britain , Matt Brittin , the head of Google 's business and operations in Europe , said his company would continue to invest in this country because it is `` good at the internet . '' Ms Morrissey , who backed Brexit , said : `` What has happened this year should not really be a surprise for anyone who examined the 2008 global financial crisis and its aftermath with any honesty . `` The banking collapse then should have been a wake-up call to experts , pundits and establishment figures everywhere , but the events of this past year suggest to me that many people in charge have remained detached from reality . '' Her comments came after an economist who played a leading role in the Remain campaign admitted that Michael Gove had been right to say that `` people are fed up with experts '' . Stephanie Flanders , a former BBC presenter who now works for JP Morgan , said that over the last few years economists have been `` wrong in some pretty big areas '' . Ms Flanders , who appeared in a Britain Stronger in Europe advert during the referendum campaign , said they have been `` victims of group think '' and `` out of touch '' . During the referendum campaign Mr Gove , the justice secretary at the time , was a fierce critic of `` project fear '' and said `` I think people in this country have had enough of experts . '' Speaking on the Today programme during a debate , Ms Flanders agreed that there was a `` long record '' of economists being wrong on their direct forecasts . She said : `` You get group think , you can certainly get elites being out of touch , and we 've seen all of that and that 's why I think , in a sense , Michael had captured something with that phrase that he 's explained better in this piece , about people being fed up with experts , I think people are fed up with experts . '' Business : Page 27
Scotland Sturgeon 's chance to veto Brexit ; Devolved administrations given role in Supreme Court case
NICOLA STURGEON could lay the groundwork for blocking Brexit by seeking a legal ruling from Europe that the triggering of Article 50 can be reversed , according to a QC who helped frustrate Theresa May 's plan to bypass a vote in Parliament . Jolyon Maugham argues in an article in today 's Daily Telegraph that the First Minister could `` explode the cosy consensus '' that the two-year process for leaving the European Union can not be undone once it has been started by seeking a reference to the Court of Justice of the EU . His intervention came as the Supreme Court confirmed that the Scottish and Welsh governments would be allowed to intervene in the ongoing court battle over how the Brexit process should be triggered . In his article Mr Maugham claims that such a ruling would enable MPs to withdraw the Article 50 notification at a later date if they do not like the shape of the Brexit deal that emerges . Mr Maugham claims that if Ms Sturgeon won a case in the ECJ , it would leave the `` door ajar '' for the entire UK remaining in the EU and give her a `` real bargaining chip in her negotiations with Westminster '' . He argues that the First Minister is right to demand that Westminster respects the will of the Scottish people , 62 per cent of whom voted Remain , and concludes : `` This is how she gets it . '' He writes that before the High Court case it suited everyone to `` pretend '' that triggering Article 50 would inevitably lead to Britain leaving the EU . He suggests that Ms Sturgeon asks the European Court of Justice to answer the question , and if it decides that Article 50 is reversible its MPs can threaten to vote down any Brexit deal that ignores Scotland 's interests . Doing so would mean withdrawing the Article 50 notification and remaining in the EU . He adds : `` Although that vote would almost certainly fall in the House of Commons today , who knows how Brexit will look in two years ' time ? It is possible that the `` sunlit uplands '' promised by Boris Johnson will hove into view - but it may also be that they dissolve to mere mirage , '' he argues . If this is the case , he predicts , MPs will face strong pressure from the voters to keep Britain in the EU `` and the Brexiteers fear that '' . Mr Maugham initiated the crowdfunded People 's Challenge group , which launched a legal challenge to Brexit alongside investment manager Gina Miller and hairdresser Deir Dos Santos . Earlier this month they won a case that saw three High Court judges rule that the Prime Minister does not have the power to trigger Article 50 , which starts a two-year negotiation process , without the authority of Parliament . The UK Government immediately announced plans to appeal against the judgment , taking the case to the Supreme Court . Michael Russell , Scotland 's Brexit minister , yesterday welcomed the decision to allow the devolved administrations to take part , saying : `` We recognise the decision of people in England and Wales to support Brexit , but the views of people in Scotland can not simply be brushed aside . The Lord Advocate will be making the case on behalf of the Scottish Government . '' James Wolffe , the Lord Advocate , is expected to argue that Article 50 can not be triggered without a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) from Holyrood . This would allow MSPs to block Brexit , with a majority of members in the Scottish Parliament chamber vigorously opposed to leaving the EU . However , academic experts have previously said the UK Government is not legally bound to seek LCMs from the three devolved administrations
Brexit fuelling a growing rift in the SNP ; With such a rebellion in the ranks Sturgeon ca n't proceed with a second independence referendum
Never one to miss an opportunity to embarrass or pick a fight with the UK Government , Nicola Sturgeon was quick off the mark when the High Court handed down its controversial judgment on Brexit . The ink was barely dry on their lordships ' ruling when Scotland 's separatist First Minister announced that she was `` actively considering '' joining attempts to stop Theresa May triggering Article 50 without Parliament 's agreement . Yesterday she confirmed that James Wolffe , the Lord Advocate , Scotland 's senior law officer , is to seek permission to address the Supreme Court when it considers the case next month . But she was vague as to the precise nature of Mr Wolffe 's submission , understandably so given the hugely embarrassing revelation - first made public in this newspaper - that her party , noted for its iron discipline , is seriously split over EU membership . Although Ms Sturgeon regularly trumpets the fact that 62 per cent of Scots voted for Remain in the EU referendum , she chooses to ignore the fact that of the one million north of the border who backed Brexit , some 400,000 were SNP voters . However , what she could n't dismiss was the announcement by Alex Neil , one of the most senior of all serving nationalists ( and a leading cabinet minister until sacked by Ms Sturgeon in May ) , that he had voted for Brexit . Nor could she ignore his revelation that he was not the only nationalist member of the Scottish Parliament to be a Brexiteer . Indeed , Mr Neil has suggested that there may have been five or six MSPs who voted Leave . The issue is easily the biggest split in SNP ranks since devolution and is all the more surprising given that , since it has been in government since 2007 , there has hardly been a chink in the party 's formidable armour . Now we have the situation where , given that their party 's supposed stalwart support for the EU is seen to be dwindling , stalwart nationalists are wondering if they can trust each other . We have already seen a number of nationalists - including a junior minister , the party chairman , who is also a member of the European Parliament , and a prominent MP - all refusing to answer questions about how they voted in the June referendum . And to think that EU membership was for decades supposed an article of faith among the SNP membership ; something that would fuel a renewed referendum campaign after Brexit . In fact the issue is just sowing confusion in the SNP 's own ranks . Mr Neil now claims that as many of as 40 per cent of the party 's 120,000 members probably voted for Brexit . And there can be little doubt that some voted for Brexit in the belief that it would bring on an early second referendum , others really are genuine and longtime Eurosceptics . There has always been a not insignificant faction within the SNP that believed that there was little point in seeking to break away from the UK , only then to be run from Brussels . Ms Sturgeon wants `` her '' Parliament to have the same authority over Brexit as Westminster does , especially as the Welsh and Northern Irish governments are opposing Theresa May 's appeal to the Supreme Court . Mike Russell , the Scottish Government 's Brexit minister , said that it was `` important '' that Parliament scrutinised the decision of the executive but added , significantly : `` There are a number of parliaments in the UK . '' Yet , with such a public rift in her own party , can Nicola Sturgeon take the risk of having a full-blown Brexit debate at Holyrood , even if the Supreme Court justices agree to such a move ? The split in the SNP ranks over EU membership gives the lie to Ms Sturgeon 's claim that she speaks for all of Scotland , given that she ca n't even be said to be speaking for her entire party . With such a rebellion she could hardly proceed with any confidence with her threatened second referendum on independence , a prospect already looking doubtful thanks to Scotland 's poor economic performance . Far from being the sure route towards independence that many in that party have always believed , it is now beginning to look as if Brexit has become an anvil on which the SNP takes a real hammering . READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Brexit warnings 'correct ' says Civil Service boss ; Civil Service put out propaganda on Brexit , says MP
THE head of the Civil Service has drawn fury from Eurosceptic MPs after claiming that official warnings about the impact of Brexit during the referendum were `` factually correct and objective '' . Sir Jeremy Heywood said the `` Civil Service did its job '' and was `` scrupulous '' during the build-up to the referendum , producing work `` as we should , at pace and with accuracy '' . Eurosceptics have accused him of promoting `` Project Fear '' in an attempt to keep Britain in the European Union . The Treasury warned just weeks before the vote that households could be £4,300 worse off because of Brexit . In a blog on a government website , Sir Jeremy said : `` During the official referendum campaign , we were scrupulous in making sure that all documents issued were factually correct and objective . '' He added : `` The question has still been asked : 'What was the Civil Service doing before the referendum ? Where is the Brexit plan ? ' This shows little appreciation of the constitutional and Continued on Page 2 Editorial Comment : Page 19 Continued from Page 1 proprietary framework in which we operate , not to mention the practical difficulty of producing a comprehensive plan for such a multifaceted proposition as Brexit . '' Steve Baker , a leading Tory Eurosceptic , said : `` From my point of view as a leading 'Leave ' campaigner , the Government 's arguments were partisan propaganda . `` The entire Civil Service machine was mobilised to campaign as strongly as possible . '' Iain Duncan Smith , the Brexitsupporting Tory MP and former work and pensions secretary , said : `` There was huge pressure from government and lines got blurred and broken . `` But after purdah [ which restricted civil servants ] there was no question that the Civil Service was more comfortable being able to say no . '' It comes as the High Court today gives its ruling on whether the Government must secure the consent of MPs before formally triggering Brexit . Campaigners claim that Mrs May must give MPs a vote before she triggers Article 50 , which will give Britain a two-year window before leaving the EU . Mrs May has repeatedly rejected the calls and accused pro-European groups of trying to undermine the will of the British people .
Freedom of movement will end in March 2019 , insists May ; May moves to end Cabinet 's 'divorce ' terms tug-of-war
THERESA MAY moved to rein in Philip Hammond and soothe Cabinet unrest over Brexit yesterday as Downing Street insisted free movement of people will end in March 2019 . No10 said it was `` wrong '' to suggest that free movement would continue `` as it is now '' once Britain leaves the EU , in comments that appeared to contradict Mr Hammond 's stated view that `` many arrangements [ will remain ] very similar to how they were the day before we exited '' . The Prime Minister 's spokesman also said that Britain would not be seeking an `` off the shelf `` deal similar to Norway 's arrangement with the EU , turning a phrase used by the Chancellor on its head and exposing cracks between No10 and No 11 . The first public comments by Downing Street on Brexit since Theresa May went on holiday a week ago appeared designed to calm Brexiteers including Boris Johnson and Liam Fox , who were reportedly angered by Mr Hammond 's attempts to set a `` soft '' Brexit agenda while he was left in charge of the country . It came as leaked emails written by Emmanuel Macron , the French president , revealed that his military adviser told him Britain should be kept onside after Brexit because it is the `` most important '' military player in Europe . Another adviser told Mr Macron the EU would be less appealing without Britain as a member . The Cabinet row over Brexit showed no sign of abating yesterday as Mrs May 's official spokesman set out her position on free movement of people and the transition period , which are at the centre of the tug-of-war between Europhile and Eurosceptic ministers . Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Mr Fox , the International Trade Secretary , are understood to have been angered by Mr Hammond 's comments last Friday that there was a `` broad consensus '' in Cabinet that the Brexit transition period would last up to three years . Mr Hammond also said he envisaged Britain leaving the EU `` with many arrangements remaining very similar to how they were the day before we exited '' . Some former Leave campaigners warned that dragging out the transition process to the next general election must not be used as `` a ruse to keep the door open to going back into the EU '' . But Downing Street said : `` Free movement will end in March 2019 ... other elements of the post-Brexit immigration system will be brought forward in due course . It would be wrong to speculate on what these might look like or to suggest that free movement will continue as it is now . '' 'Other elements of the post-Brexit immigration system will be brought forward in due course . '
Philip Hammond can not be allowed to redefine the terms of Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - In Theresa May and Boris Johnson 's absence , Philip Hammond seems to have gained control of the Cabinet and is trying to subvert the will of the people . He has shown a lack of competence in his job as Chancellor and is now taking Brexit in the wrong direction , with talk of a long transition period . He is in danger of giving the EU negotiating team early concessions that will encourage them to ask for more . As an avid Remainer , that may be his intention . He must be stopped . Patricia Bateson Diss , Norfolk sir - Anyone who has had a senior role in business ( and Parliament has a dearth of such people ) knows that , if a major transformation is necessary , the more rapidly and urgently it is done , the better . The pain is over in a short time , and the positive part can then occupy people 's time and energy . A protracted Brexit transition will only drag out the uncertainty and anxieties - and give the Brexit saboteurs , of whom there are many , every opportunity to ensure that Brexit never happens . Dr Peter Grey Hurley , Berkshire sir - I voted for `` No deal is better than a bad deal '' , which has now changed to `` Any deal is better than no deal '' - so we might just as well have accepted what David Cameron was offered before the referendum and saved the `` divorce '' bill . We can now see why Mr Hammond did not take part in the electioneering , as the plan was for the Treasury 's `` puppet '' to take over after the election and impose its views on the electorate regardless of democracy . Philip Trow Stafford sir - While there may be a number of areas in which businesses and individuals require extra time to adapt after Brexit , the need to reduce immigration was a major issue even before the Brexit vote . People have had plenty of warning and need to start putting alternative arrangements in place by our date of leaving . Contrary to what Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , suggests , completely free movement - with or without visas - should not be allowed after 2019 . Jane Drew Bristol sir - Liam Fox says that Brexit supporters voted for restricted access to Britain for EU citizens , but the fact is that no one knows what made people vote the way they did . Bearing in mind that the Government , the Conservative Party and the Labour Party are split between leaving and remaining in the EU , and that both the Houses of Commons and Lords will have to vote on the final Brexit agreement , surely it is time for a second referendum to find out if people in Britain still want to leave the EU now that all the issues are becoming plain . Tony Blackman London SW11
Scotland 'Disaster ' of quitting EU must be halted , say Scottish leaders
MORE than 60 high-profile politicians , academics and leading figures from across Scotland have called for Brexit to be halted as its `` disastrous consequences '' become clearer every day . They warned yesterday that Brexit has seriously damaged the UK 's international reputation and called for a `` UK-wide debate about calling a halt to the process '' . The signatories of an open letter that claims the UK has already been left `` weak and diminished '' include Lord Kerr of Kinlochard , the author of Article 50 , which sets out the process for withdrawal from the EU . The peer , who was Britain 's permanent representative at the EU from 1990-95 before becoming ambassador to the US , previously said he thought it would only ever be used by a dictatorial regime , not by the UK . Lord Campbell of Pittenweem , former leader of the Liberal Democrats , the former first minister Henry McLeish , the SNP MEP Alyn Smith , the former Tory MEP Struan Stevenson , and the former defence secretary and ex-Nato secretary general Lord Robertson , also signed the letter . Other signatories from the fields of academia , business , arts and NGOs included Scotland 's former chief medical officer Sir Harry Burns and the historians Sir Tom Devine and Chris Smout . In the letter to The Herald they say : `` We see our society , economy and politics becoming ever more undermined due to the impact of Brexit . We recognise that a narrow majority voted to leave the European Union , but the disastrous consequences are now becoming ever clearer - every day . Even before the UK has left the EU , we face falling living standards , rising inflation , slowing growth and lower productivity . `` Our international reputation has been seriously damaged , leaving the UK weak , with diminished influence , in an increasingly uncertain and unstable world . '' The letter continues : `` In a democracy , it is always possible to think again and to choose a different direction . We need to think again about Brexit , to have a UK-wide debate about calling a halt to the process and changing our minds . '' It concludes : `` We call for a national debate on Brexit . We ask our fellow citizens , and our politicians , to think again . '' Mr McLeish told BBC Radio Scotland 's Good Morning Scotland programme that Brexit was `` tearing Britain apart '' . He said : `` Enough is enough because we see Brexit taking us towards a catastrophe , there are no perceived benefits , and in the meantime we see negotiations in Brussels going nowhere , we see a Cabinet and Government at Westminster shambolically handling affairs . `` And one of the big issues for me is that , over the next two years , Parliament in London will face seven Bills about exiting the European Union . What happens then to housing ? What happens then to climate change ? `` What happens to the big issues that Britain faces ? They 'll be in the cupboard while we pursue this pointless distraction . '' The former first minister said it was `` possible '' that Parliament could overturn the Brexit vote , adding : `` There will be a lot of opportunities over the next two years to derail and potentially reverse that decision . '' The letter coincided with a new report warning that Brexit is having a negative impact on the economy and the housing market as growth in Scotland lags behind the UK . The latest projections from PwC put Scottish growth at 1.2 per cent this year and 1.1 per cent next year , behind UK GDP growth of 1.5 per cent and 1.4 per cent respectively . The economic outlook report attributes the figures to `` slower consumer spending growth and the drag on business investment from ongoing political and economic uncertainty relating to the outcome of the Brexit negotiations '' . 'We call for a national debate on Brexit . We ask our fellow citizens , and our politicians , to think again '
Scotland David vows to squash the latest Lords Brexit defeat
DAVID DAVIS last night accused peers of trying to `` frustrate '' the process of triggering Brexit , as he insisted the Government would overturn the latest Lords amendment to the Article 50 bill . The Brexit Secretary is confident that a potential Tory rebellion in the Commons will be headed off despite suffering a second Parliamentary defeat on Brexit in the space of a week . The House of Lords passed an amendment to the Article 50 bill that would force the Government to give MPs a `` meaningful vote '' on the final Brexit deal before Britain 's withdrawal from the EU . Up to 20 Conservative MPs could vote in favour of the amendment , with rebels encouraging others to abstain . They include Anna Soubry , the former business minister , who believes a `` significant '' number of Tories might defy the whip . The Government has a `` Brexit majority '' of around 30 MPs - double its normal working majority - because it can count on the support of a number of MPs from other parties . The danger for Mrs May is that the Lords vote - in which the amendment was passed by 366 votes to 268 - could encourage Conservative MPs representing pro-Remain constituencies to abstain . Thirteen Tory peers voted against the Government as a new record was set for the number of peers taking part in a vote , at 634 . Mr Davis said it was `` disappointing '' that the Lords had made further changes to the Bill , adding : `` It is clear that some in the Lords would seek to frustrate that process , and it is the Government 's intention to ensure that does not happen . We will now aim to overturn these amendments in the House of Commons . '' Ms Soubry said : `` I 'm hoping a significant number of colleagues who may not be able to vote against their Government would consider abstaining , and recognise that their lordships have considered the Bill carefully . `` What do these hard Brexiteers fear ? They wanted to restore Parliamentary sovereignty , but suddenly they seem terrified of Parliament having a say , never mind sovereignty . ''
Scotland 'Sturgeon can cash in on Brexit with May ' ; SNP leader urged to drop referendum aims and use funds from Europe to create 'neo-independence ' ; 'Government should publish List of Scottish Demands '
NICOLA STURGEON could win `` neoindependence '' for Scotland by abandoning her referendum threat and focusing on using Brexit to get major new powers , one of her former Cabinet ministers says today . Writing in The Daily Telegraph , Alex Neil says the First Minister should fill the political `` void '' created by the UK Government 's silence over what they want from Brexit by issuing a `` List of Scottish Demands '' . He argues that Ms Sturgeon seizing a swathe of the powers and spending money that will be repatriated from the European Union would leave Scotland with `` neo-independence '' . Urging the SNP leader to exploit a `` golden opportunity '' , the former Scottish health secretary also says this strategy would provide the `` ideal platform '' for Scotland getting full independence in the early 2020s . He writes that she should press for all EU powers that relate to devolved policy areas to be `` automatically '' transferred to Edinburgh , including controls over farming , fishing , employment law , consumer protection , social policy and the environment . The Airdrie and Shotts MSP argues that around £800 million of funding associated with these policies should be added to Holyrood 's budget along with control of VAT , which EU law currently prevents being devolved . In addition , Mr Neil says Ms Sturgeon should pressurise Theresa May to honour the Leave campaign 's suggestion that some immigration powers be devolved after Brexit . His intervention is the most detailed explanation yet of how the First Minister could use the Brexit vote as part of a `` long game '' towards independence . It is in stark contrast to Alex Salmond 's proposal that Ms Sturgeon call a second independence referendum in the autumn of 2018 , after her demands that Scotland retain membership of the EU single market are rejected . However , a series of senior SNP figures such as Kenny MacAskill have joined Mr Neil in warning that a `` headlong rush '' towards a rerun of the 2014 vote to appease enthusiastic party members risks a defeat that sets back the Nationalist cause for decades . Opinion polls show a majority of Scots oppose a second referendum before Brexit takes place , and they would reject independence again . Alyn Smith , an SNP MEP and candidate in the party 's deputy leadership contest , warned yesterday that Scots might end up being `` quite happy '' with Brexit despite 62 per cent voting to Remain . Mr Neil is one of the party 's most eminent grandees , having stood against John Swinney for the leadership in 2000 and held two Cabinet posts in Mr Salmond 's government , before being appointed part of Ms Sturgeon 's top team . The 65-year-old writes today that it is `` blatantly obvious '' three months on from the EU referendum that the UK Government has no idea how to proceed with Brexit , and this creates a huge political opportunity for Ms Sturgeon that she `` should not let slip '' . `` Rather than wait until Theresa May Continued on Page 6 Alex Neil : Page 6 Continued from Page 1 eventually gets her act together , the Scottish Government should immediately publish its 'List of Scottish Demands ' for the Brexit negotiations , '' he writes . `` Do n't wait for Whitehall . Set the agenda now . Force the UK Cabinet to acknowledge Scotland 's priorities . Preempt any attempt by the UK Government to place unacceptable limitations on Scotland 's Brexit ambitions . '' He argues that moving quickly with the demands for the powers and the associated funding would put them `` at the top of the UK/EU negotiations agenda '' . Mr Neil concludes : `` The accumulation of all these new powers and finances would bring about 'neo-Independence ' for Scotland , creating the ideal platform for advancing to full sovereignty for the Scottish people in the early 2020s . '' The former minister also argues that the UK Government would find it `` difficult '' to deny Ms Sturgeon a special deal on access to the EU single market and freedom of movement `` if Scotland plays its cards right '' . To build pressure on Mrs May to agree to the First Minister 's demands , he suggests that Ms Sturgeon organise a `` Brexit Coalition '' with representatives from all the UK 's nations and regions . However , the Prime Minister argues today that the SNP needs to accept its share of responsibility for voter disillusionment with the political establishment , which she claims led to the Brexit vote . Writing in Holyrood magazine , Mrs May says that Scotland 's status in the world will be enhanced by Brexit because it will allow keynote industries such as financial services , food and drink and shipbuilding to take maximum advantage of global markets . An SNP spokesman said : `` The First Minister has repeatedly made clear that the Scottish Government is exploring all possible avenues to protect Scotland 's place in Europe , in line with the overwhelming vote to remain - and those options must include independence if it becomes clear it is the best or only way of doing so . '' 'Set the agenda now . Force the UK Cabinet to acknowledge Scotland 's priorities '
No shortcuts for firms moving EU base after Brexit , warns watchdog
FINANCIAL firms hoping to avoid any Brexit aftershocks by setting up a `` letterbox '' office on the Continent will not get away with it , the EU securities watchdog has warned . Businesses across the City are looking at how they can minimise the impact of a hard Brexit , which would see UK-based firms lose the ability to service clients in the EU , by setting up licensed hubs overseas . However , the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) yesterday listed nine conditions firms should meet if they want to do so , sending a clear message that they will not be able to side-step the rules . In a move to crack down on shell or `` letterbox '' hubs , the watchdog said EU countries - which are competing to attract financial firms post-Brexit - need to be wary of offices that still have critical functions in London . This will make life difficult for countries hoping to win business over rival centres by offering post-Brexit sweeteners , such as the opportunity to outsource chunks of work to London ; ESMA warned that any outsourcing to a UK entity needs to be strictly supervised . While it acknowledged that a number of companies see their EU branches as a safety net , the Paris-based watchdog said there should be no `` automatic recognition of existing authorisations '' - meaning many companies might well have to start from scratch . ESMA chairman Steven Maijoor said it was vital that firms were subject to the same standards across the EU , to avoid `` competition on regulatory and supervisory practices '' between members . `` The UK plays a prominent role in EU financial markets and the relocation of entities , activities and functions to the EU27 creates a unique situation requiring a common effort , at EU level , to safeguard investor protection , the orderly functioning of financial markets and financial stability , '' he said . A number of companies in the financial services sector have already outlined post-Brexit contingency plans , with Luxembourg , Dublin and Frankfurt emerging as popular locations . Meanwhile , the Financial Conduct Authority has sent out letters to 20 of the UK 's largest asset managers asking for details on their post-Brexit plans . A spokesman said the move was `` not a formal data request '' but was aimed at helping the UK regulator better understand what firms are doing to prepare for Brexit .
Italy planning to lure City firms to Milan after Brexit
ITALY is to set up a task force to lure businesses and investors from the City to Milan in the wake of Brexit , the country 's foreign minister announced . Angelino Alfano said his government would aggressively promote Italy 's financial capital as a viable alternative to London . `` We 're going to set up a task force . The government is on Milan 's side in the post-Brexit game , '' the minister said at a conference in Rome . `` Who says that businesses that leave London should all go to Frankfurt ? We need to be able to attract Milan businesses that decide to leave London . '' Brexit offered many opportunities for Italy , `` and we need to work to make Milan a highly-competitive city in the post-Brexit era '' , Mr Alfano said . The capital of the wealthy Lombardy region , Milan is home to Italy 's main stock exchange , has two airports and boasts Bocconi University , acclaimed for business studies and finance . The city 's profile was boosted last year by the success of the Expo world fair , which attracted 20m visitors . But Milan 's ambitions to lure away firms from the City face numerous obstacles , from language to labour laws . Italy has one of the lowest levels of English language proficiency of any country in the EU . Only 34pc of Italians have a working knowledge of English , according to a study by the European Commission , and firms looking to leave the UK might instead opt for Dublin . High social security costs mean employees in Milan are more costly than those in London and labour laws make it harder to make workers redundant . Italy 's legal system is also notoriously slow and inefficient , with court cases dragging on for years and even decades . In the latest annual Ease of Doing Business Survey by the World Bank , Italy ranked 50th out of 190 countries , behind Serbia , Belarus , Moldova and Armenia . Britain ranked seventh . `` In the current cost-conscious environment , I think companies will be concerned at how much more it costs to set up a business in Milan and how much harder it is to get rid of people if needed , '' said a British corporate lawyer familiar with both Italy and the City . `` I think Dublin is a much more attractive proposition . ''
Brexiteers warn that 17 million voters must not be betrayed
THERESA MAY has been warned she `` must deliver on Brexit '' or she will betray the 17 million people who voted last month for Britain to leave the European Union . Eurosceptic Cabinet ministers including Boris Johnson , the former Mayor of London , and Owen Paterson , a former Environment Secretary , said it is `` vital '' that Mrs May `` respects the will of the people '' . Owen Paterson , a supporter of Andrea Leadsom , said : `` If she fails to deliver on Brexit there will be massive disillusionment in the political class as a whole . She must deliver a Brexit for the 17.4 million people who voted for it . '' Boris Johnson , one of the leading voices in the Vote Leave camp , said : `` I have no doubt Theresa will make an excellent party leader and prime minister and I 'm encouraged that she 's made it clear that Brexit means Brexit - that we will leave the EU . `` It is vital that we respect the will of the people and get on with exploiting new opportunities for this country . '' Mrs May insisted yesterday that she is `` going to make a success '' of Brexit . She said : `` Our country needs strong , proven leadership to steer us through this time of economic and political uncertainty and to negotiate the best deal for Britain as we leave the EU and forge a new role for ourselves in the world . `` Because Brexit means Brexit , and we 're going to make a success of it . '' The new Tory leader had campaigned for the UK to remain inside the EU but did not make any high-profile appeals , earning her criticism for her lacklustre approach . But she has vowed not to trigger Article 50 , the formal mechanism to begin a Brexit , until the UK is ready to negotiate a new deal . Mrs Leadsom , her former opponent , had promised to do so more quickly in order to speed up the process of leaving . Mrs May said there is absolutely no deadline for her to trigger the formal talks , adding that the most important thing is to secure a good deal . She added : `` We should n't invoke Article 50 immediately , I 've said it should n't be before the end of the year , we need to set our own negotiation position . '' Other pro-Brexit MPs called for Mrs Leadsom to be given a position in Mrs May 's cabinet and backed the Tory leader 's promise to put a Brexiter in charge of plans to leave the EU . Nigel Evans MP , who campaigned for the UK to leave , said : `` There is no sidestepping , there is no second referendum , we are going to respect the wishes of the British people ... that 's exactly what 's going to happen and Theresa did give a guarantee that a Brexiteer would be in charge of that withdrawal . It has to be someone who vigorously campaigned for us to leave the European Union . '' Politicians in Brussels conceded that Mrs May is a tough negotiator and will battle to get the best deal for the UK . One Italian newspaper described Mrs May as the English equivalent of Angela Merkel . EU sources are said to be pleased with Mrs May 's appointment as prime minister-in-waiting because she is a known quantity following her numerous talks and discussions during her time as a Cabinet minister . Two weeks of turbulence How political history was forged June 24 Hours after the nation 's historic vote to leave the EU , David Cameron resigns as Prime Minister , saying : `` I do not think I can be the captain to take the country to its next destination . '' June 26 Jeremy Corbyn sacks Hilary Benn , triggering a wave of resignations from shadow cabinet members , as part of a concerted effort by the Parliamentary Labour Party to bring down its leader . June 27 As many as nine Conservative MPs consider mounting leadership campaigns , as the bookmakers back the cheerleader of the Leave movement , Boris Johnson , to be the next prime minister . June 28 Labour MPs overwhelmingly back a vote of no confidence in Jeremy Corbyn . He insists he will not quit , declaring his victory in the leadership contest gave him a mandate from party members . June 29 Cracks begin to appear in the alliance between Boris Johnson and Michael Gove , as a leaked email from Mr Gove 's wife shows her urging him to demand `` specific assurances '' from his Brexit colleague . June 30 Michael Gove torpedoes Mr Johnson 's bid , claiming he `` was n't capable '' of being PM and announcing he will run himself . Race is narrowed to five candidates : Gove , May , Crabb , Fox and Leadsom . July 1 Mrs Leadsom is the major beneficiary of Mr Johnson 's departure , picking up dozens of pro-Brexit MPs . Chancellor abandons his target to run a budget surplus by 2020 , citing instability caused by Brexit . July 4 Nigel Farage quits as Ukip leader , saying : `` I want my life back . '' Westminster sources said that after the Leave camp won the referendum , it was time Mr Farage could declare `` job done '' . July 5 Liam Fox , right , eliminated from the leadership race in the first round of voting by Conservative MPs , with Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb quitting shortly afterwards . July 7 Michael Gove eliminated from the contest , leaving an allfemale race between Theresa May and Andrea Leadsom which would produce the first woman prime minister since Mrs Thatcher . July 9 Mrs Leadsom criticised after giving an interview in which she claims that being a mother differentiates her from Mrs May because it means she has `` a very real stake '' in the future of the nation . July 10 It is confirmed that Angela Eagle will stand as a unity candidate for the Labour leadership , in an attempt to unseat Mr Corbyn , who insists he has the right to run again in any contest . July 11 Theresa May is anointed as the next prime minister , after Andrea Leadsom pulls out of the leadership race , saying : `` We need a new prime minister in place as soon as possible . ''
It is still not too late to change your mind on leaving , EU tells Britain
DONALD TUSK and Jean-Claude Juncker yesterday told Britain that the door was still open for the country to change its mind over Brexit . Appearing to back a second referendum on UK membership of the European Union , Mr Tusk , the president of the European Council , said : `` If the UK sticks to its decision to leave , Brexit will become a reality with all its negative consequences in March next year - unless there is a change of heart among our British friends . '' Mr Tusk , the former prime minister of Poland added : `` We here on the Continent have n't had a change of heart . Our hearts are still open to you . '' Jean-Claude Juncker , who is president of the European Commission , told MEPs : `` I hope that that will be heard clearly in London . '' They were speaking a day after five Remain-supporting MPs , including Tory Brexit rebels , visited Brussels . `` Was n't it David Davis himself who said that if a democracy can not change its mind , it ceases to be a democracy , '' Mr Tusk asked , referring to a speech given by Britain 's Brexit Secretary in 2012 . Meanwhile , European Parliament leaders ruthlessly mocked Britain for celebrating the return of its `` muchmissed '' blue passport , which Theresa May had said expressed post-Brexit `` independence and sovereignty '' . Manfred Weber , leader of the largest political group in the European Parliament , said there was nothing in existing EU rules that demanded passports be of a certain colour . `` The whole story is a scam , '' he crowed . `` Why do n't you tell the people the truth ? '' Blue passports appeared to be Mrs May 's `` only achievement '' since she triggered the Brexit process in March 2017 , said the Bavarian MEP , who leads the European People 's Party . On Monday , MPs including Tory Brexit rebels Dominic Grieve and Anna Soubry met Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator in Brussels . The allparty parliamentary group on EU relations raised the prospect of voting down the Brexit deal . Speaking in Brussels and denying she was undermining Mrs May 's negotiating hand , Ms Soubry said : `` Both political parties have a number of backbenchers who feel differently from their front benches . '' Last week , Nigel Farage , the MEP and ex-Ukip leader , offered apparent support for a second referendum after a separate meeting with Mr Barnier .
Ignore the doom-laden spin - Brexit is going remarkably well ; Government chaos has led critics to believe our exit from the EU is a disaster , when the opposite is true
Strictly speaking , Britain is not allowed to hold trade talks with anyone until we have left the European Union . But no one in London or Washington wants to wait that long so , on Monday , talks to establish a free-trade agreement will begin . It 's a fairly historic moment : Robert Lighthizer , the US trade representative , will meet Liam Fox to discuss what American officials describe as `` ways to strengthen trade and commercial ties '' . To have this happen so soon is more than any Brexiteer dared predict . Rather than be at the back of the queue , as Barack Obama had rather absurdly threatened , Britain is sneaking to the front . This fits a trend . Brazil is keen to start talks with Britain , as are Australia and Turkey . They might be bemused at the political mess in Westminster but they seek closer links to our economy , the fifth largest in the world . We have a newly competitive currency , fuelling demand for our goods and helping employment to an all-time high . There 's even a consensus about what Brexit should look like : a clean break with the EU , untying our hands to strike new alliances . The journey is bumpy , but the direction is clear . So it 's hard to portray Brexit as being an unmitigated disaster . But a great many people are doing a rather good job of it . Their mistake is to look at the state of the Government and assume that the Brexit project is in the same dilapidated condition . Negotiations with the EU , which finished their second stage yesterday , were always going to be tortuous . Made more so , it 's true , by the implosion of the Prime Minister 's authority and the inability of anyone to make the case for Brexit . When critics carp , the Government is unable to respond . Given the scale of this task , Theresa May ought to have assembled a Bletchley Park-style cadre of experts to work out every detail . Instead , the Government has relied on a still-traumatised Whitehall machine . I recently met one of the many civil servants deployed to Brexit and asked what it was , exactly , that he did . `` I do n't know , '' he replied , `` that has n't been made clear to me yet . '' The basic problem is that leadership has to come from the very top . And it 's not being applied . Yet in spite of all this , public opinion remains remarkably firm - perhaps because , political tragicomedy aside , things have been going rather well . The country is as evenly split now as it was in last year 's referendum , with Brexit just about edging it . Which is perhaps understandable , given how many Brexit voters expected precisely this kind of disruption . They rejected the advice of academics , economists , actors and every political party in Westminster - it always was a vote for the long term , sure to cause havoc in the short term . If anything , Brexit seems less of a risk now . HM Treasury 's dire predictions have proved , to put it politely , unduly pessimistic . A falling pound annoys holidaymakers , but has helped manufacturing increase every month since the referendum , while tourism spending is up 14 per cent and exports in general 16 per cent . Inflation has risen , but it now looks set to peak - having never risen above 3 per cent . In the great history of British inflation disasters , this will barely merit a mention . And what about the talented EU nationals supposedly being chased away ? A group of academics warned about this in a letter this week , but the latest figures show more Europeans working here than ever before . Mrs May has belatedly said she wants to offer them all permanent residency - and we should hope they accept . While Europe is wrestling with unemployment , Britain 's problem is a lack of workers - most companies now say they struggle to fill skilled vacancies . A problem , yes , but a problem born of success . And that exodus of financial services ? Yes , some of the banks are sending a few more staff to EU offices but , overall , the City of London is booming . The latest update from Morgan McKinley found that the Brexit referendum prompted an 18 per cent hike in hiring , rather than a desertion . The dire state of the Westminster soap opera does n't alter a basic fact : London is the greatest financial centre in the world , ranking even above New York . The official league tables do n't show any EU city in the top 20 . And if bankers do go to Frankfurt , the EU might have some unpleasant surprises waiting . It recently published various plans for the future , including a financial transactions tax - the sort that Britain would never have tolerated . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's Brexit representative , recently declared that the `` only way for the EU is to develop itself into a federal Europe '' . Once Britain would have been working out how to sabotage such agenda . Now , we can wish the EU good luck . Those who have seen David Cameron recently say that he 's still very downbeat and can often be found in Dukes Bar in Mayfair , mournfully nursing its signature vodka martini . But he should not be so hard on himself . The EU is evidently heading on a federalist path that Britain could never have followed ; Brexit would have happened sooner or later . The more the EU talks about greater integration , the wiser the Brexit vote seems . And this is true no matter how much of a mess the British Government might find itself in . Fundamentally , Brexit is about the country , not the government . The US is keen to open trade talks not as a love letter to Theresa May but because it seeks closer links to an economy without threatening American jobs . The Prime Minister has made this case very well to the Trump administration : this is her personal success . She has also kept her nerve on Brexit and has not been tempted to make a false choice between `` hard '' or `` soft '' version . She has a strong hand to play because the country has so much to offer . So there are two Brexit battles being fought : that of the spin , and that of the substance . The Government is losing the former , but slowly winning the latter . Better that , at least , than the other way around . Follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
What to watch ; TELEVISION THURSDAY 9 FEBRUARY BODY : After Brexit : the Battle for Europe BBC Two , 9.00pm Hard Brexit . Soft Brexit . Red , white and blue Brexit . Full English Brexit with choice of tea or coffee . As Britain continues to prepare for withdrawal from the EU , the BBC 's Europe Editor Katya Adler presents this special investigation into the rise of populist Eurosceptic movements and asks whether the union itself can survive . Adler begins in Sicily , where she charts the conflict between UKIPlike movement Five Star and pro-Euro centrist Matteo Renzi , who recently resigned as Italian prime minister . She then travels across the continent , meeting the politicians posing a major threat to the EU establishment , as well as ordinary voters disenfranchised by years of Eurozone turmoil and the migrant crisis - from France , where the Front National 's Marine Le Pen is in contention for presidency , to Hungary , where PM Viktor Orban is launching his own counter-revolution against Brussels . Adler also meets top Eurocrats including Germany 's Martin Schulz and Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian PM charged with negotiating Brexit on behalf of the European Parliament . Can the 60-year old union survive or will it be swept away by a populist revolution ? Michael Hogan The Great Pottery Throw Down BBC Two , 8.00pm Last week , they made a 16-piece dinner set and decorated a pair of jugs . Now , in the second episode of the series , the amateur potters must throw a double-walled pot , create handles for casserole dishes and make a large clock . The Cruise : Sailing the Mediterranean ITV , 8.30pm The ups and downs of the crew of the Royal Princess in this fly-onthe-cabin-wall series have kept us anchored to our seats in recent weeks . In the penultimate episode , there could be trouble as junior officer Lauren is in charge of engineer husband Mike during her first shift commanding the bridge . The series concludes tomorrow at 8.00pm . Unforgotten ITV , 9.00pm Despite weeks of toiling Unforgotten : Sanjeev Bhaskar and Nicola Walker over the murder of David Walker , the team is still left with a puzzle to solve . In the series ' finale , DCI Cassie Stuart ( Nicola Stuart ) is increasingly unconvinced by teacher Sara Mahmoud 's alibi . 60 Days in Jail Channel 4 , 11.05pm As this docu-series , in which seven innocent volunteers go undercover in Indiana 's Clark County Jail , draws to an close , Tami is on the verge of a meltdown after Maryum is released . Meanwhile , a power struggle ensues when a `` boss '' is removed from D-Pod and a dispute erupts over a lunch tray . Lottie Hughes
Britain 's fury at 'unhelpful ' Barnier ; Brexit talks descend into slanging match as EU negotiator tells UK to behave 'seriously ' ; Barnier 's claim UK will be less secure labelled 'risible nonsense '
BRITAIN 'S relationship with Brussels appeared close to breaking point last night as the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator was accused of an `` ill-judged and unhelpful '' attack on the UK . The latest round of Brexit talks descended into open hostility after Michel Barnier sniped at Britain for `` ambiguity '' in its stance on the socalled `` divorce bill '' and lectured the UK on taking the issue `` seriously '' . Senior sources close to the British negotiating team described Mr Barnier as being `` stuck with a headache of his own making '' over the Brexit Bill . They dismissed suggestions that Britain should pay to leave the EU while continuing to make payments for access to the single market during a transition period . `` We are not going to pay twice , '' said one source . The source added that Brussels would simply `` pocket gains '' from any financial offer , `` as their reaction to our offer on citizens ' rights showed . We made a generous offer and got no credit '' . Another senior source described Mr Barnier 's attack as `` inconsistent , illjudged , ill-considered and unhelpful for the next round of negotiations '' . Mr Barnier separately suggested the UK would be less secure as a result of Brexit , which was dismissed as `` risible nonsense '' in Whitehall . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , appeared visibly irritated by Mr Barnier 's remarks as they made opening statements side by side in Brussels . He told Mr Barnier : `` We want to make progress across all the issues . '' Peering at his opposite number over his glasses he repeated : `` All the issues . '' This week 's talks , the third in a series of monthly negotiations , are aimed at reaching an agreement on the `` divorce bill '' , citizens ' rights and the Irish border so trade talks can begin in October . However , yesterday 's public mudslinging did nothing to increase the chances of a swift resolution . One EU official said it was `` clearly worrying that we have major differences of core issues ... with very little time to land all this , even if Britain moves '' . At a terse press conference in Brussels Mr Barnier , a former French minister , told Mr Davis that the next phase of the Brexit talks can not begin until Britain provides a clearer statement of its position on the `` divorce bill '' . He said : `` To be honest I am concerned that time passes quickly . We must start negotiating seriously . `` We need UK papers that are clear in order to have constructive negotiations and the sooner we remove the ambiguity the sooner we will be in a position to discuss the future relationship and transitional period . '' The choice of words was deliberate . Earlier this month , Mr Davis said that `` constructive ambiguity '' was necessary in negotiations . The Brexit Secretary called for `` imagination and flexibility on both sides '' to make progress , but an atmosphere of suspicion appeared to dominate yesterday . Mr Barnier also angered his British counterparts by writing an article for a French newspaper in which he claimed Britain would be less secure after Brexit . Writing in Le Monde , he said Brexit Continued on Page 4 William Hague : Page 14 Editorial Comment : Page 15 Continued from Page 1 `` will have very practical consequences including on defence and security '' before listing a series of what he saw as negative impacts for the UK . He said that the UK would no longer be part of the policing agency Europol , or the European Defence Agency and would have no right to sit at the council of defence ministers . He added : `` British defence research facilities will not be able to benefit from EU funding , London will not be able to assume command of European operations . '' A Whitehall source said : `` This is risible nonsense . Mr Barnier knows full well that the UK is the leading military and security power in Europe at a time when the threats to the Continent have increased dramatically . After we leave , the UK will continue to guarantee European security and shape defence through bilateral relations - something Mr Barnier would do well to remember . '' A source close to the negotiations said : `` Is n't that the EU wanting their cake and eating it ? They say 'You Brits are out of this , this , this and this , but then they say 'we want the UK to work together ' . '' Tim Cross , a retired Major General , accused Mr Barnier of driving a `` fear agenda '' while Gwythian Prins , emeritus research professor at the London School of Economics and a member of the Veterans For Britain campaign group , said : `` All of the examples that he has outlined are not benefits . `` They are all entanglements . They are things that have impeded the best use of our defence establishment and funding . '' He added that `` the primary alliances that matter to the UK '' were Nato and the Five Eyes intelligence partnership with Canada , New Zealand , Australia and the United States , and not EU institutions . `` It 's a very good illustration of how far out of touch these people in the Brussels bubble are , '' he said .
Push for powers to fine Britain for EU law infringements after leaving ; The road to Brexit
EU NEGOTIATORS want to be able to impose huge fines on Britain for breaking European laws for years after Brexit , it has emerged . The European Commission believes the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) should have the power to rule on British infringements of EU laws that occurred at any time before the March 2019 withdrawal , and to levy financial penalties . This attitude is a further hurdle for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who returns to Brussels today for his second round of face-to-face negotiations . According to EU negotiating papers , the European Commission , leading the talks for the EU , wants the ECJ to be able to hear a case if `` facts relating '' to it occurred at any point before Brexit day . EU officials have put no statute of limitations on potential lawsuits . Bart Van Vooren , an associate lawyer in the Brussels office of the global law firm Covington and Burling , said : `` The way that infringement proceedings are brought is very much under the discretion of the commission ... and they are extremely politicised . '' Mr Van Vooren said there would be huge fallout in bringing a case after Brexit . `` But never say never , '' he added . There are currently 84 infringement proceedings against Britain , at different stages . The average duration of the cases is 36.9 months , according to commission figures . Ending the supremacy of the ECJ over British law is a red line for the UK government in the negotiations . After Brexit , the UK would no longer have any British judges in the court . A Government spokesman said : `` It would be impossible to predict how long the ECJ would continue to issue judgments in respect of the United Kingdom . That is not in our interests . '' He added that the UK was clear the ECJ could only rule on `` pending '' cases that were referred to it before Brexit day . But there is no agreed UK-EU definition on when a case is `` pending '' . Mr Van Vooren said the EU would compromise on its current stance . `` This is a maximalist position , '' he said , `` When you ask for a salary increase , you do n't begin by asking for just ( EURO ) 100 more - you go bigger than that . '' The Government spokesman pointed out that the ECJ had never fined the UK for non-compliance with EU law . The court 's role will come up during today 's talks between David Davis and his opposite number Michel Barnier , as the EU wants the rights of its citizens in the UK after Brexit to be guaranteed by the European court . Britain insists these rights will be guaranteed under UK law and in the withdrawal agreement , which will be binding under international law and immune from parliamentary tampering . Mr Davis will tell Mr Barnier that the UK has made good progress since they met a month ago , by introducing the Great Repeal Bill into Parliament , and will make citizens ' rights his personal priority for the talks . Ahead of the negotiations , he said : `` Protecting the rights of all our citizens is the priority for me going into this round and I 'm clear that it 's something we must make real progress on . '' Meanwhile , Fabian Picardo , Gibraltar 's chief minister , said he has received `` cast-iron assurances '' from Mr Davis that the territory will not be excluded from any agreement to secure a better post-Brexit trade deal by the EU and Spain ; a scenario that Mr Picardo warned would be a `` failure '' by the UK negotiating team . Tim Cullen : Page 16 Talks timetable Divorce bill on the agenda Monday : David Davis , Brexit Secretary , will travel to Brussels to appear alongside Michel Barnier , the European Union 's chief Brexit negotiator , to formally kick off the second round of exit talks . Monday to Wednesday : UK and EU officials will engage in a series of `` working groups '' , each of which will focus on a specific issue related to Brexit . One will look at resolving the issue of what happens to EU citizens living in Britain after the date of departure , another will examine the thorny issue of the so-called `` Brexit bill '' and another will centre on the Northern Irish border . Negotiations are expected to be most difficult on the issue of the UK 's divorce payment . Officials will seek to find common ground and identify areas of difficulty . Thursday : Mr Davis will return to Brussels to take part in more talks to find solutions to contentious issues . Then : A round of talks will take place every month until October when both sides hope to have finalised the terms of Britain 's exit from the EU . Negotiations will then shift to focus on the UK 's future trading arrangements with the bloc . It is hoped a deal can be reached by summer 2018 so that there is time for the deal to be ratified by both sides by March 2019 - the date of Brexit .
Scotland Mr Glum 's view on Brexit ? Oh , all right then ; Sketch h
If I had to choose a single word to describe Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow secretary of state for Brexit , it would be this . Defeated . He looks defeated . He sounds defeated . Each speech , and each interview , feels like one long heavy sigh of defeat . Perhaps , behind closed doors , he 's different . Perhaps , away from the cameras , he thrums with vigour and verve . Perhaps , among friends , family and his closest colleagues , he is a sunbeam in human form , a ceaseless , soul-nourishing source of energy , joy and inspiration . But not in public . In public , he radiates all the hope and optimism of a punctured bouncy castle . Yesterday , Sir Keir dragged himself to a conference hall near Parliament to set out Labour 's position on Brexit . Aside from glum , it was fairly long and dull , so let me summarise it . Labour 's position on Brexit is essentially : `` Oh , all right then . `` No Labour MP would ever put it like that . But - underneath all the noblesounding waffle about `` respecting the result '' - that 's what it amounts to . `` Oh , all right then . You win . We told you Brexit was a bad idea . We still think it 's a bad idea . But a lot of us are in seats that voted Leave , and we 're scared , and confused , and our leader is useless , and our support is collapsing before our eyes , and we do n't know what else to do . So , in the extremely unlikely event that you let us form a government on June 9 , we 'll give you your precious Brexit . But , just so you understand : the Brexit we 'd negotiate would be as close as we could possibly get to staying in the EU . '' That 's how Labour 's message came across . They are , however , prepared to make one big concession - although not with any obvious enthusiasm . `` We have to be honest enough , '' sighed Sir Keir , `` to accept that the referendum result was largely a result of concerns about freedom of movement . We have to listen to what people are telling us about immigration . '' Because the truth , he groaned , was that Labour could n't `` rub out what 's happened '' . And , sometimes , `` you have to make choices about how you react to something you did n't want to happen . I did n't want us to leave . The Labour party campaigned to leave . But ... '' That was a slip , of course . The Labour party campaigned to remain . But with Jeremy Corbyn in charge , I admit it was sometimes difficult to tell . What a state they 're in now , though . Backing Brexit , but in the most reluctant manner possible . Which means that if Brexit goes well , they 'll get none of the credit . And if it goes badly , what are they going to say ? `` Yeah , we thought this would happen . But we went along with it anyway . '' 'Sometimes , you have to make choices about how you react to something you did n't want to happen '
May dares rebels to defy her on Brexit ; EU date to be set in law as PM shores up Eurosceptics in Cabinet with Mordaunt Customs union dilemma could put Good Friday Agreement in jeopardy
THERESA MAY today warns pro-European Tory rebels that she will not `` tolerate '' any attempts to undermine Brexit as she unveils plans to enshrine in law the date that Britain leaves the EU . The Government last night tabled an amendment to commit Britain formally to leaving the European Union at 11pm on March 29 2019 ahead of a debate and vote in the Commons next week . The amendment will effectively force pro-European MPs to declare publicly if they oppose leaving the EU in March 2019 . Writing in The Daily Telegraph , the Prime Minister warns MPs that they must not use the passage of the EU Withdrawal Bill through Parliament over the next month to try to `` slow down or stop '' Brexit . The Prime Minister is also attempting to reassert her authority after losing two Cabinet ministers in the space of a week while Brexit talks with Brussels remain deadlocked with no signs of a breakthrough . She yesterday bowed to the demands of Eurosceptic Tory MPs by appointing Penny Mordaunt , a Brexit supporter who serves as a Royal Naval reservist , to replace Priti Patel as International Development Secretary . Mrs May says in her article : `` We will not tolerate attempts from any quarter to use the process of amendments to this Bill as a mechanism to try to block the democratic wishes of the British people by attempting to slow down or stop our departure from the European Union . `` The British people have been clear.Parliament itself voted for Article 50 - and for this bill at its second reading . We are leaving the European Union on March 29 2019 . '' She says that the Government 's amendment , which has cross-party backing , will set out in `` black and white '' that Britain will leave the EU . The comments will be seen as a direct challenge to Tory rebels , who have said that they are prepared to defeat the Government by siding with opposition parties to secure a legally-binding vote on the final Brexit deal . The UK will leave at 11pm - an hour earlier than previously thought - because the timing of Brexit under the terms of Article 50 is determined by Brussels . The Prime Minister says that while she is prepared to work with MPs to `` improve '' the bill , they must ultimately `` come together '' and help single market and the customs union , which are `` necessary for North-South co-operation , the all-island economy and the protection of the Good Friday Agreement '' . The hardline Irish position , which was discussed at the EU 's Brexit working group ahead of yesterday 's talks , was described by a senior EU source as reflecting the `` state of play '' on the Irish question and reflected the `` guiding principles '' of the EU 's approach to the problem . The Telegraph understands that Dublin is demanding that Britain sign up to around 100 EU rules and regulations , including many covering customs and agriculture , in order to ensure an open trade border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland . Dublin 's demands present an apparently impossible dilemma to London , requiring either the UK remains in the EU Customs Union and accepts the rules for the entire UK , or gives Northern Ireland special status in the EU that would undermine the territorial integrity of the UK . British officials have warned that any attempt to create a `` special status '' for Northern Ireland would have a potentially catastrophic destabilising effect on the Good Friday Agreement , pitting Unionists and Nationalists against each other . In August , the UK proposed creating an invisible border that would use technology to create as `` frictionless and seamless a border as possible '' , but the proposals were swiftly dismissed as `` magical thinking '' by senior EU officials . The Irish pushback comes at a crucial moment in the Brexit process , which is deadlocked over the Brexit bill , but now risks foundering or being delayed afresh over the question of Northern Ireland . A second EU source said that Dublin was `` pulling the levers '' and had decided to use tensions over the bill as the moment to `` exert maximum leverage '' and extract concessions from the UK . `` Dublin sees their leverage point is now , as Britain fights to get a 'sufficient progress ' designation , not in phase two , '' the source added . The gambit comes just days after James Brokenshire , the Northern Ireland Secretary , travelled to Brussels , and appeared to dismiss the Irish position , telling a seminar that it was `` difficult to imagine how Northern Ireland could somehow remain 'in ' [ the EU ] '' .
This result has put the Brexit process in peril
We won the Brexit referendum through a genuine cross-party campaign . The message was clear : Brexit is not about Left or Right , but right or wrong , and this message brought together people who had previously fought against each other in election contests . But Theresa May used this general election to try to turn the Tory party into the standard-bearers of Brexit , with the aim of wiping out Ukip , despite being a Remain supporter when the crunch came last year . What she misread is that many Ukip voters had come across from Labour . They wanted to hear more than just Brexit , they wanted a message of change . Something that the `` strong and stable '' line simply did n't deliver in any way . Once Jeremy Corbyn had said he would leave the EU and that free movement of people would come to an end , he began to be seen as an equal option to Mrs May . Mrs May lost the ensuing personality contest . Frankly , she was useless . But what particularly worried me , as the results poured in , were comments made not by her , but by David Davis . At 2:30am , as the election picture began to emerge , he suggested Britain might not leave the single market and the customs union after all . If the only cabinet minister I thought might hold the Brexit line is backsliding , then the prospects are grim . There is no doubt that Mrs May , as a severely weakened prime minister , will now be treated as a joke in Brussels . Her speech yesterday afternoon outside Downing Street bordered on the delusional , with virtually no recognition of the fact that the British people had failed to deliver her a mandate to negotiate Brexit . I have no doubt that the champagne corks have been popping in Brussels and that Jean-Claude Juncker 's mood is buoyed . As we enter tough negotiations , the Prime Minister is now vulnerable to her own eurofanatics keen to inflict Commons defeats . That is a tragedy . Before this election , nearly 70 per cent of Britons had a settled view that Brexit should happen whether they had voted for it or not . The country had largely come together and was looking ahead to an independent , self-governing future . But Mrs May 's gamble has now reinvigorated a political class which never believed in Brexit . This is because she never did either , as became clear during the course of the campaign . When asked four times by Jeremy Paxman whether as a Remain voter she had changed her mind , she could only mouth : `` I am following the will of the people . '' Do not underestimate the strength of opinion among Brexit voters following all of this . They will be furious if we stay in the single market and the customs union , and if we keep paying money into a club whose courts can overrule ours . This unnecessary election has imperilled a Brexit process that seemed to have passed the point of no-return . So Ukip , which yesterday was considered irrelevant by voters who judged that the party had done its job , suddenly has brighter prospects . It is , however , in need of serious reform . It is run by a bunch of amateur volunteers elected virtually at random on to a governing National Executive Committee ( NEC ) . The last NEC election saw 92 candidates vying for six places . You may as well play the child 's game of pin the tail on the donkey . All professional campaigning structures have evaporated and the leader is simply not allowed to lead . In January 2016 , for example , I opposed putting Neil Hamilton at the top of the proportional representation list for the Welsh Assembly , but was outvoted . I urged sanctions against Douglas Carswell , who was clearly working against us , but was outvoted . From early 2016 until the referendum campaign , I had to campaign on my own , without working with the official party structures . If I , backed by considerable public support , was unable to lead the party , then we have a real problem . As I ponder whether to stand for leader again , I have to ask myself : `` Is Ukip capable of serious reform ? '' If it is , it could become far bigger in the next general election than it has ever been before . The party of `` fruitcakes and loonies '' , as David Cameron famously dismissed it , achieved national victory in the European elections of 2014 ; backsliding on Brexit could see it or a successor reach even greater highs . The little people spoke on June 23 2016 . If necessary they will speak again with an even louder voice .
Remainers 'paying lip service ' to Brexit vote ; Davis attacks Labour MPs in bitter Commons debate as timetable for triggering Article 50 is approved
DAVID DAVIS has accused europhile MPs of paying `` lip service '' to Brexit while doing `` everything they can '' to stop it . The Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union committed to producing a `` strategic plan '' for Brexit before triggering Article 50 and formally beginning Brexit negotiations . However he said the Government would not do anything that might `` jeopardise our negotiating position '' as he warned that a second referendum would be `` destructive '' to negotiations . Mr Davis spoke as MPs embarked on six hours of debate before waving through Theresa May 's plans to trigger Brexit by the end of March next year . More than 40 MPs spoke in the debate , which revealed bitter divisions in the Labour Party over migration and saw Tory MPs trade insults with one another on the floor of the Commons . MPs voted overwhelmingly in favour of the Government 's Brexit timetable , in a motion that also committed the Government to revealing details about its plans . However a hardcore group of pro-Remain Labour MPs voted against the motion , despite the fact it was first tabled by leader Jeremy Corbyn and largely accepted by the Government . Mr Davis said : `` Many on the benches opposite pay lip service to respecting the result of the referendum , while at the same time trying to find new ways to thwart and delay . `` The shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respects the will of the people . Today we will see whether they are prepared to back Britain , support our plan to follow the instructions of the British people and leave the European Union . '' Government 'on notice ' Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , called the Government 's decision to give more information about its plans for leaving the EU a `` victory '' . He claimed that he did not want to `` frustrate or delay '' Brexit , only to demand that the Government must spell out its plans on the Single Market , transition and the Customs Union . He said he was putting ministers `` on notice '' that Labour would try to write its own plans for Brexit into law unless ministers disclosed more information . While Labour 's official position was to back the Government 's amendment to invoke Article 50 by March next year , many of its MPs chose to rebel . 'Democratic outrage ' Twenty-three Labour MPs voted against the motion , warning that it would enable ministers to push ahead with Brexit without giving away any more detail about their plans . Ben Bradshaw , a Labour MP , said : `` It in effect gives a blank cheque for us to invoke Article 50 by March without any of us being any the wiser about the Government 's intentions today . '' Mike Gapes , another Labour MP , said the Government 's amendment was a `` democratic outrage '' . Heidi Alexander said she supported a second referendum on the terms of leaving the EU as she condemned the Government 's `` arbitrary '' timetable . Labour divide on migration Ms Alexander said Britain needed immigration because it is `` not having enough babies '' . She said : `` I am a 41-year-old woman without children . `` Babies grow up to become taxpayers . Who will be contributing to my pension and my care ? The answer is migrants and their children . '' By contrast Andy Burnham , Labour 's candidate for the Manchester mayorality , criticised the party 's `` paralysis '' over migration . `` Reluctance to confront this debate is undermining the cohesion of our communities and the safety of our streets , '' he said . `` I am no longer prepared to be complicit in that . '' It comes after Mr Corbyn suggested at Labour 's conference last year that he favoured uncontrolled immigration . Tory MPs trade blows Leading europhile Conservative MPs came out in force during the debate , but Ken Clarke was the only member of the party to oppose the amendment . The former Tory chancellor said Mrs May 's Brexit plan was `` extremely vague '' as he called for a White Paper . He mocked the suggestion that she wanted a `` red , white and blue '' Brexit as he questioned whether the Government had a plan at all . Peter Bone , a eurosceptic MP , attacked Anna Soubry , a leading Remain campaigner and former employment minister . He said she `` had no time for this place '' while in government but is suddenly a `` great '' supporter of parliamentary sovereignty . Ms Soubry said she and her colleagues were `` sick and tired '' of the abuse directed at them as she warned that many young people felt `` the older generation has stolen their future '' . She said she was prepared to back Brexit but warned the Prime Minister against playing `` silly games '' , adding that she must publish a White Paper . Remain is 'full of anger ' Eurosceptic Tory MPs set out some red lines of their own . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader , said he would rather stay in the EU than leave and remain part of the Customs Union . He said : `` It seems completely pointless to me to actually embroil ourselves on the Customs Union , go through all this rigmarole of arguments and debates and rows , only to find at the end of the day there is no jewel in the crown at the end . '' Michael Gove , a former chief whip , said Remain campaigners look back in `` anger , remorse and regret '' . MPs who voted against Ken Clarke the only Conservative rebel ? Tory ( 1 ) : Ken Clarke ? Labour ( 23 ) : Rushanara Ali , Graham Allen , Ben Bradshaw , Ann Coffey , Neil Coyle , Stella Creasy , Geraint Davies , Jim Dowd , Louise Ellman , Chris Evans , Paul Farrelly , Mike Gapes , Helen Hayes , Meg Hillier , Peter Kyle , David Lammy , Chris Leslie , Ian Murray , Barry Sheerman , Tulip Siddiq , Angela Smith , Catherine West , Daniel Zeichner ? Liberal Democrats ( 5 ) : Alistair Carmichael , Nick Clegg , Tim Farron , Sarah Olney , Mark Williams ? Green Party ( 1 ) : Caroline Lucas ? SDLP ( 3 ) : Mark Durkam , Alasdair McDonnell , Margaret Ritchie ? Independent ( 2 ) : Natalie McGarry , Michelle Thomson ? Plaid Cymru ( 3 ) : Jonathan Edwards , Liz Saville-Roberts , Hywel Williams ? SNP ( 51 ) : Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh , Hannah Bardel , Mhairi Black , Ian Blackford , Kirsty Blackman , Philip Boswell , Deidre Brock , Alan Brown , Lisa Cameron , Doug Chapman , Joanna Cherry , Ronnie Cowan , Angela Crawley , Martyn Day , Martin Docherty , Stuart Donaldson , Marion Fellows , Margaret Ferrier , Stephen Gethins , Patricia Gibson , Patrick Grady , Peter Grant , Neil Gray , Drew Hendry , Stewart Hosie , George Kerevan , Calum Kerr , Chris Law , John McNally , Angus MacNeil , Stuart McDonald , Callum McCaig , Anne McLaughlin , Carol Monaghan , Paul Monaghan , Roger Mullin , Gavin Newlands , John Nicolson , Brendan O'Hara , Kirsten Oswald , Steven Paterson , Angus Robertson , Alex Salmond , Tommy Sheppard , Chris Stephens , Alison Thewliss , Michael Weir , Eilidh Whiteford , Philippa Whitford , Corri Wilson , Peter Wishart 'The shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respects the will of the people '
Cheer up : a Brexit would help British GDP
As Lenin famously put it , a lie told often enough becomes the truth . For some in the City , Brexit is a bit like bad weather , or major sporting tournaments : a convenient excuse for businesses facing a tough time . Of course , bad weather can depress a retailer 's sales and football games can distract workers - but four times out of five , such `` explanations '' are merely trotted out to camouflage deeper , more genuine problems . The same is true of the uncertainty surrounding a possible Brexit : some investors are doubtless waiting for the results before they allocate capital . So Brexit jitters will be having some , marginal impact on the economy , in the same way that some transactions were doubtless delayed by a few weeks before last year 's election . But most of what 's happening in the economy has nothing to do with our national debate about the European Union . The top of the housing market has primarily been affected by a sharp hike in stamp duty and reduced demand from emerging market buyers . Banks are laying staff off because higher capital requirements and rock-bottom interest rates have hurt their business models , and there has been a global downturn in capital markets activity . It is true , though , that some companies have started to believe their own scare stories about what would happen were we to quit the EU and have put some projects on hold . More fool them : the UK will be fine regardless of how we vote , but unfortunately this will have a small impact on overall GDP . It is time to nail one myth , however : the idea that there has been no serious economic analysis suggesting that we would be better off outside of the EU . That is n't so : most economists are pro-Remain , but there has been some excellent - and in my view - far more persuasive work on the Brexit side . Five reports in particular stand out , but there have also been others , as well as various analyses of our post-Brexit trading options . Open Europe has published a range of estimates of the economic effects of Brexit . Its comprehensive analysis suggests that we could be anywhere between 1.6pc better off and 2.2pc worse off . The good scenario is contingent on striking lots of free trade deals around the world and deregulating the economy ; the bad one if we fail to keep trade liberal and if we were to embrace protectionism . In my view , the first scenario would be by far the likeliest ; Open Europe 's analysis was much more balanced and sensible than the Treasury 's . The Centre for Economics and Business Research has also published a nuanced report on the matter . It believes that there would be a shortterm hit from Brexit , lasting maybe two years , and sterling would fall 10pc to 15pc - but once the business community got used to the new arrangements , the lower exchange rate would help attract foreign investment and `` most of the lost GDP would be recovered and quite likely the economy would settle on a slightly faster growth path '' . By 2030 , GDP would be higher than it was if we remained in the EU , though as ever the result is contingent on striking trade deals and remaining an open , promigration economy . Andrew Lilico of Europe Economics , who also backs Brexit , has pointed out there are many more such studies . The one published by the Mayor of London 's economists ( led by the excellent Gerard Lyons ) argued cogently that Brexit would enhance our economy compared with staying in the unreformed EU delivered by the Prime Minister . As to Capital Economics , run by our columnist Roger Bootle , its study commissioned by Woodford Investment Management argued that Brexit would n't have much of a net effect on the economy 's performance . Capital Economics expect us to continue to outperform the rest of the EU either way . Another fascinating approach is that of Patrick Minford in the new edition of `` Should Britain leave the EU ? Economic analysis of a troubled relationship '' : his cost benefit analysis using a general equilibrium model suggests that we would be massively better off if we left the EU and declared unilateral free trade . Our consumers waste 4pc of GDP on excessive costs because of EU protectionism , and we would benefit greatly from deregulation also . Last but not least , the Change or Go report from Business for Britain serialised in this newspaper contained much excellent analysis . It is untrue that there are no serious economic studies that support the Brexit case . We need more , of course . But in the meantime take the pro-EU doom-mongers with a bucket of salt . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk 'It is untrue there are no serious economic studies that support the Brexit case '
Brexit Big Band might not be music to taxpayers ' ears
IF BREXIT negotiations were not painful enough , an experimental musician funded by the taxpayer has set Article 50 to music . Matthew Herbert 's Brexit Big Band has been given a share of a £182,000 grant , paid for by the Department for International Trade , to bankroll a tour of Europe . The tour is designed to heal any rifts caused by Brexit and will culminate in the release of an album in March 2019 to coincide with the day Britain formally leaves the European Union . Mr Herbert 's Brexit Big Band project was launched earlier this year and he has already set the words of Article 50 to music and played the `` gently swinging number '' to a devoted audience at the Barbican theatre in London . Another number involved ripping up hundreds of copies of the Daily Mail , giving the effect of a drumbeat . The Department for International Trade , presided over by Dr Liam Fox , a Brexit supporter , said the cash given to Mr Herbert , who opposes Brexit , was part of a £181,944 award divided among 12 artists to help them `` achieve success as international artists '' .
May : It is EU 's duty to agree a Brexit deal ; PM to lay out 'bold new economic and secuity partnership ' in crucial speechPM to highlight Britain 's strengths in key speech
THERESA MAY will today tell European Union leaders that they share a `` profound sense of responsibility '' to forge a Brexit deal for the benefit of those who `` inherit the world we leave them '' . The Prime Minister will use a speech in Florence to tell European negotiators and heads of state that `` the eyes of the world are upon us '' and that they must use imagination to make a success of `` this chapter of our European history '' . Employing positive rhetoric that evokes Boris Johnson 's intervention in The Daily Telegraph last week , Mrs May will insist that `` the future is bright '' as she sets out her vision of Britain 's post-Brexit relationship with Europe . Downing Street said the speech - her most significant on Brexit since January - would include a blueprint for a `` bold new economic and security partnership '' and set out plans for a timelimited implementation period , offering `` certainty and clarity to businesses and citizens '' . The speech will contain no concrete offer on the Brexit bill , only an initial promise that Britain will continue to pay into EU funds during a two-year transition period - a sum likely to be around £20billion . Although EU negotiators will continue to demand more , Mrs May will reassure them that no EU member state will have to pay more to Brussels before 2020 as a result of Brexit . Downing Street said the Florence speech would build on the vision Mrs May set out at Lancaster House in London in January , detailing a bright future for both the UK and the EU . She is expected to say that if they can make a success of Brexit , `` then when this chapter of our European history is written , it will be remembered not for the differences we faced , but for the vision we showed ; not for the challenges we endured but for the creativity we used to overcome them ; not for a relationship that ended but a new partnership that began . While the UK 's departure from the EU is inevitably a difficult process , it is in all of our interests for our negotiations to succeed ... so I believe we share a profound sense of responsibility to make this change work smoothly and sensibly , not just for people today but for the next generation '' . Mrs May will also highlight Britain 's strengths such as its legal system , openness to investment , ease of doing business and its universities and research . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , used a speech in Rome yesterday to pile pressure on Mrs May , saying that `` settling accounts '' with the EU - in other words agreeing the so-called `` divorce bill '' - is the only way to `` build trust '' as Brexit talks continue . Mr Barnier also said there was `` only one year left '' to seal a deal , adding : `` I 'm wondering why - beyond the progress we 've made on certain points - there is still today major uncertainty on each of the key issues of the first phase . '' However , he struck a note of optimism by quoting the Florentine politician Niccolò Machiavelli - one of history 's great plotters - by using the phrase : `` Where the willingness is great , the difficulties can not be great . '' Meanwhile in Ireland Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's Brexit co-ordinator , criticised Boris Johnson over comments he made in his Telegraph essay on Brexit last Saturday , calling him `` old-fashioned '' . The Telegraph understands that Mrs May is unlikely to repeat her claim that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' as she accepts the phrase has been counterproductive . The Cabinet is yet to agree on the exact length of the transition period .
Scotland Ministers prepare for snap election ; Cabinet discusses spring vote after Tory MP quits to leave May facing battle for Brexit ; May will win by landslide if election repeats Brexit vote
MINISTERS are preparing for an early general election after the first Conservative MP resigned in protest at Theresa May 's handling of Brexit . The prospect of the Prime Minister being forced to call a national vote in order to deliver Brexit is now being `` openly discussed '' by ministers , senior sources said . It came after Stephen Phillips , the Leave-supporting MP for Sleaford and North Hykeham , brought about a byelection , saying that he had `` irreconcilable policy differences with the current government '' . Mr Phillips said that he was resigning because Mrs May had failed to `` appreciate the constitutional necessity '' of consulting Parliament before invoking Article 50 , which begins formal Brexit negotiations with Brussels . It prompted fears that Europhile Tories who oppose Brexit could follow him and trigger their own by-elections to pile further pressure on Mrs May . The Prime Minister is facing a battle to deliver Brexit after three high court judges ruled on Thursday that Britain 's departure from the EU can not take place without a parliamentary vote . Mrs May is now fighting on several fronts , with battles against the courts , MPs who are demanding an early election , peers who are threatening to water down her Brexit plans and Europe-an leaders who say Britain will not find any concessions during negotiations to leave the EU . But it is the prospect of an early election which now looms largest . Ministers believe Mrs May needs to win a mandate from the country to deliver a `` hard Brexit '' . One member of the Government said ministers were discussing whether Mrs May will go to the country early in the spring . He said : `` The problem we have Continued on Page 5 Reports : Pages 4-7 Charles Moore : Page 20 Editorial Comment : Page 21 Continued from Page 1 got is we have a Brexit majority in the country and a Remain majority in Parliament . I had believed until this week , that we would be able to avoid an early election . Given this court judgment , and the likelihood that we wo n't win the appeal , and given the intransigence in the Lords particularly , I am now openminded to an early election , as many colleagues are . '' Another member of the Government added : `` If I were the Prime Minister I would go for it , but I do n't think her natural caution is going to allow her to do that . '' Another minister said that Mrs May and her senior advisers were `` not minded '' to call an election , despite the growing pressure . `` All of her inclination is not to call an election , '' the minister said . `` She 's only just got in the job . People who have just got a job that they wanted for a long time do n't want to re-apply for it . '' An analysis of the Brexit referendum has found that Mrs May would win a `` landslide '' if the June result was replicated across the country 's constituencies . With some polls suggesting that a narrow majority of voters would now support remaining in the EU , it has been argued that Mrs May would not win an overwhelming victory against Jeremy Corbyn if she went to the country . She has a slim Commons majority of just 14 . However , analysis found that if the referendum result is replicated using the 2015 general election boundaries , Leave would win 421 seats and Remain would win just 229 . If voters cast their ballot on this basis , Labour and the Liberal Democrats could struggle while the Conservatives and Ukip would be likely to boost their share of the vote . Analysis by the University of East Anglia suggests that 150 of Labour 's current seats voted to leave while 82 backed staying inside the union , the party 's official position . For the Conservatives , 258 constituencies voted Leave , while just 72 backed Remain . Meanwhile , peers and MPs including Nick Clegg , yesterday openly said that they are now plotting to delay or even block Brexit . They plan to amend a Bill that Mrs May will be forced to bring before both the Commons and Lords if the Government loses an appeal against the ruling at the Supreme Court . The Prime Minister remained defiant and told Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , and Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , she believes she will win the Supreme Court appeal and be able to trigger Article 50 by the end of March next year . However , just after 11am yesterday she was dealt another blow when Mr Phillips resigned as a Conservative MP because of the Government 's refusal to discuss its Brexit plans in Parliament . Ministers and allies of Mrs May last night dismissed Mr Phillips as a `` loner '' and said he was `` incandescent '' when overlooked for the role of Attorney General despite his legal qualifications . One source said the resignation was `` contrived '' and that he `` simply wants to go and earn more money '' . Mr Phillips did not inform No10 that he was intending to quit . In a resignation letter to his local constituency association , he criticised the Government 's failure to `` properly consult Parliament '' over Brexit . He also accused the Government of `` shirking '' its `` responsibility for unaccompanied child refugees '' . Nigel Farage has ruled out a political comeback by fighting the Sleaford and North Hykeham by-election . He told The Daily Telegraph he was `` not interested '' in standing . The decision would appear to leave the way open for leadership hopeful Suzanne Evans to put her name forward as a Ukip candidate . 421 vs 229 How Leave would overwhelm Remain in number of seats if a general election replicated the Brexit referendum result
Telegraph readers back Brexit and Johnson as next Tory leader ; Sovereignty key concern for readers backing Brexit
MORE than two thirds of subscribers to The Daily Telegraph will vote for Britain to leave the European Union , according to a survey . A survey of nearly 19,000 subscribers found that 69 per cent were intending to back Brexit at the June 23 referendum . Respondents also overwhelmingly backed Boris Johnson to become the next leader of the Conservative Party , with 42 per cent saying they would `` prefer '' him to succeed David Cameron . Michael Gove , the Justice Secretary , who is backing Brexit , is in second place on 16 per cent of the vote , while Theresa May is in third place on 13 per cent of the vote . George Osborne is trailing on just 8 per cent . The survey also found that 94 per cent will `` definitely vote '' in the EU referendum . Of those , 86 per cent said that they had already decided how they would vote , with 13 per cent yet to make up their minds . Among all age groups surveyed , the majority of people said they would back a Leave vote . Of those aged between 18 and 44 , 58 per cent said they would vote for Brexit , and 42 per cent would back the Remain campaign . Of those Continued on Page 8 Continued from Page 1 subscribers aged between 45 and 64 , 67 per cent favoured Brexit and 32 per cent backed Remain . People over the age of 65 overwhelmingly backed Brexit , with 75 per cent saying they would `` vote to leave the EU . Questioned about the key issues in- fluencing their decision , 71 per cent said that `` sovereignty of the British Parliament '' was key to determining their position ahead of the vote . Of those surveyed , 57 per cent said `` security '' was a key issue , 51 per cent cited `` immigration '' , 41 per cent said `` trade policy '' and 40 per cent identi- fied Britain 's `` ability to influence the EU '' . Mr Johnson is the clear favourite to become the next Conservative Party . leader Among all age groups surveyed . Male subscribers are slightly more likely to back Mr Johnson , with 44 per cent saying they would `` prefer '' him to be the next party leader , compared with 39 per cent of female subscribers . Although Mrs May trails just behind Mr Gove among all subscribers , she is marginally more popular that the Justice Secretaryamong female voters . Of the women surveyed , 17 per cent said that they backed Mrs May , compared with 16 per cent who said that they supported Mr Gove . Mr Cameron has said he will serve a full second term before stepping down as Prime Minister . However , many Conservative MPs believe he will have to bring forward his departure after the referendum , regardless of the result . More than 50 MPs are expected to table a vote of no confidence in Mr Cameron even if Britain votes to stay in the EU . They are angry at the way Mr Cameron has conducted the referendum campaign and believe he has made it an `` unfair fight '' by using government resources to make the case for a Remain vote . ? ? David Cameron 's failure to meet the Government 's migration targets is a `` crime '' , Boris Johnson has said . Mr Johnson said all Tory MPs were `` convicted of the same crime '' after standing on a `` no ifs , no buts '' election platform that pledged to bring net migration to below 100,000 . Last month official figures revealed net migration had risen to the second highest level on record .
Find your voice and kill off Brexit , Blair tells MPs ; Kill Brexit if you see a better way , says Blair
TONY BLAIR , who called on MPs and ministers to rise up against Brexit on the eve of a vital Commons vote , was branded `` beyond parody '' for demanding tougher controls on migration yesterday . The former Labour prime minister told politicians to `` find the leadership within yourself `` ahead of the Brexit debate in Parliament and offer voters an alternative to leaving . He claimed people wanted a new party that considers broader issues and not just the decision to leave the EU , fuelling claims he is on the verge of setting one up himself . However , he was branded a hypocrite by ministers for calling for tighter immigration rules after he failed to set limits when in office - something his own report concluded contributed to the vote to leave . Speaking on the BBC 's Andrew Marr Show , Mr Blair , whose think tank came up with the plan to curb migration over the weekend , said politicians should show leadership and resist the urge to support the Government 's Brexit plan at every turn . He said : `` If you believe there is a better way through ... there are better ways of dealing with the country 's problems than Brexit , then at least try and explain that to the country . `` find the leadership within yourself `` to say to people there is a different and better way . What I 'm saying to those in positions of political leadership and those members of Parliament at the moment is guys , this is not an ordinary decision , so make this one where you 're prepared to go out and if you think that there is a different and better way , put it before people and argue for it . '' His plea came on the eve of what will be a difficult few days for the Government as it attempts to get the EU Withdrawal Bill through its first stage in the House of Commons . Labour is planning to oppose the bill , which seeks to transpose EU law onto UK statute books , amid concerns about how much power ministers will be given . However , Ken Clarke , the most ardent opponent of Brexit on the Tory benches , claimed it was `` hopeless '' to expect that Brexit could be reversed . He told Sky News that the country was set on leaving and opposition was a waste of time . And Sir Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , called Mr Blair a hypocrite , accusing him of being responsible for high levels of EU migration in the first place . Brandon Lewis , the Immigration Minister , tweeted : `` Comments by Tony Blair this weekend are beyond parody in light of his actions as PM . '' But Mr Blair refused to apologise and said the country had changed as a result of the economic crash , leading to a need for tighter controls . Writing in The Sunday Times , he said : `` Intelligent politics takes account of such change . '' He called on Jeremy Corbyn to oppose leaving altogether and suggest alternative ways to address the concerns which led to the leave vote . Mr Blair also appeared to call for a second referendum , saying : `` This thing will go ahead unless it starts to become obvious that the public is having second thoughts . '' He added : `` Surely it 's a very common sense thing to say that we take our final irrevocable decision once we see what the alternative is . '' He did not rule out the formation of a new political party , saying : `` There is a huge amount of political energy out there in the country that is searching for a home . If the two main parties do n't give it a home it 's going to search for a different home . ''
US brewer applies for 'Brexit ' trademark
DAVID CAMERON could soon be drowning his sorrows in his local over a `` Brexit '' cider , after the American brewer behind Samuel Adams submitted a trademark application for the word . According to the United States Patent and Trademark Office , the Boston Brewing Company filed an application for the Brexit trademark on Friday , the day the surprise result of the EU referendum was announced . The brief filing says the application relates to `` hard cider '' . Talk of the UK 's looming secession from the EU has dominated Westminster , trading floors across the City , and homes and businesses up and down the country . Britons ' surprise decision to vote for Brexit prompted Mr Cameron 's shock resignation on Friday , and has sparked a political crisis . The ramifications of the referendum are likely to last for years , if not decades . If the Boston Brewing Company has its way , politicians and traders exhausted from dealing with the implications of Brexit will one day be able to lift their spirits by downing a Brexit too . The Boston-based company plotting the cider is listed in the US and worth $ 2.1bn ( £1.6bn ) . Samuel Adams is its flagship brand , but it also produces Angry Orchard hard cider and Twisted Tea iced tea . It generated $ 966.5m in revenues last year and net profits of $ 90.7m . A spokesman for the company could not be reached for comment .
A second referendum would be a disaster ; Tories ' fragile Commons majority has energised Remainers determined to reverse Brexit
'The public have voted and I do think it 's seriously disrespectful and politically utterly counter-productive to say 'sorry guys , you 've got it wrong , we 're going to try again ' . '' So said Vince Cable in September 2016 . Since then , though , Cable has become Liberal Democrat leader . Now he 's pushing hard for a second referendum on European Union membership . Earlier this week , Cable 's party tried passing a Commons amendment to hold a referendum on the final Brexit agreement in December 2018 , vowing to campaign to stay in . The Liberal Democrats , it seems , are n't democrats at all . And they 're only ''liberal '' until the electorate makes a decision they oppose . Despite recent progress in negotiations , the campaign to reverse Brexit is still gathering pace . Run by ultra-Remain MPs and peers , it 's backed by big corporations which , benefiting from the status quo , are determined to maintain it . After pious claims about ''respecting the referendum '' , some now openly admit they want to upend the biggest vote in British history . ''First step towards defeating Brexit , '' tweeted Lord Adonis after the Government 's recent Commons defeat . These Brexit negotiations are tough . The self-serving Brussels bureaucracy is making it difficult for Britain to leave - to discourage others . But rocky departure talks do n't justify ignoring a ''once in a generation '' vote , won by a margin of 1.3 million people . ''This is your decision , '' said the Cameron government 's outrageously pro-Remain mailshot , sent to every UK household ahead of the June 2016 vote . ''The government will implement what you decide . '' In 2015 , Parliament voted by six-to-one to give the people the decision on the UK 's EU membership . After the referendum , in February 2017 , Parliament voted again , overwhelmingly , to implement Article 50 . In the June general election , the Conservatives and Labour both stood on a platform to leave the EU , including the single market and customs union . Between them , they won over 80 per cent of all votes . The two parties calling for a second referendum , the Liberal Democrats and Scottish Nationalists , both saw their vote share fall . But the Tories ' fragile Commons majority has energised those determined to reverse Brexit . Labour 's policy constantly changes , and currently amounts to doing or saying anything necessary to topple the Government . This week , deputy leader Tom Watson argued for a second referendum , just as Diane Abbott ruled it out . Amidst such chaos , some Remainers sense an opportunity . The scarier Brexit is made to look - the difficulties constantly exaggerated , the potential economic gains utterly ignored - the greater the chances the public can be railroaded into voting again . Then , with much of the political and media establishment on side , and masses of campaign cash , Brexit can be blocked . A second Brexit referendum , though , would be an economic and political disaster . If agreed , the UK 's Article 50 negotiations would be destroyed . The EU would have every incentive to offer the worst deal imaginable - ensuring the terms are rejected by the electorate , with Britain ( and our money ) then staying , exactly as Brussels wants . If , in contrast , the UK commits to leaving the single market and customs union with no question of a second referendum , there is a huge incentive for EU governments to strike agreeable trade terms , given the value of British markets to their exporters . The prospect of a second referendum would also seriously prolong business uncertainty , harming investment and jobs . If voters reject ''the deal '' , would there be another negotiation and yet another referendum ? The best of three , or five ? Our political system would become paralysed by splits , confusion and rancour . The ongoing uncertainty and instability would impact on financial markets , hitting sterling , equities and the broader business environment . And if Brexit is reversed , our subsequent EU membership would surely be on far worse terms - with no rebate and perhaps no opt-out from the dysfunctional single currency . What do the Brexit-blockers say about recent renewed calls from Germany 's Martin Schultz , now on course to share power with Angela Merkel , for ''a United States of Europe '' ? Be in no doubt , the drumbeat for a second EU referendum is getting louder . Tony Blair is on manoeuvres , as is Vince Cable 's predecessor Nick Clegg - who , since he lost his Commons seat last June , seems to be given more television airtime than ever . Early in 2018 , ultra-Remainers in the Lords will do their utmost to thwart Brexit . Those agitating for a second referendum must be called out , their arguments exposed as disastrous and anti-democratic . And ministers need to move the conversation on from the process of leaving to the outcome itself - presenting Brexit as what it is , an opportunity for national economic renewal . FOLLOW Liam Halligan on Twitter @ LiamHalligan ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Brexit is becoming a hostage to fortune BODY : If the Europeans are getting ready for the prospect of Jeremy Corbyn , so should Britain . We report today that EU officials are preparing themselves for a scenario in which it 's not a Tory government they have to negotiate with but a Labour one - a dystopian vision that would be bad for Brexit and bad for the country . What might seem at this moment like an internal Tory debate over the future of Theresa May could have long-term consequences . MPs and voters need to think those consequences through . Britain can not afford socialism . The Conservative Government can not afford to fail . Cool heads might say that little has changed . Yes , the Prime Minister 's speech was an embarrassment , but most people have reacted with sympathy . And , yes , Mr Corbyn had a confident conference , but he 's still Mr Corbyn . After two eventful weeks , YouGov puts Labour on 42 per cent in the polls and the Tories on 40 per cent . The Tories , believe it or not , have actually gone up one point . But this does n't mean British politics has found equilibrium . It means it is stuck on a knife edge . The Tories still have a thin parliamentary majority cobbled together with the DUP . If there were an election , the result could still go either way . Eurosceptics might ask : `` So what ? The negotiations will continue regardless of who leads the country . '' But the very fact that the EU is thinking ahead to a change of government highlights how much Brexit is a hostage to fortune . It was clear from the very start of negotiations that Britain wants to use talks to forge a free trade deal while the EU wants to squeeze some goodies out of us first . The British , being British , have generally been accommodating and practical . The Europeans have delayed and prevaricated and kicked up a stink in press conferences . Now they will exploit Mrs May 's bad week and any backbench plotting to insist that they ca n't even trust that the prime minister will be in office in a month 's time . It 's an old negotiating ploy : the reality is that the EU is in a considerably worse shape than Britain . Its economy is stagnating ; the French , incredibly , have called for more integration to fix it . As for political stability , the Germans do n't have a government yet , the Dutch have n't had one for several months and Catalonia is on the brink of a secession that would make Brexit look like a walk in the park . Nevertheless , there is no doubt that the quality of British political leadership will make a difference in regard to the quality of Brexit . Under Mrs May , Britain has already made concessions to the EU and there is obvious dispute between ministers over the transition period and the settlement to follow . This is n't a strong negotiating position . There must be clarity on Britain 's red lines . There must be clarity about the transition deal it is willing to sign . And there must be clarity about the kind of Britain to be built afterwards . Will we purchase access into the single market ? Surrender legal sovereignty to smooth things along ? Or cut the chord completely ? Europe is watching and planning ahead . Even if British politicians talk down a hard Brexit , German businesses are preparing for one . Britain needs a strong government to get the right Brexit . If the Tories collapse , Brexiteers should abandon any fantasies that Mr Corbyn could pick up the baton and do any better . His position on Europe is as concrete as jelly , his position on immigration or the European Court of Justice is as clear as mud . He would n't allow a proper vote on Brexit at his conference for the very good reason that he - a Marxist Eurosceptic - is at odds with most of his party over it . And even if Mr Corbyn was able to put together a novel governmental coalition of fanatics who love him and moderates who hate him , his domestic policies would doom the country . On top of any economic uncertainty caused by Brexit , he would add renationalisation and soaring taxes . Perhaps the most sobering news from his conference week was that the shadow chancellor is preparing for a run on the pound if Labour wins . Even the Left acknowledges that Corbynism is n't just an oldfashioned , socialist moral crusade . It 's a kamikaze mission . The success of Conservatism , the success of Brexit and the success of Britain are all entwined . That is why the next few days in Westminster are so important . It is n't good enough to adopt the `` muddling through '' perspective - to cross one 's fingers and hope that Labour remains stuck around 42 per cent and Brexit will go OK and the Tories can pull it all off in the end . That is not how politics works . Governments constantly have to make the case for themselves and to contrast their vision with that of their opponents . That is why the Tory party has to pull itself together and do what it failed to do at the election and failed to do at the conference : restore its authority . Catalonia is on the brink of a secession that would make Brexit look like a walk in the park It is n't good enough to cross one 's fingers and hope that Labour remains stuck around 42 per cent
Scotland Tusk says he 's a dreamer about Britain staying - but it looks like he 's the only one
DONALD TUSK yesterday invoked John Lennon as he said he `` dreams '' that Britain could still say in the European union . The president of the European Council said it is not `` impossible '' that Brexit could be abandoned , adding : `` You may say I 'm a dreamer , but I 'm not the only one . '' It came on the day that Theresa May made a `` fair and serious offer '' to give EU citizens living in the UK the right to stay permanently after Brexit and be treated like British citizens . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , said that as a committed Anglophile he `` hates Brexit from every possible angle '' . Mr Tusk said : `` You can hear different predictions coming from different people about the possible outcome of these negotiations - hard Brexit , soft Brexit or no deal . Some of my British friends have even asked me whether Brexit could be reversed and whether I could imagine an outcome where the UK stays part of the EU . I told them that , in fact , the European Union was built on dreams that seemed impossible to achieve . So , who knows . You may say I 'm a dreamer , but I 'm not the only one . '' However , he was almost immediately contradicted by other European leaders including Jean Claude-Juncker , the president of the European Commission , who said : `` In Europe I never have illusions because I do n't want to lose them . '' Charles Michel , the Belgian prime minister , said : `` I am not a dreamer . And I am not the only one . '' It came as Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , said that Brexit was less of a `` priority '' than the future of the European Union . She said : `` I want to say clearly that , for me , shaping the future for the 27 takes priority over the negotiations with Great Britain over withdrawal . Naturally we will conduct these negotiations quickly and we will conduct them intensively . We will do everything to ensure that - as has been successfully done so far - the 27 states stick together . `` We want this negotiation to take place in a good spirit . We know that we will want to work with Great Britain later . But the clear focus must be on the future of the 27 , so that we have the best results . '' Emmanuel Macron , the French president , said he preferred to talk about Europe 's ambitions and plans than get involved in `` discussions lasting days and nights on its dismantling '' . Mr Macron repeated his position that the door remains open for a U-turn on Brexit , but warned that it will be-come more difficult the longer talks between David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Michel Barnier , the EU negotiator , continue . `` The door is open until the moment you walk through it . It 's not up to me to say it 's closed , '' Mr Macron told The Guardian . Mr Rutte suggested that he respected the outcome of last year 's referendum , even if he regretted it . `` I am an Anglophile , '' said Mr Rutte . `` You are one of our most beloved partners , so I hate Brexit from every angle . But you ca n't argue with democracy . '' Arriving at the European Council summit for the first time since this month 's snap election left her in a weakened position at the head of a minority government , Mrs May insisted that talks on withdrawal had begun in a `` constructive '' way . `` What I am going to be setting out today is clearly how the United Kingdom proposes to protect the rights of EU citizens living in the UK and see the rights of UK citizens living in Europe protected , '' she said . `` That 's been an important issue . We 've wanted it to be one of the early issues to be considered in the negotiations . That is now the case . That work is starting . '' The Prime Minister also urged European leaders to put pressure on social media websites such as Whatsapp and Facebook to give security services access to encrypted messages so they can tackle terrorists . Mrs May called on the EU to help `` rid terrorist material from the internet in all our languages '' in the wake of the Manchester , London Bridge and Finsbury Park terror attacks . Speaking at the European Council she said that the terror threat is `` evolving quickly '' , highlighting the fact that in Manchester an improvised explosive device was used while in London the attacks involved vehicles and knives . She said that technology companies must `` fulfil their responsibilities '' and automatically remove extremist content instead of acting `` reactively '' once they are notified by users . She said that `` concerted pressure '' is needed to stop end-to-end encryption , where even the social media companies themselves can not access the content of messages . Mr Juncker yesterday hailed a new deal on EU defence co-operation which will see Europe sharing defence procurement and working together on small projects such as logistics and officer training . He said : `` What was started in 1954 is happening now ... I said this was 'the sleeping princess ' of the Lisbon Treaty . Well , the Princess is now awakening . ''
Johnson told by his deputy to stop 'playing games '
BORIS JOHNSON 'S deputy has told the Foreign Secretary to stop `` playing games '' and described claims by ministers that Brexit will be straightforward as `` knuckle-headed lunacy '' . Sir Alan Duncan , a Foreign Office minister , said he believes that getting a deal on Brexit will be `` fraught with difficulty '' and suggested that those who believe Brexit will be `` pain-free '' should not be in politics . His comments will be seen as an attack on Mr Johnson , who has presented one of the most optimistic visions of Brexit in government and said that the UK can `` have its cake and eat it '' . In the interview with the BBC 's Brexit Means Brexit programme , which is broadcast tonight , Sir Alan also issues a warning to Mr Johnson . On the election result , he says : `` It 's very easy to say , oh no , let 's get rid of her [ Theresa May ] , but it is very difficult to say , 'This is what should follow ' . `` So unless we risk having splits everywhere , complications , it does n't bear thinking about . Just be sensible , be steady , no plotting , no manoeuvring , make this work . '' Sir Alan added : `` He 's [ Boris Johnson ] got to resist the temptation to play games . He must n't do that . He must just be part of the stable Cabinet government we want to see . '' Sir Alan , who insists in the documentary that Mrs May should `` absolutely not '' resign , also says Brexit will ultimately be a success . He says : `` You have seen it in the way news has reacted over the last year . `` Everything is ascribed to Brexit.There will be bumps in the road and the plaster will come off the ceiling from time to time . And there will be excitable headlines , but we will end up in a very good place . ''
IMF accused of trying to 'bully ' Britons into staying in the EU ; Europe 2016 ; Fund 's `` anti-Brexit '' report warning of recession and risks to UK markets will be released on eve of vote
THE International Monetary Fund has been accused of trying to bully British voters into staying in the EU after it pledged to publish a report warning of the risk of a Brexit on the eve of the EU referendum . Christine Lagarde , the head of the IMF , said yesterday that a vote to leave the EU would have `` pretty bad to very , very bad consequences '' and could lead to a recession . She said that a Brexit would lead to a stock market crash and a steep fall in house prices as she pledged to publish a more detailed analysis a week before the referendum on June 23 . She defended the decision to intervene so close to the vote despite having delayed a report ahead of the general election amid concerns it would affect the result . Priti Patel , the Eurosceptic employment minister , accused George Osborne of encouraging the IMF to `` bully '' the British people . She said : `` The IMF warned Britain it was playing with fire when it set out a plan to deal with the deficit . Now our economy is stronger than nearly every other major economy . `` Today , the IMF is talking down Britain because we want to take back control from Brussels . They were wrong then , and they are wrong now . `` The EU-funded IMF should not interfere in our democratic debate a week before polling day . It appears the Chancellor is cashing in favours to Ms Lagarde in order to encourage the IMF to bully the British people . '' The full report will be published during purdah period , the 28 days in the run up to the referendum in which the Government is barred from making announcements that could affect it . Mrs Lagarde said she had `` not seen anything that 's positive '' about Brexit and warned that it could `` lead to a technical recession '' . She said that a Brexit could have a `` negative and substantial effect '' and lead to `` severe regional and global damage '' . She insisted that she had a duty to assess the risks of a Brexit . When asked whether the Treasury had an input into the report , she replied : `` Heck , no '' . A vote for Brexit would result in a `` protracted period of heightened uncertainty '' and could lead to a sharp rise in interest rates , the IMF said , while . London 's status as a `` global financial centre '' would be at risk of being `` eroded '' . The IMF suggested that concerns about a Brexit may have affected UK markets in recent months . It pointed to a 40 per cent decline in the number of commercial real estate transactions in the first three months of the year . The Chancellor said : `` The IMF also put to rest the fallacy that has been peddled by those who say Britain will have more money for public services if we are not paying into the EU budget . `` The IMF are very clear today , the hit to growth we could expect from a vote to leave would cost our public fi-nances more than the amount we would gain from no longer contributing to the EU budget . '' However , Lord Lamont , the pro-Brexit former chancellor , said : `` This daily avalanche of institutional propaganda is becoming ludicrous and pitiful . Important institutions are being politicised and used to make bloodcurdling forecasts . '' Charles Moore : Page 26 Editorial Comment : Page 27
As haven of sensible regulation , the City might even gain from Brexit
Xavier Rolet , chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , thinks Brexit might end up costing the City 100,000 jobs . Bank of England estimates are scarcely any more reassuring . Collating contingency planning by City firms for a hard Brexit , the Bank puts the costs at a possible 75,000 jobs . Lloyd Blankfein , chief executive of Goldman Sachs , has also suggested in a tweet that thanks to Brexit , his new partially completed European headquarters in London may be left substantially empty . It all sounds and looks pretty grim , and for certain , intra-European , activities it probably is . But it does n't mean the City is doomed ; the cleverer operators are already looking through the legal and economic quagmire of Brexit to the more conducive regulatory environment for international capital that could lie beyond , given the political will . A case in point is the European Union 's so-called Solvency II directive , the subject last week of a deeply critical report by the UK parliamentary Treasury select committee . Brexit provides the opportunity to reform this 3,200-page piece of regulatory gobbledegook in a manner which puts the competitiveness of the UK insurance industry first , rather than the misguided and destructive notions of consumer and systemic safety the directive is intended to give teeth to . But first , the negatives . The City , it scarcely needs saying , is far from happy about Brexit , and particularly unhappy about the way the talks seem to be going . One senior banker I recently spoke to put the chance of a decent deal for financial services at less than 10pc . I 'd be a bit more optimistic , but not much ; the Government 's narrative on this issue is instructed by little more than wishful thinking . It may be true that the City provides Europe with an invaluable service that it would be hard to replicate , but it does n't cut much ice with Europe 's political class , where the `` Anglo-Saxon speculators '' are still routinely blamed for almost any ill. A similar argument is often applied by Brexit optimists to trade in goods ; they 've got more to lose than us because we 've got a whacking great deficit with Europe while Europe 's got a whacking great surplus with us . As a statement of fact , this too is true , but it draws the wrong conclusion . A parallel can be made with my mother 's home town of Cholsey , which were it - like Catalonia - to declare independence would no doubt argue that the rest of the country would be stupid not to continue with free trade because its exports to Cholsey far exceed Cholsey 's exports to greater Britain . Indeed so , but the rest of the country would scarcely miss Cholsey if it were entirely wiped from the map , whereas Cholsey would suffer a crippling loss were it suddenly to be denied access to markets elsewhere in Britain . On both goods and services , the EU unfortunately holds most of the cards . There is not a free trade agreement anywhere in existence that includes the sort of deal that Britain is looking for in financial services . It stretches credulity to think that an internal market determined that Britain - pour encourager les autres - is seen to be worse off once it leaves than before is about to set the precedent . Remember , in the EU the politics always trumps the economics . The same goes for Liam Fox 's hopes of focusing free trade talks with the US on services rather than goods . The international trade secretary 's suggestion is naive in the extreme . That the US is about to roll over and allow its financial services to be run out of London is about as likely as Elon Musk 's plans for colonising Mars ; it 's not going to happen in our life times . Fortunately , financiers , like business people , are first and foremost pragmatists ; when push comes to shove , they will attempt to turn any loss into an opportunity . Friendlier regulation is one such chance . Solvency II provides a particularly glaring example of European , regulatory overkill . It 's been under construction since the turn of the century , and at quite shocking cost , recently came fully into operation . In total , HM Treasury has estimated a one-off cost to UK business of `` £2.6bn ... and ongoing costs at approximately £196m each year '' . The directive is not entirely without merit ; it may have improved risk management in Europe and it allows firms to write business in other EU member states without needing to go through local regulators . But in other respects it is having some deeply negative consequences , considerably adding to the cost of capital , undermining value to the consumer , and making the UK an increasingly unattractive place for insurance . The directive also unnecessarily drives insurers into safe , liquid assets - mainly government bonds - to the detriment of long term business and infrastructure investment , for which the industry 's nearly £2 trillion of assets under management are ideally suited . Furthermore , the directive 's impact is far greater in Britain because of the mix of business in UK companies and the number of firms required to adopt its models . Insurance is simply a much bigger industry in Britain than elsewhere in Europe , and it is being force fed a particularly ill-suited form of regulation . The same may be true of other financial services . By liberalising accountancy rules , for instance , the City might be able to attract risk management of huge amounts of additional , offshore international capital . My suggestion here is merely that of changing the regulation , not abandoning it entirely . Nobody is advocating complete deregulation ; by making the system unsafe , this would be more likely to deter capital than attract it . But putting the competitiveness of the City back centre stage as a regulatory priority - something that virtually disappeared with the creation of the Prudential Regulatory Authority - has plenty to commend it over the alternative of seeking regulatory equivalence with Europe , an approach which condemns the UK to rule taking with no say in the way the rules are made . That 's the worst of all possible worlds . What the Continentals fear most is that the City breaks away entirely and competes on its own terms for international business , leaving the EU an entirely closed zone for finance . Get the regulation right , and what the UK loses on the one hand , it may gain on the other . 'What the Continentals fear most is that the City breaks away entirely and competes on its own terms for global business '
Germany values its identity just as much as all the cars it exports ; Mrs May is finally adapting to European sensitivities , and must use informal backchannels to aid Brexit
The worship of economics has always been seen as an ideological illness of the Left . Ever since Karl Marx , the Left has insisted that economic relations define everything , from tensions over immigration to cultural norms . Brexit has , however , brought to the fore another kind of economic idolatry , and now it is on the Right . Once upon a time , we thought that culture and religion drove international relations just as much as prosperity . In the age of secularism and the free market , we have convinced ourselves that only trade matters . This was the argument of the Brexit campaign . We will get a deal , said the optimists , because trade trumps everything . Just wait till after the elections in Germany , they said , and we 'll see Berlin start to prioritise its carmakers , Paris its cheesemakers and vintners . The German and French elections have now happened . Angela Merkel was wounded but is heading back to office . The going is supposed to get easier now . In reality , the hard part is yet to come . To understand why , do n't blame Brussels bureaucrats . Ultimately , Europe 's powerful capitals call the shots . Our problem is that many Europeans , and particularly Germans , are still deeply sad and angry about Brexit . Germany 's nationalists might have done unexpectedly well in yesterday 's vote , but even they did n't dare argue in this campaign for leaving the euro or the EU . The vast majority of Germans still see the EU as a treasured part of their identity and Brexit as a direct attack on it . This sounds strange to British ears . But Germany is a young nation with a guilty history . For its national glue , it can not look back . Instead , it looks to the EU as the idealistic vehicle of its foreign policy . Germans might be reluctant to subsidise the euro , but they still do not see a tension between their strong , regional identities and their national or European selves . Take national borders . In Britain , we associate borders with security . In Germany , with its nine neighbours , it is more complicated . One German who grew up close to the Netherlands recently described to me what the EU meant for her hometown . It went from being a backwater to a `` real place '' , she said . Instead of driving an hour to Cologne , residents started to visit nearby Maastricht . The local economy boomed . To such people , the idea of EU oppression or collapse is absurd . When Theresa May stood in Florence and wished the EU well , when she called the four freedoms `` indivisible '' , she was recognising what the EU means to these Europeans . And for the first time , she tried to explain Brexit to them . Britain `` has never totally felt at home '' in the EU , she said , and its voters `` want more direct control '' of its government . This was shockingly overdue . Just as we misunderstand German identity , many Europeans see Brexit purely as an act of aggressive , isolationist nationalism . Brexit , I was told recently by a Swiss national , means that Britain has voted to be `` selfish '' . This conflation of sovereignty with selfishness stems from a failure to understand British democracy . Told that Britons think the EU is undemocratic , this same Swiss national said : `` Your government is undemocratic . Look at the House of Lords . '' It is easy to explain legal limits on the Lords ' power . It is harder to explain the role of convention in British politics . The Queen does n't veto legislation . The Commons and Lords passed the Article 50 Bill , despite opposing Brexit . Why ? Well , it 's instinctive to most British voters . We understand that , whatever the legal position , if the Lords veto Brexit , they risk abolition . Likewise , we understand that our ancient courts can be trusted to protect the rights of EU citizens even after Brexit . It is obvious to us that Brexit negotiations should focus on practical outcomes over technical procedures . None of these things are obvious across the Channel , where procedure is very important . The EU and Germany will , of course , selectively interpret laws to suit their interests . But , operating in the Napoleonic legal tradition , they can not publicly admit that procedure comes second to political priorities . After all , without legal niceties , Britain might still exist , but the EU would n't . That does not mean the EU has none of its own unwritten conventions . For example , ambitious officials seeking advancement do not just lobby people with formal , decision-making power . They also pay their respects to the `` fathers '' of the project . Figures such as Helmut Schmidt , the late German chancellor and an early supporter of the euro , had no formal role in EU governance in later life , but still expected to be seen by candidates seeking high office . Similarly , a London lawyer working in Paris soon learns that even small decisions might need to be passed through senior managers to avoid trampling on jurisdictional sensitivities . That these norms feel so alien to us owes a lot to our habit of looking west , rather than east . Ambitious young Brits dream of passing a few years in New York . They do not study in Maastricht or seek internships in Brussels . Our elites holiday in British enclaves and rarely find themselves dining with their European counterparts after a day 's skiing . Exceptions to this rule have either marginalised themselves by refusing to accept Brexit or been neglected by the Government . As a result , our Government does not know what informal backchannels or helpful dinner dates might unlock progress in the Brexit talks . Our politicians mock Jean-Claude Juncker 's drinking , instead of finding out where he does it and sending a charming official to buy him a round . This might sound like a dirty world , but it is how diplomacy works . It does not mean we should be weak in negotiations . But sitting in London comparing the EU to the Nazis stirs up a needlessly toxic mood among people whose support we want . Germany 's carmakers are not just businesspeople : they are also proud Germans and Europhiles . With Mrs May 's Florence speech , the Government has finally started to realise that cultural cues matter . Economics do , too , of course . But , as conservative thinkers have always told us , ideas also drive history . It may be that Germany is so attached to its European ideals that it will risk tariffs by insisting on conditions that Britain can not accept , such as the supremacy of EU law . I still think , in the end , that this wo n't happen . But instead of continuing with its pointless infighting , our Government should be working out how to let Germany concede ground while keeping its pride intact . FOLLOW Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Labour 's show of unity as party claims credit for PM 's speech ; May 's Brexit speech
LABOUR attempted to take the credit for Theresa May 's Florence speech last night , claiming it was identical to an article written by Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary . Unusually , the party was united on the issue of leaving the European Union , stating the Prime Minister should have committed to a transitional period a year ago . Voices on the Right , Left and centre of the party came together after months of confusion over Brexit to claim Mrs May 's speech offered nothing new . Jenny Chapman , the shadow Brexit minister said Mrs May , `` could just as easily have WhatsApp-ed Keir Starmer 's article from The Observer and said exactly the same thing '' . Jeremy Corbyn said the speech showed only that she had , `` listened to Labour and faced up to the reality that Britain needs a transition on the same basic terms to provide stability for businesses and workers '' . Mr Corbyn added : `` That 's because Theresa May and her Conservative Cabinet colleagues are spending more time negotiating with each other rather than with the EU . '' The surprise show of unity comes after months of confusion over where the party stands on Brexit , largely prompted by Mr Corbyn 's ambiguity around whether the UK should seek permanent membership of the single market and customs union or not . Tom Watson , the deputy leader of the party , said Labour is the party of `` soft Brexit '' , adding it should seek to remain inside both organisations even after Brexit . However this position was later slapped down by Mr Corbyn 's office , which made clear that while Britain should stay in both during the transition period , anything else is up for negotiation . Now the party faces a crunch vote at its conference this weekend when MPs Alison McGovern and Heidi Alexander , coupled with unions and local party groups , attempt to force the leader to back a pledge to continue membership of both . In doing so Mr Corbyn would have to accept continued freedom of movement , which concerns Labour MPs in the North and Midlands , whose constituencies backed the decision to leave and want to see tougher rules on migration . But the party was united in panning Mrs May 's speech , which was billed as a chance to re-set the negotiations with Brussels . Chris Leslie MP , who has spoken out in favour of a softer Brexit , said : `` Need for transition pre-Brexit was obvious more than year ago . Today 's begrudging acknowledgement from PM says little about long-term deal . '' Ms Chapman added : `` We are 18 months in , the speech she gave today had one hell of a build-up and it was very , very weak , disappointing , empty and ... clearly leaves so many questions unanswered , and I think many people will be scratching their heads and wondering what on earth the fuss has been about with this speech . Beyond committing to transition , which frankly everybody knew was an inevitability , there really was n't very much to it . '' 'The speech she gave today had one hell of a build-up and it was very , very weak , disappointing and empty '
Lack of leadership putting Brexit at risk , says watchdog ; Watchdog warns of Brexit 'horror show '
THERESA MAY 's administration is putting a successful Brexit at risk by failing to show `` active and energetic '' leadership , the head of the National Audit Office ( NAO ) has warned . In an unprecedented intervention , Sir Amyas Morse said Whitehall departments were being left to `` struggle on their own '' with Brexit because of a failure of leadership and direction . He said Brexit posed the `` biggest challenge '' to the nation since the Second World War , but government could `` come apart like a chocolate orange '' unless departments were given more support . They should not be left to decide which of their many projects to prioritise , he said . Sir Amyas also revealed that David Davis 's Brexit department failed to show him a plan for leaving the European Union , despite his requests for one , and could only offer a `` vague '' explanation as to why it was unable to do so . `` Government will need to be fast and flexible and act in a unified way , '' Sir Amyas said . He added that he had serious doubts about the likelihood of a unified approach , saying : `` We have an issue here because of departmental government and what we do n't want to find is that at the first tap it comes apart like a chocolate orange . '' Yesterday Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , hit back at Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson 's declaration that the EU can `` go whistle '' if it thinks the UK will pay a large exit bill . Sir Amyas 's remarks follow weeks of speculation about the Mrs May 's ability to lead after the election defeat and plots to replace her at No 10 as well as fears of a rift between the PM and her Cabinet colleagues over Brexit strategy . Sir Amyas said the scale of the task was `` only just starting to click into people 's awareness '' and that leaving the EU meant ministers would not have `` space for legislating on other issues '' . He also highlighted fears that UK customs would descend into a `` horror show '' as Britain leaves the union because a new £150million system may not be ready in time and without it millions of trade transactions could be delayed and taxes lost . However , a Government spokesman said ministers are `` alive to the task ahead '' . The criticism came as the Great Repeal Bill comes before the Commons today , in what Mr Davis called `` a major milestone '' . The Bill will convert EU law into UK law . Meanwhile , the Office for Budget Responsibility was also publishing a key policy paper today detailing the fiscal risks of Brexit .
'I 'm investing in this Brexit basket of stocks ' ; Political turmoil offers many opportunities , Old Mutual 's Dan Nickols tells Laura Suter
DAN NICKOLS OLD MUTUAL UK SMALLER COMPANIES vs benchmark index over five years Since the EU referendum British stock markets have soared to record highs . However , there are some companies that are still undervalued - having not rebounded after the dramatic sell-off in markets following the vote . Following this week 's announcement of a general election on June 8 , the value of the pound rose , a move that some fund managers had anticipated . Dan Nickols , manager of the £1bn Old Mutual UK Smaller Companies fund , said this `` Brexit basket '' of UK companies has the potential to outperform once the pound rises , after Brexit actually happens . Telegraph Money talked to him about the advantages of investing away from the FTSE giants , what this week 's general election announcement means for stocks and his best ever investment . How do you pick stocks ? I like to mix finding good companies with how I think the economy will perform . Underpinning the fund is the belief that companies in our area are generally less well researched than larger companies , so there should be better opportunities to identify those that are mispriced . The average FTSE 100 stock is covered by around 22 analysts , in our world it 's just three . This gives us an opportunity to understand the investment case better than others in the market . How have you invested since Brexit ? One area we have paid particular attention to is the `` Brexit basket '' of domestically-focused UK stocks . This grouping of stocks , such as housebuilders , real estate , retail and leisure stocks , is trading at a discount to the wider FTSE 250 . These names are very sensitive to the value of the pound . Given that the economy has performed pretty well since the referendum , I think it is fair to contend that sterling 's fall is due to political developments rather than economic developments . If , over the next few weeks , months or years we get a soft Brexit or an extended transition period , I think that will be very sterling friendly , so very helpful for that collection of Brexit stocks . Among the stocks we hold in this area are Crest Nicholson , the housebuilder , and Johnson Service , the drycleaning business , which is trading very cheaply . What does the general election mean for UK stocks ? The calling of the election and the bounce in sterling does n't change my overall thinking about the composition of the portfolio . Campaigning ahead of the election may give us a better feel for the outcome of Brexit and the likely impacts , particularly for the more economically-sensitive parts of the portfolio . Many smaller companies will remain unaffected by the nuances of the debate , however . What other areas do you like and dislike at the moment ? We saw the `` reflation '' trade at the end of last year [ the expectation that inflation will return and boost markets ] . That trend is clearly here to stay , even if it is temporarily paused for now . We increased our exposure to oils , mining companies and capital goods . Examples include Vesuvius , Senna , Bodycote , Cairn Energy and Hurricane Energy , although not all are large positions . One place we are really avoiding is travel and leisure , the pubs and restaurants space . I think they just have a whole host of headwinds that are here to stay for the foreseeable future , such as higher food and energy costs , the national living wage , the apprentice levy , changes to business rates . Life remains very difficult for companies in that space for some time to come . We also do not hold many storebased retailers . Operating in a conventional high street or retail park is increasingly tough . What have been your best and worst investments ? Fever-Tree has to be one of the best . We bought at the time it floated on the stock market for £1.34 - now it trades above £15 . Probably the worst was Blinkx , an advertising technology firm that was the subject of an aggressive piece of research arguing that the stock should be shorted . We exited and lost money . Do you have money in the fund ? How much ? Yes I do . I 'd rather not say how much , but it 's very meaningful to me and my family . What would you have done if you had n't been a manager ? Teaching would have appealed . How to buy the fund as cheaply as possible The trust has a total cost ( the `` OCF '' or `` TER '' ) of 1.03pc a www.year.Be sure to buy the right `` share class '' , which is `` R '' . The investment shop through which you buy the fund will also levy a charge . Some will charge a percentage of the amount invested , others will apply a flat annual fee . Our colour coded tables at www.telegraph.co.uk/investing will guide you to the cheapest fund shop for your circumstances .
Scotland Voters more concerned about Brexit than Union
BREXIT is more of a concern to voters than keeping the United Kingdom together , a poll for The Daily Telegraph has found . Almost two thirds of people agreed that Britain 's EU departure mattered more than stopping the UK 's break-up , while just 27 per cent disagreed . Furthermore , a majority of respondents said they would still vote for Brexit even if they knew it could trigger Scotland 's independence . The results indicate that voters agree with Theresa May that no independence referendum should be held until Brexit is complete . It also suggests there is no `` buyer 's remorse '' for pulling Britain out the EU despite a dramatic week in which the UK 's future has been called into question . Theresa May yesterday pledged to fight `` heart and soul '' to keep the `` precious , precious Union '' together after the SNP demanded a second referendum . The Prime Minister has rejected a demand from Nicola Sturgeon for a vote before spring 2019 , when Britain is likely to leave the EU . An ORB poll of 2,000 voters conducted on Wednesday and Thursday gives an insight into how the week 's events have affected their views . Asked whether they would still back Brexit `` even if I knew it could lead to the breakup of the UK '' , 51 per cent of voters agreed and 38 per cent disagreed . The rest said they did not know . There was also support for Mrs May 's stance that a Scottish independence referendum should not be held before spring 2019 . Almost 60 per cent thought doing preparing for a referendum would undermine negotiations for Brexit , while just 22 per cent disagreed . However , most voters also said that they do not want Scotland to become independent . When asked if Brexit was more important than the potential break-up of the UK , a majority of voters in every part of Britain except Scotland said yes . Mrs May yesterday dismissed Ms Sturgeon 's plans for a new independence referendum as `` muddle on muddle '' as she rejected the `` divisive , obsessive '' nationalism of the SNP . The Prime Minister in her speech to the Conservative Spring Forum in Cardiff d to suggest that Ms Sturgeon had been plotting since last year to use Brexit as a `` pretext '' for a referendum . She also defended the `` precious , precious Union '' and said she wanted the country to become more , not less , united . Mrs May told delegates : `` Our party believes heart and soul in our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . The precious bond between four nations : England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . But that union is more than just a constitutional artefact . It is a union between all of our citizens , whoever we are and wherever we 're from . '' Ms Sturgeon said her `` intention '' was to get the legal powers from the Prime Minister to stage another vote and she would not outline possible Plan Bs to the Scottish people `` at this stage '' .
Britain urges unbroken talks to clear Brexit bill deadlock
BRITAIN is pressing for `` continuous '' Brexit negotiations in a bid to unpick the continuing deadlock between the two sides over the so-called `` Brexit bill '' , The Daily Telegraph can disclose . The British gambit comes as senior UK and EU officials sought to agree a new timetable for talks yesterday , while Germany continues to hold a hard line on Brexit talks , delaying discussions on a new EU negotiating mandate for the next phase of the negotiations on trade and the future relationship . Senior UK sources said continuous talks could help to `` clear the thicket '' of the issues between the sides . `` We need to create an administrative process that gives both sides room to move , '' the UK source said , acknowledging that the political impasse over EU demands for a ( EURO ) 60billion ( £53billion ) settlement had left officials `` little to discuss '' . The Department for Exiting the European Union yesterday disclosed that the Government was examining the potential impact of Brexit across 58 sectors , including defence and agriculture . Cabinet ministers will today discuss Brexit `` preparations for all contingencies '' . It came as three of Britain 's leading Europhile politicians - Nick Clegg , Ken Clarke and Lord Adonis - met with Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , in Brussels . The all-party trio , dubbed `` the rebels '' by Mr Clegg , denied they were undermining the Government or the vote for Brexit .
Scotland Britain could face second Brexit bill - and 30 years before any money back
BRITAIN could be forced to pay a `` second Brexit bill '' of £30billion and made to wait 30 years before getting any money back from the EU bank , a senior European official has claimed . Alexander Stubb , vice-president of the European Investment Bank , said that the UK could be forced to pay billions of pounds after Brexit if projects to which it had contributed failed . He also said that Britain could have to wait until 2054 before the EU 's bank returned £3billion the country has paid into it since 1973 . Eurosceptic Tory MPs said this was `` completely absurd '' and would make a no-deal Brexit more likely . There was further turmoil in David Davis 's Brexit department yesterday as he was forced to replace his third minister in five months . Baroness Anelay resigned as Minister of State for Exiting the European Union as a result of an injury suffered while climbing out of a Black Hawk helicopter two years ago when she was a Foreign Office minister . Mr Davis 's team was shaken up in June when David Jones was sacked by Theresa May and Lord Bridges resigned in the aftermath of the general election . The Brexit Secretary had already lost James Chapman , his former chief of staff , who quit during the campaign . Last month Oliver Robbins , the top official at the department , left to take up a role reporting directly to Mrs May . Lady Anelay said she was `` certain '' that Brexit would be a success . Writing on the ConservativeHome website , she said : `` We are getting more control of our borders , our money and our laws , and at the same time the course the European Union is taking - bold as it may be - is deeply integrationist , and increasingly unpalatable . '' Meanwhile , Mr Stubb rejected a suggestion made by the European Union Committee of the House of Lords earlier this year that the EU bank may actually owe the UK £9 billion ( ( EURO ) 10 billion ) . The UK has a 16 per cent share in the bank which funds projects in the bloc but will leave after Brexit because only EU states are allowed to be members . The Lords committee said in a report that `` the UK might expect its ( EURO ) 3.5billion in called up capital to be returned '' if it stops being a shareholder , and suggested the sum due could even be in the region of ( EURO ) 10billion . But Mr Stubb said the latter figure was `` incorrect '' when it was put to him on BBC Radio 4 's Today programme yesterday . Philip Davies , the Tory MP for Shipley , said the legal grounds for the first bill for Brexit had not yet been demonstrated , let alone the justification for a second one . He said : `` I think it has already been established that there is no legal basis for any bill to leave the EU . It 's highly unlikely that there is a legal basis for this one . '' ( EURO ) 30 bn The amount of money the EU says Britain may still have to pay if projects it has previously contributed to fail
May refuses to say if she would vote Leave now ; No-deal Britain could join North American alliance
THERESA MAY has repeatedly refused to say whether she would vote for Brexit in a second EU referendum . The Prime Minister , who backed Remain during last year 's Brexit vote , said she would `` look at everything '' and `` come to a judgment '' . Meanwhile , Donald Tusk , the European Council president , has signalled for the first time that EU negotiators are taking a `` no deal '' outcome seriously , with Brexit talks being put on hold today . Mr Tusk said that if the talks continued at a `` slow pace '' without sufficient progress being made , `` we will have to think about where we are heading '' . Mrs May yesterday initially declined to answer the question about how she would vote , dismissing it as `` hypothetical '' . But after being pressed she said : `` I could sit here and I could say I 'd still vote Remain or I 'd vote Leave , just to give you an answer . I 'm being open and honest with you . What I did last time round was I looked at everything and came to a judgment and I 'd do exactly the same this time round . '' She added : `` But we 're not having another referendum . That 's absolutely crucial . We are going to deliver on the vote of the British people , we are going to deliver Brexit . March 29 2019 , we come out of the European Union . '' The comments risk antagonising Eurosceptic Tory MPs already concerned about the UK being bound by the European Court of Justice during a transition period . It will also put pressure on other Cabinet ministers who voted Remain . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , suggested on the BBC 's Newsnight that he would vote Remain again . Asked if he believed the country would have been better off in the EU , he said : `` It would have been . '' adding : `` I do n't resile from my views . '' Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , snapped that `` Brexit is not a game '' in an ill-tempered riposte to Theresa May 's comment that `` the ball is in their court '' . Mrs May will arrive in Brussels next Thursday for a meeting of the European Council , at which she is likely to be told that insufficient progress has been made for trade talks to begin . Negotiators had been expected to talk about the so-called Brexit `` divorce bill '' during this week 's round of talks , but it has emerged that after discussions on citizens ' rights and the Irish border on Monday and Tuesday no talks on money will be held today . Asked whether the ball was in his court as he left a lunch meeting in Brussels with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , Mr Barnier said : `` Brexit is not a game . Do n't forget . '' The Chancellor Philip Hammond said the Treasury is prepared for `` every outcome '' including a no-deal scenario . `` We will find any necessary funding and we will only spend it when it 's responsible to do so , '' he wrote in The Times . He appealed for European leaders to be `` more flexible and creative '' . It also emerged yesterday that Britain could join a formal trade alliance with the US , Canada and Mexico after Brexit under plans being considered by ministers . The Daily Telegraph understands that the Government is examining the possibility of joining the North American Free Trade Agreement , known as Nafta , as part of its planning for a `` no deal '' scenario . Joining Nafta would enable the UK to boost its trade with three of the world 's economic powerhouses , which have a combined Gross Domestic Product of £17.2trillion , compared with the EU 's GDP of £15.7trillion . Together , Britain , the US , Canada and Mexico account for more than 30 per cent of the entire global economy . 'We 're not having another referendum . March 29 2019 , we come out of the European Union '
Scotland Find your voice and kill off Brexit , Blair tells MPs
TONY BLAIR has called on MPs and ministers to rise up against Brexit on the eve of a crunch Commons vote as he was branded `` beyond parody '' for demanding tougher controls on migration yesterday . The former Labour Prime Minister told politicians to `` find the leadership within yourself `` ahead of the Brexit debate in Parliament and offer voters an alternative to leaving . He claimed people wanted a new party which considered broader issues and not just the decision to leave the EU , adding fuel to claims he is on the verge of setting one up . However , the anti-Brexit campaigner was branded a hypocrite by ministers for calling for tighter immigration rules after failing to set limits when he was prime minister - a fact his own report said contributed to the Brexit vote . Speaking on the BBC 's Andrew Marr Show , Mr Blair , whose think tank produced a plan to curb migration , said politicians should show leadership and resist the urge to support the Government 's Brexit plan at every turn . Editorial Comment : Page 17
Scotland Sturgeon 's plan risks referendum before Brexit uncertainty ends ; Report warns that First Minister 's timescale could see separation vote held before full picture emerges
THERE will still be `` substantial uncertainty '' about the implications of Brexit by the time Nicola Sturgeon wants to hold a second independence referendum , a think tank has warned . The Scottish Centre on European Relations ( SCER ) said a substantial amount of information would be available by March 2019 . But it also said the effect of leaving the European Union and Scotland 's future relationship with the EU would not yet be clear . The independent think tank published its latest policy paper amid a stand-off between Scotland 's First Minister and the Prime Minister over the prospect of another vote on breaking-up Britain . Ms Sturgeon has insisted that holding a vote some time between autumn next year and spring 2019 would allow Scots to make an informed choice between Brexit and independence . Theresa May , however , has made clear that `` now is not the time '' for Scotland 's future in the UK to be put to the vote . Dr Kirsty Hughes , an expert on European politics and founder of the SCER , said : `` If there were a second independence referendum in March 2019 , Scottish voters would know a lot more than now about the outcome of the Brexit talks , and about whether an independent Scotland would definitely aim to re-join the EU . It will not be a moment for fudging that choice . '' In the paper , she argued : `` Overall , by early 2019 , there will be substantial information available on the UK 's exit deal ( if there is one ) , including the transition phase and the outline of the proposed future UK-EU27 trade deal . `` If Scotland did hold an independence referendum in March 2019 , then Scottish voters would have more information on Brexit , and on the goals for an independent Scotland vis-a-vis the EU or EEA ( European Economic Area ) , than they do now . `` But there would be some substantial uncertainty still and plenty of room for debate about the implications of the UK 's Brexit deal in 2019 and of the potential impacts - positive and negative - if an independent Scotland joined the EU or EEA and the risks it might fail in such an attempt . '' If the UK and the other 27 EU countries `` agree and ratify a divorce deal within the two-year timetable '' laid down by Article 50 , Ms Hughes said many details of this would be clear by March 2019 , including over issues such as the rights of EU citizens living in the UK , the objectives of future trade deals between the UK and Europe and what transition arrangements will be put in place when Britain departs . The UK 's Brexit transition phase will be `` significant '' to the debate over Scotland 's future , she added . `` If Scotland were to vote 'yes ' in March 2019 to independence , it would take at least 18 months or longer to become independent , '' she stated in the paper . A spokesman for the Scottish Government said Ms Sturgeon had made clear that the choice over Scotland 's future `` must be an informed one '' . He added : `` That means that both the terms of Brexit and the implications and opportunities of independence must be clear in advance of the referendum . `` The First Minister will set out the next steps to parliament in the coming weeks as we continue our work to protect Scotland 's economy and our public services from the impact of Brexit . '' 'There would be plenty of room for debate about the implications of the UK 's Brexit deal in 2019 '
Warnings on single market 'ignored ' in Brexit report
REMAIN MPs on a powerful Brexit committee have been accused of ignoring expert evidence about Britain leaving the single market and customs union as a major report is published today . The report from the Exiting the European Union committee urges Theresa May to publish a detailed White Paper on her plans for Brexit by the middle of next month . The MPs also ask the Prime Minister to make clear whether she wants to keep Britain in the European single market and customs union . The report was signed off by senior Conservative Brexiteers including John Whittingdale , Michael Gove , Dominic Raab and Peter Lilley . There was frustration among Conservative members of the committee that the report ignored experts who had said Britain would have to quit the customs union and single market after leaving the EU . One MP said the committee left out `` the most interesting bit of evidence '' and that Conservative efforts to address this were `` rebuffed '' . Mr Raab said : `` The expert witness consensus is Britain will not stay a formal member of the single market or customs union , but aim to maintain barrier-free trade . '' The Prime Minister signed up to a Labour motion requiring her to publish details of her plans for Brexit before the invocation of Article 50 by the end of next month . She has so far held back from saying whether MPs will be granted a vote on the Brexit deal . The report says ministers should seek an outline framework of the future trading relationship with the EU as part of the Article 50 negotiations , with transitional arrangements to allow trade to continue if a deal is not reached in time for the expected Brexit in 2019 . Hilary Benn , Labour chairman of the committee , said Parliament needed to be given a vote on a deal `` and the Government should make this clear now '' . It came as Bill English , New Zealand 's prime minister , said he was impressed by the `` clarity and determination '' Mrs May had brought to Brexit . While Mrs May has faced criticism for revealing little about her Brexit plans , Mr English praised the way his government had been kept informed and said he hoped negotiations could start soon on a `` high quality '' trade deal . 2019 The year that Britain is expected to exit the EU . The MPs ' report said a plan for trade must be in place before then
Boris : cash saving from Brexit is millions more than estimated ; 'There was an error on the side of the bus , ' claims Foreign Secretary , alluding to campaign promise
THE Leave campaign 's claim that £350million a week would be saved by Britain leaving the EU was `` grossly underestimated '' , Boris Johnson said last night . The Foreign Secretary said the UK 's weekly gross contribution to the EU would in fact rise to £438million by the end of a post-Brexit transition period , as he continued to pledge the NHS would be `` top of the list '' when the spare cash becomes available . His claims , in an interview with the Guardian , threatened to reignite the row with Remain voters who claimed Leavers were tricked by the promise into voting for Brexit , after the figure was printed on the side of a campaign bus . But Mr Johnson , who insisted the UK 's EU contribution was already up to £362million and set to rise annually through to 2020-21 , said : `` There was an error on the side of the bus . We grossly underestimated the sum over which we would be able to take back control . '' His remarks come on the day when it emerged freedom of movement in Britain could continue for up to two years after Brexit , if British negotiators cave to fresh demands from Brussels ahead of talks over an UK-EU transition deal . The bloc wants EU citizens arriving in the UK before 2021 to be allowed to live and work in the UK indefinitely as the price for a Brexit transition period . Theresa May must secure a transition to reassure anxious businesses , but agreeing to the demand risks the fury of Brexiteers who want March 29 2019 to spell the end of freedom of movement in Britain . Capitulation would mean an extra 18 months to two years of unlimited EU migration , with people arriving benefiting from the same protected status as EU citizens living in Britain before `` Brexit Day '' . Draft instructions for Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , have revealed the bloc 's toughened stance ahead of transition period talks . The transition agreement will come into force after Brexit Day , effectively `` deep-freezing '' the UK 's membership of the single market and customs union for about two years , giving businesses and the government time to prepare for departure . In December , the UK and European Commission agreed that EU citizens living in Britain before the cut-off date would have their residency rights protected after Brexit . The EU now wants the cut-off date to be pushed back to the end of the transition period and the special status for EU citizens extended to those arriving in the UK before the last day of transition at the end of 2020 . People arriving in Britain after Brexit but before 2021 could stay and work in the UK indefinitely . Central and Eastern European countries , including Poland , are behind the demand , according to the Financial Times .
May heads to Brussels for talks to save Brexit ; MPs taken aback as the Prime Minister leaves for meeting with EU leaders today to break deadlock
THERESA MAY will travel to Brussels today for talks with EU leaders amid reports that she has personally urged Angela Merkel to end the Brexit stand-off . The meeting comes days after Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the EU Commission , and Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , said talks about Britain leaving the EU in March 2019 were deadlocked . Mrs May is taking Oliver Robbins , the civil servant leading the Brexit talks , with her for the dinner - the first since a frosty meal in Downing Street in April . Mr Juncker was reported to have launched a scathing attack on Mrs May during the April dinner , saying that Brexit `` can not be a success '' . Mrs May , who will also be joined by Brexit Secretary David Davis , is expected to have discussions with European counterparts over the coming days ahead of a meeting of all EU leaders later in the week . Downing Street sources insisted today 's meeting had `` been in the diary for weeks '' but the announcement caused surprise in Westminster , and comes after last week 's negotiations ended with little movement . The visit comes a day after Mrs May phoned Mrs Merkel , the German Chancellor , to urge her to help end the Brexit stand-off at this week 's EU summit in Brussels . France and Germany are understood to have pushed for changes to a draft paper prepared for Thursday 's summit to avoid giving the impression that the EU will agree guidelines on a transition period as soon as `` sufficient progress '' has been made in issues relating to the exit . No10 is keen to open the next stage of talks about Britain 's relationship with the EU after Brexit . A colleague of Mrs May told The Financial Times : `` We 've almost run out of things to talk about . It comes down to money : by discussing the transition deal at the same time , you create a broader framework for talking about the money . '' The news came amid concern a nodeal Brexit could place added strain of up to £500million a year on the NHS . A report backed by the NHS Confederation suggests that tens of thousands of British pensioners living in Europe could return home if the Government is unable to strike a deal with the EU to continue existing healthcare arrangements . Under EU law , European citizens benefit from reciprocal rights to healthcare when they are in any of the 28 member states . Brussels and the UK are currently negotiating on what will happen to those rights after Britain 's withdrawal in March 2019 . The report , compiled by the Brexit Health Alliance , warns that patients could suffer dramatically if reciprocal rights to healthcare were scrapped , because they could face huge medical bills if they fall ill while travelling abroad , while the cost of travel insurance could prove prohibitive for people with existing conditions . The £500million figure is based on analysis that estimates the cost of caring for everyone who could return to the UK at £1billion a year , minus the £500million that would no longer have to be paid to European health systems . It does not take into account any income that could be generated from EU citizens potentially having to pay for NHS care when they are in the UK .
Scotland May 's Brexit plans in disarray ; Two of Prime Minister 's most senior ministers refuse to back radical plans to restrict EU migration
THERESA MAY 'S Brexit plans were in chaos last night as two of her most senior ministers distanced themselves from leaked immigration policies amid a backlash from Brussels and business leaders . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , and Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , both have misgivings about radical plans to curb migration , which include a two-year maximum stay for low-skilled workers , whose overall numbers could also be capped . Ms Rudd has `` reservations '' about the migration blueprint even though it was drawn up by officials in her own department , and may favour lighter touch regulations that make it easier for businesses to hire EU workers . Mr Green , who is one of Mrs May 's most trusted advisers , has hinted the Government could row back on the proposals - which have proved popular with Brexiteers - because he is concerned at the effect they will have on EU withdrawal negotiations . The migration plans were described as `` toxic '' in Brussels , where Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , has suggested Britain now has no chance of a `` bespoke '' transition deal . Mr Barnier has told colleagues the UK will have to `` photocopy '' the agreement that Norway has with the EU . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Nick Timothy , Mrs May 's former chief of staff , says that Britain `` must be prepared for a 'no deal ' scenario '' because `` hardliners in Brussels , Paris and Berlin might prevail in their pursuit of a punishment deal that Britain can not accept '' . And there was embarrassment yesterday for Mrs May when the leaders of some FTSE 100 companies disclosed that they had refused a request from Downing Street to sign a letter backing the Government 's position on Brexit . The battle for Brexit enters a new phase today when MPs begin debating the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill , also known as the Repeal Bill , which Labour will oppose when it is put to a vote next week . Mrs May will today appeal to MPs from all parties to `` help get the best Brexit for Britain '' by voting for `` the single most important step we can take to prevent a cliff-edge for people and businesses , because it provides legal certainty '' . But as well as facing opposition from Labour , Mrs May faces turmoil within her own party and in Brussels over Brexit plans for immigration . A Home Office document leaked on Tuesday contained proposals for a cap on low-skilled workers and three-year to five-year work permits for highly skilled EU migrants . It also called for fingerprinting and criminal records checks for foreign workers . One minister told The Daily Telegraph that Ms Rudd `` has reservations about it '' and wanted to wait for the findings of a Migration Advisory Committee report next year - which may recommend less strict rules on foreign workers - to enable government policy to `` ensure continuity for business '' . Another source said Ms Rudd was `` absolutely committed to reducing net migration to sustainable levels and delivering what people voted for at the referendum '' . Damian Green , the de facto deputy prime minister , has told friends that ministers will have to do `` some smoothing over '' with Brussels , where the proposals in the document met with hostility . One source said Mr Green believed that the leaked paper had not `` committed us to things we ca n't resile from , it is not that exact '' . In Brussels the Britain-first migration plans provoked fury and were described as `` simply toxic '' by an influential group of Liberal MEPs who said it would poison ongoing negotiations on citizens ' rights , while Sandro Continued on Page 6 Editorial Comment : Page 19
May must explain how Brexit can strengthen , not overturn , the West ; The EU does n't seem to realise that our capitalist , liberal democratic framework is under threat
This is n't the way Theresa May wanted it to be . Like most politicians , she coveted power for years . Now that she has it , her carefully considered domestic agenda keeps disappearing under heavy files marked `` Brexit '' . But as Margaret Thatcher found in the Falklands , unexpected adventures abroad can make a premiership . If Mrs May wants to win the authority needed for domestic reforms , she must seize the moment . Brexit calls not just for technical squabbles in Brussels and platitudes at home , but for leadership on a grand scale . What kind of world does Mrs May want us to live in ? How will her leadership help get us there ? And , vitally for Britain 's interests , how will she defend the Western order ? Over and over , Mrs May 's enemies claim that she must lay out a vision for Brexit , but they are focusing on the wrong kind of vision . We do not need or want a Prime Minister who foolishly lays out Britain 's demands , fall-back positions and red lines . What is required is not a Westminster row about the single market and the EU 's legal structures , but to elevate the debate . The country and the EU need to understand what is at stake . The capitalist , liberal democratic framework that has served us so well since 1945 is under threat . Brexit does not mean , as the EU assumes , that Britain wants a revolution to throw it all away . We want to build a new model of co-operation with a greater a role for the nation state , to defeat the corrupt authoritarianism and state-rigged trading models of China and Russia . To that end , Brexit should not be about punishment , but must revitalise the alliance between freedom-loving Western nations . This is the unambiguous message Mrs May needs to deliver before negotiations begin . The Prime Minister understands the domestic piece of the puzzle very well . After the financial crisis and years of wage stagnation , capitalism is threatened not just by foreign powers , but by disillusion at home , which is why Mrs May keeps calling Brexit `` a vote for change '' . Her initial instincts pushed her towards ineffective socialist ideas like workers on boards , energy price caps or state bailouts for industry . But unlike many politicians , she is good at listening to her Cabinet colleagues and is slowly moving in the right direction : a radical shake-up of the housing market , much more investment in skills and education , and an energy policy that serves consumers and the economy , not just emissions targets . So Mrs May is right not to ignore the domestic anger the referendum laid bare . Fundamentally , though , Brexit is a matter of foreign policy - one of the few briefs she has never held . The Government must rethink how Britain manages all of its dealings with the outside world , from trade to immigration and defence . The EU 's ideologues insist that there are only two possible models . The first is that we are governed by supranational organisations within the single market . The second is total isolation . The defining feature of this argument is that it an obsessively legal one . It assumes that Brexit can create no new legal forms of co-operation or trade , but must rely on the current available options . It ignores that fact that we are not dealing with lawyers and statute on a two-year timetable . Brexit is about the fate of nations over decades . It is for elected politicians to make the decisions , not lawyers . So far , the leading elected politicians on the Continent have been extremely reluctant to admit this fact . They are deferring to the lawyers when they repeat the mantra that the EU 's `` four freedoms '' are inseparable ; in other words , there can be no free trade of goods , capital and services without the free movement of people . They are convinced , for the moment , the legal edifice is what matters and if they allow it to be altered , the whole European democratic order will crumble . Mrs May 's central task is to make Brexit a matter of politics , not legal technicalities . In this mission , she does have potential allies on the Continent , even in some of Brussels ' staunchest pro-EU circles . In August , five authors published a paper arguing that Brexit is a chance to create a `` continental partnership '' between Europe 's EU and non-EU nations . The authors included two top thinkers from the Bruegel Institute , Brussels ' most influential think tank ; Jean Pisani-Ferry , a former EU official and French government adviser ; Norbet Röttgen , a German MP and chairman of the Bundestag foreign affairs committee , and former Bank of England deputy governor Paul Tucker . It would be easy to assume that this list of authors is capable only of parroting EU dogma . It would also be wrong . `` Free movement of workers , '' they wrote , `` is not indispensable ... Free movement of workers can be separated from [ free trade ] . '' The `` continental partnership '' they describe would let the UK set quotas on EU immigration while allowing British firms to operate freely in the single market . As with any modern trade agreement , it would establish an arbitration system to ensure we have sufficiently similar trading standards.But it would not allow foreign judges to interpret human rights law here or decide whom we deport . This might still sound unpalatable to some Brexiteers . It does , however , provide a crucial advantage over a straightforward `` hard Brexit '' . It means Britain can continue to exert a strong influence over geopolitical decisions that will make or break Western power , like whether to impose sanctions on Russia , the imperative for EU countries to stop free-riding and contribute more to Nato , and whether the West should compete with China by embracing protectionism and massive state subsidy programmes . The `` continental partnership '' might not be the exact model we adopt , but it provides the key insight : even after Brexit , Britain needs a platform to influence our EU allies and nudge them in the right direction . The task is certainly daunting.Mrs May must engineer a Brexit that strengthens , rather than weakens , the West 's resolve to tackle threats from disruptive , anti-democratic powers . If she fails , Britain could quit the EU declaring that it wants to be a beacon of free trade only to find that free trade , capitalism and the rule of law are in retreat across the world . Ultimately , our prosperity does not depend on a `` soft '' or `` hard '' Brexit . It depends on openness and security . For the first time since the Cold War , the West is entering a battle of ideas . Mrs May must explain how we will win it . FOLLOW Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Voters know what they want from Brexit - but it will be a tall order ; They say yes to controlled immigration and access to the EU single market - no to financial contributions
Four months before the last election I conducted a survey which found Ukip voters to be the most pessimistic in Britain . Three quarters of them said they thought the country was heading in the wrong direction . My latest research reveals a stunning turnaround : 86 per cent of them now say we are on the right track , making them the most optimistic of all . It does not take much to figure out what is behind this transformation . And the 'Kippers are not alone , even if most do not share their degree of exuberance : since the referendum , a majority of British people say the country is on the right path , and expect the economy to do well over the next year . But a majority does not mean a consensus . Seven in ten of those who voted to remain in the EU say the country is heading the wrong way , and though more than four fifths of leavers expect the British economy to do well over the next year , just three in 10 remainers agree . While leavers chuckle that they are still waiting for the world to end , many remainers fear that the real impact of Brexit has yet to be felt . One response to this is that the remainers will just have to get over it . And plenty of them feel the same way - they may not like it , but they know they are going to have to get used to the idea of Brexit . In my focus groups , few of those who had wanted to stay in the EU now thought it desirable , let alone realistic , to try to reverse the outcome . Yet while rightly insisting that `` Brexit means Brexit '' , the Government can not disregard those who are anxious about the future . This is not just because its job is to govern for the whole country , as Theresa May has said , but because to do so would be politically foolish - on June 23 , the remain column included two fifths of those who voted for the Conservatives last year , all of whom will need to do so again to keep the party in office . The Tories can be the best party to negotiate Brexit on the right terms without being a party only for Brexiteers like me . The key , then , is to fashion a Brexit agreement that the whole country can get behind . My research gives some indication of what this would look like - and how hard it will be to achieve . So far , progress towards the exit seems slow , to the frustration of some and the relief of others . Though some suspect a plot to thwart the voters ' will , the more likely explanation is that the referendum result had taken the Government completely by surprise so no contingency plans had been made . Still , I found most people agreeing that when it came to a Brexit deal , it was more important to get it right than to do it quickly . In this , Mrs May has the public behind her , at least for now . In my research people spontaneously described her as smart , tough , confident and very much up to the job . Two thirds of our poll respondents , including more than four in 10 of those who voted Labour last year , said she was the best available prime minister of the party leaders . Labour voters despaired of the `` shambles '' and `` farce '' that their party had become , and held out little hope of it offering any decent opposition , let alone returning to office , under their principled but `` totally unelectable '' leader . Though the PM campaigned ( if somewhat ambivalently ) to remain in the EU , nobody doubts her intention when she says Brexit means Brexit . Which just leaves the question of what Brexit means . It is probably easier to start by asking what Brexit does n't mean , and here the public are quite clear . More than four fifths of people in Britain , including three quarters of those who voted to remain , say Britain would not really have left if we continued to pay into the EU budget . Almost as many say that continuing to allow free movement - in which foreign nationals from other European countries still had the automatic right to live and work in the UK - would mean the referendum result had not been honoured , though large majorities of both leavers and remainers said they were happy for EU citizens already living and working in Britain to stay . Meanwhile , a clear majority thinks retaining access to the EU single market would be compatible with Brexit . Indeed , leavers are even more likely to think this than remainers . What if the negotiations come down to a trade-off between controlling immigration and single market access ? Overall , most say setting our own terms for immigration is the more important priority . But here again there is a division : while three quarters of leavers would choose immigration control over the single market , remainers prioritise continued free trade by a 22-point margin . Yet what really throws down the gauntlet for British negotiators is that many people do not accept that such a trade-off exists . As an independent country outside the EU , they argue , it goes without saying that we should be able to say who can and who can not enter , and under what conditions - this principle being much more important to most than the numbers involved . At the same time , they reason , everyone benefits from trade , and as things stand - since EU countries sell more to us than we do to them - our European neighbours benefit 1from it even more than we do . So , whatever the single market 's technicalities , why , they ask , should we need to make any concessions at all for the privilege of continuing to provide a market for their exports ? In a nutshell : yes to full control of immigration , yes to unfettered trade , and no to any further contributions to the EU budget . The deal the voters want with the EU is certainly unique . It may also prove a tall order . The New Blueprint : The Conservative Agenda In Post-Brexit Britain is launched today at www.LordAshcroftPolls.com . Lord Ashcroft 's book on the referendum , 'Well You Did Ask : Why The UK Voted To Leave The EU ' , is published this month by Biteback FOLLOW Lord Ashcroft on Twitter @ LordAshcroft ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Brexit would halt 'dangerous ' EU army , insist French
A BREXIT vote would make Europe more secure as it would stop the `` dangerous '' integration of EU member states ' armies , two senior French admirals have said . In a letter in The Daily Telegraph , Vice Admiral Michel Debray and Rear Admiral Claude Gaucherand say the UK would not be `` diminished '' by a vote to leave and it would prevent the `` inevitable and dangerous '' development of an EU fighting force . They say the UK 's neighbours would still want to `` cooperate on close and friendly terms '' because Britain is such a strong military and economic power . The admirals also warn that `` scaremongering '' about the UK 's military prowess after a possible Brexit `` makes no sense '' because Britain would `` remain a major force '' . They say : `` Viewed rationally and dispassionately from Paris , the scaremongering that we have seen the British people subjected to makes no sense . `` The UK will remain a major force after Brexit , a major military , security and economic power that its neighbours will want to cooperate with on close and friendly terms . `` A Leave vote will apply screeching brakes to those pushing for the integration of the armed forces of the EU 's member states and the otherwise inev-UK airborne troops on a Nato drill in Poland . A Brexit would not stop such cooperation itable and dangerous development of a 'common defence ' as the treaties predict . '' They say Charles de Gaulle and Sir Winston Churchill 's view of Britain would be `` vindicated '' if voters opt out of the union on June 23 . Both believed that the nation state is the foundation of good security policy . The letter follows speculation that plans for a European-wide force , to which the UK would be forced to contribute , are being held back until after June 23 . David Cameron has said it is `` not true '' Britain would be made to contribute to such a force if the UK votes to remain in the EU , but last week Penny Mordaunt , the armed forces minister , warned it is a serious prospect . Letters : Page 19
Brexit is not a one-off , look at Europe 's woes
There is a way of thinking about Brexit that has proven popular because it is of comfort both to the UK and to the remaining 27 member states of the EU . This is to view it as a uniquely British affair , one that realigns this country with its old traditions - in Europe , but not a direct part of it ; a bridge between Europe and the US . The continental version , meanwhile , views Brexit as a liberation for the EU after putting up for decades with grumbling Brits . As one French journalist put it a day after the referendum : `` My English friends , thank you for your sacrifice . '' This is wrong . Far from being an isolated event , Brexit is representative of growing economic and political tensions within Europe on the matter of European integration . Look at the political tremors now shaking the EU 's keystone nation , Germany , which have even threatened the position of Angela Merkel . Importantly , both Britain and nations of the Continent have economic frustrations with the EU . As there is no single European economy , citizens in Europe experience `` ever closer union '' through their national growth models . In Britain 's case , the economy grows by expanding the labour market . This injects life into the country 's service sector-dominated economy but makes the UK dependent on very high levels of net migration . This model delivers low unemployment but also low productivity and low wage growth . The tensions produced by this growth model were important drivers of Brexit . Germany 's experience of the Single Market is quite different , but also problematic . Lying behind Germany 's success in export markets is an economy characterised by low aggregate demand and high savings rates . Labour market reforms have led to a decade-long squeeze on wages , meaning that most Germans do n't feel rich . This is why there is so much opposition in Germany to a European fiscal transfer union . `` We 've not had it easy , '' goes the argument , `` so why should we help out the Greeks and the Italians ? '' Further integration of the eurozone will run up against ordinary Germans ' experience of life in the single market . There are also frustrations common to Britain and the Continent with governments which seem more focused on striking deals in Brussels than in representing the wishes of their citizens . The European orientation of the administrative British state was on show throughout the referendum campaign , with major British institutions - such as the Bank of England and the Treasury , and the `` deep state '' of the higher education sector - openly backing the Remain campaign . Since the Brexit vote , British diplomats have been pushed to act as if the UK were a 19th century nationstate , when in fact it is a 21st-century EU member state , accustomed to the pursuit of consensus and compromise . Their refusal to consider Brexit as a challenge to transform the state continues . British civil servants currently working within the Department for Exiting the European Union ( DEXEU ) are only seconded , for a term of two years , from their original ministries - the implication being that their services will only be needed for a short transitional period . This is clearly a dramatic under-estimation of the administrative , constitutional and economic challenges posed by Brexit . Brexit reveals in a dramatic fashion the way in which EU member states struggle to fulfil even the most basic functions of self-government associated with the model of the modern sovereign state . This is by no means only a British affair , as we saw it also in 2015 when the Greek government was unable to translate the wishes of its own people into a new deal with its creditors . This is an urgent issue for all European citizens who believe in the capacity - and duty - of governments to represent the will of their citizens . Brexit should not be treated as a stand-alone phenomenon , isolated from the rest of the European continent . It is unlikely that other countries will follow suit in the near future , not least because of the difficulty in leaving an integrated currency union . But Brexit nevertheless expresses fundamental tensions at the heart of `` ever closer union '' . Ironically , it is precisely in its decision to exit the EU that the UK has identified itself most as a European state , whose fate has many lessons for the EU 's 27 remaining members . Chris Bickerton is a Fellow of Politics at Queens ' College Cambridge . This is adapted from an essay in Brexit and Beyond : Rethinking the Futures of Europe , available to download free from UCL Press from Jan 29 READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Davis will be sidelined in reshuffle , allies fear ; Brexit Secretary faces new blow to authority as Prime Minister looks at diffe rent role for Boris Johnson
DAVID DAVIS 'S allies fear that he risks being `` marginalised '' if Boris Johnson is handed a new `` super-charged '' Brexit role in a Cabinet reshuffle . The Prime Minister is said to be considering moving Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , in a `` renewal '' reshuffle in which she could axe as many as five ministers . Mr Johnson could be asked to replace Greg Clark , the Business Secretary , with the portfolio significantly bolstered to give him more direct `` ownership '' of Brexit . However , allies of the Foreign Secretary said that he was likely to reject the move because he is `` very happy '' in the Foreign Office after several turbulent months . `` The difficulty they will have is that they know they ca n't sack him , '' a source said . There are also concerns that Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , could be sidelined if Mr Johnson is given a significant Brexit role . It comes after Olly Robbins , Mr Davis 's former chief of staff , left his department to lead a newly formed European Unit in the Cabinet Office . He now reports directly to Theresa May rather than Mr Davis and is regarded by some in Brussels as the man effectively running Brexit negotiations . An ally of Mr Davis said : `` The role of the Brexit Secretary is being impinged on right , left and centre . I am seriously concerned that David Davis is being marginalised . `` If you look at the way Olly Robbins has usurped his function , and now you have this . I 'm getting really quite concerned about David 's role ... It does seem to me that there would be a loss of focus if Boris was to take on a bigger Brexit role . '' Mrs May is reportedly preparing to axe Sir Patrick McLoughlin , the chairman of the Conservative Party , Justine Greening , the Education Secretary , Mr Clark , Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , and Andrea Leadsom , the leader of the Commons . There are also suggestions that Sajid Javid , the Communities Secretary , could be axed . Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , is tipped to replace Damian Green in the Cabinet Office after he was forced out before Christmas . Ministers also tipped for promotion include Brandon Lewis , the immigration minister , along with Dominic Raab , a justice minister , and Damian Hinds , the employment minister . Mrs May will also be acutely aware of the need to appoint more women . At present only five members of the 21-strong Cabinet are women . The timing of her prospective reshuffle has prompted concern among some members of the Cabinet . The Prime Minister is next week expected to launch a series of high-profile domestic policies in a bid to prove that she will not be defined by Brexit alone . The minister said : `` If you do a reshuffle you upset 100 people who do n't get promoted , and cheer up a dozen . I just ca n't quite see why the PM would create these problems for herself . ''
Scotland Drinks giant denies loss of 100 jobs was consequence of Brexit BODY : DIAGEO is to cut more than 100 jobs across its Scottish operations - a move that a trade union blamed on Brexit . Workers were told that 70 redundancies will be made at the drinks giant 's Leven plant in Fife and a further 35 at its Shieldhall site , near Glasgow . Selected white spirits production will be moved to the company 's Santa Vittoria plant in Italy and to plants in the United States . The GMB said it had warned David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , earlier this year about the need for special measures to protect Scotland 's drinks manufacturing sector against the backdrop of Brexit uncertainty . But a Diageo spokesman denied the decision was a consequence of Brexit , adding : `` This is a business decision taken for business reasons . '' The company said : `` Following the disposal of our wine business and the subsequent end of the wine bottling contracts , we have reviewed our spirits bottling footprint to ensure we not only deliver leading performance for both our domestic and export supply chains around the world , but also to strengthen our business for the future . `` Regrettably , these changes may impact some roles in our European bottling plants towards the end of the year and we will now enter a period of consultation with our employees and their representatives to discuss the proposals in more detail . `` We are committed to our three spirits bottling sites in Europe - two in Scotland and one in Italy . '' Jenny Gilruth , the Nationalist MSP for Leven , said : `` This announcement by Diageo is concerning and will cause great uncertainty for many people in our communities throughout Fife - and it is doubly concerning that these possible redundancies appear to be down to Brexit . `` The suggestion by the GMB union that it had warned David Mundell over the need to take action to protect Scotland 's drinks manufacturers against Brexit long before this announcement is yet another sign that he is happy to support the Tories ' Brexit plans no matter the damage they will inflict on our communities and economy . Willie Rennie , the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader , said : `` This is the cold sober reality of a hard Conservative Brexit . This is a huge employer in parts of Fife and Glasgow that need the jobs . `` The Conservatives need to explain to the workers at these plants why they soon wo n't be getting a wage at the end of the month . '' A spokesman for the UK Government said : `` We have been in contact with Diageo and understand the company has begun a consultation with staff about proposed operational changes that are not driven by the UK 's decision to leave the EU . `` The UK Government continues to support the Scottish economy and key sectors such as the drinks industry . '' 'This announcement by Diageo is very concerning and will cause great uncertainty for many '
Our post-Brexit forecasts may be too gloomy , the OBR admits ; Economy ; Officials forced to make broad judgements , as Eurosceptic MPs say they are protecting their backs
BRITAIN 's official economic forecaster admits it made a series of `` gloomy '' Brexit warnings without any information about the Government 's plans . The Office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) said it had been forced to make a series of `` broad-brush judgements '' because ministers refused to provide any information about the Government 's `` goals and expectation '' . Theresa May has repeatedly refused to disclose information about the Government 's negotiating strategy amid concerns that it would be the `` best way to get the worst result for Britain '' as it leaves the EU . The OBR was forced to make a series of assumptions about Mrs May 's approach , which were yesterday branded `` totally wrong '' , while eurosceptic Conservative MPs highlighted the fact that previous forecasts by the OBR for economic growth have been `` notoriously '' inaccurate . The OBR 's post-Brexit forecast included an assumption that the pace of import and export growth will slow for a decade as the Government negotiates new trading regimes , causing the value of the pound to continue to fall and household incomes to drop . It claimed that economic growth will be 2.4 per cent lower over the next five years , while national income will fall from 2.1 per cent in 2016 to 1.4 per cent next year , significantly lower than previously forecast . It also suggests that inflation will rise from 0.9 per cent to 2.6 per cent in mid-2018 , putting greater pressure on household finances and reducing people 's spending power . A total of 100,000 more people will be unemployed as a result of Brexit , it suggests . The OBR claimed the overall cost of Brexit will mean £58.7 billion worth of additional borrowing over the next five years , including £26.2 billion because of the economic `` slowdown '' and £15 billion because of lower migration . Robert Chote , the OBR 's chairman , admitted there is a 50 per cent chance that the forecast is `` too gloomy '' . However , the OBR said its forecast is justified because it is based on existing trends , such as the fall in the value of the pound . It suggested the fallout from Brexit could be even more severe . It said : `` In the near term , as the negotiations get under way , we assume that GDP growth will continue to slow into next year as uncertainty leads firms to delay investment and as consumers are squeezed by higher import prices , thanks to the fall in the pound . `` But we do not assume that firms shed jobs more aggressively or that consumers increase precautionary saving , both of which are downside risks if the path to Brexit is bumpy . '' However , it conceded : `` Our economy forecast is not based on a precise prediction of the outcome of the Brexit negotiations , but rather on broad-brush judgements consistent with a range of possible outcomes . `` We have been given no information about the Government 's goals and economic and fiscal outlook expectations for the negotiations that is not already in the public domain . And we would not in any event wish to base our forecast on assumptions we could not be transparent about . '' Peter Bone , a eurosceptic Conservative MP , said : `` The forecast is gloomy because if they are gloomy and it is better , then they do n't get as much flak as if it is optimistic and they fail . `` They could not produce a forecast based on what appears to be happening in the economy with inflation falling and growth up . They could not do that because it would mean that all they did before was just so totally wrong . '' Bernard Jenkin MP , who helped lead the Vote Leave campaign , said : `` The Government must accept OBR forecasts . But if they turn out to be too pessimistic , then the UK will be in an even stronger position . '' Steve Baker , a prominent Eurosceptic and chairman of the Conservatives ' European Research Group , added : `` Recent pessimistic economic forecasts have been consistently wrong . I welcome this higher forecast for the current year than pre-vote and I welcome confirmation there will be no post-vote recession after all . '' The Chancellor announced that the Government will put the public finances back in the black `` as early as possible '' in the next Parliament as part of a new draft Charter for Budget Responsibility . However , Mr Chote said that his plans will pose `` quite a challenge '' for Mr Hammond if he needs to borrow more during this Parliament . He said the Government will face mounting pressure to increase spending on an ageing population , and that the number of people set to receive the state pension could rise by about nine per cent in the next Parliament . The OBR forecasts the Chancellor to overshoot previous targets for public sector borrowing for this year , revising its outlook from £55.5 billion to £68.2 billion for 2016-17 . It also hiked forecasts from £38.8 billion to £59 billion for 2017-18 , from £21.4 billion to £46.5 billion for 2018-19 , from a surplus of £10.4 billion to a deficit of £21.9 billion for 2019-20 , from a surplus of £11 billion to a deficit of £20.7 billion for 2020-21 and a deficit of £17.2 billion in 2021-22 . The OBR also pencilled in people to be about three per cent poorer compared to its March forecasts . The Government 's own analysis of the impact of its statement showed that Mr Hammond 's policies have had almost no impact on the incomes of most households . It shows that lower earners have seen their incomes rise by a maximum of 0.2 per cent , while there is little income difference for most other households .
Divorce bill far from the biggest Brexit issue , stresses OBR
BRITAIN 'S EU divorce bill is relatively insignificant to the economy or even to the Government 's finances compared with the much larger question of the UK 's growth prospects after Brexit , according to the head of the official fiscal watchdog . Robert Chote , boss of the Office for Budget Responsibility , warned MPs that it was easy to become fixated on the exact settlement agreed with Brussels , rather than the bigger picture . The bill is expected to be between ( EURO ) 45bn ( £39bn ) and ( EURO ) 55bn , with a debate over whether it is extra money or a continuation of payments that Britain was planning to make in any case . But the financial watchdog said that , in the grand scheme of things , this payment was far from the most important aspect of Brexit . `` If it is an extra amount , you are talking here about presumably a one-off payment of some billions of pounds which would be dwarfed by the consequences of Brexit , positive or negative , for the long-term outlook for economic growth , '' Mr Chote told the Treasury select committee . `` There is a kind of analogy here with the financial crisis - it is very easy to get very focused on the one-off , the particular bail-out period , when actually what matters much more is the impact on the economy and the underlying impact on receipts , flows and spending . '' In turn , that Brexit effect is itself much less important than finding a way to boost productivity growth and escape the stagnation in output per hour worked that has gripped the economy for the past decade , Mr Chote said . `` There is a small productivity effect [ in the OBR 's Brexit forecasts ] but it is tiny compared to the scale of the change that we have made on this occasion , and it is tiny compared to the scale of the shortfall in productivity relative to a continuation of pre-crisis trend , '' said Sir Charlie Bean from the OBR . `` I think it is very important to realise that the big issue economically for the British economy is productivity , it is not coming from the Brexit assumptions or anything like that . `` That is the really big challenge ; if we could do something to address that successfully , it would completely swamp the Brexit consequences , whatever they are . `` The scale could not be big enough compared to the productivity slowdown . '' Mr Chote noted that poor productivity growth had afflicted developed economies across the world , making it hard to pin down precisely why growth has been so slow and how to fix it . `` You can overdo it by focusing on particularly UK-specific explanations of this ; there is a lot more going on , '' he said .
Scotland Fishing quotas scrapped after Brexit ; Hundreds of thousands of tons more fish can be caught after 'unfair ' rules overhauled ; Fishing quotas face post-Brexit overhaul
BRITISH fishermen will be able to catch hundreds of thousands of tons more fish after Brexit because it will be able to overhaul `` unfair '' fishing quotas , the fisheries minister has said . George Eustice said Brexit will provide a `` good deal '' for fishermen because current quotas give a `` disproportionately large '' share of catches to fishermen from the European Union . He said after Brexit the UK will strike new `` reciprocal '' arrangements with the EU , which will give fishermen a greater share of catches in British waters and abroad . He said that during Britain 's membership of the EU negotiations about fishing quotas had stalled because of the `` institutionalised inertia '' of Brussels . He told The Daily Telegraph : `` It 's pretty clear Brexit can be a good deal for British fishermen because we regain control . The equation is they have one million tons of UK fish and we get about 150,000 tons of various species . '' Leaving the EU will spell the end of the hated Common Fisheries Policy and enable the UK to assert control over its 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) . This means that foreign vessels could not then fish in the zone without express consent . More than half of the UK 's EEZ is around Scotland and fishing leaders north of the border are furious with Nicola Sturgeon 's attempts to somehow bypass the Brexit vote and keep Scotland in the EU . A major report published earlier this month found that more than half the fish caught in British waters are currently landed by trawlers from the rest of the EU . Mr Eustice said : `` There are areas we would hope to get a better deal , particularly with cod and plaice . `` The truth is , things will change in a very fundamental way . In the Channel the French get twice as much plaice and three times as much Dover sole as we do . There is an imbalance . '' Mr Eustice believes that fishermen in the Channel and the West Country in particular could benefit from reforms to fishing quotas . He highlighted Britain 's `` incredibly low '' share of plaice and sole in the English Channel , with a similar situation for cod and haddock in the Celtic Sea . He said that here is no `` balance '' to Britain 's fishing agreements with the EU , and that it `` benefits more from access to the UK than the UK benefits from access to them '' . It came as French fishermen accused their British rivals of `` plundering '' Continued on Page 4 Continued from Page 1 scallops in the Channel , saying Brexit could leave UK trawlers free to increase their catches without the constraints of EU regulations . Daniel LefÈvre , head of the Lower Normandy Fisheries ' regional committee , said : `` Not only are the English pillaging a resource that we 've been protecting for more than 30 years , but the scallops they fish and freeze are coming back to be sold in France , competing with our fresh scallops . '' The French are aggrieved because they say they are already subject to stricter fishing limits than the British , and they fear Brexit will disentangle UK boats from the web of EU rules . Mr LefÈvre explained that under national regulations to prevent overfishing , French fishermen are obliged to respect strict quotas . These rules do not apply to the British , who are subject to `` more lenient '' British and EU regulations . `` After Brexit , Britain would perhaps not be bound by EU regulations . We hope we can agree on a solution with our British friends before the UK leaves , '' he said . `` The problem is that the British see only the business side of things while we are thinking about conservation too . French fishermen are only allowed to catch scallops six months a year but the British can fish them all year round . ''
Scotland Davis : MPs must end this 'blame Brexit ' festival ; Secretary for Leaving the EU insists Commons will not be allowed to thwart the process , amid growing revolt on Tory backbenches
PARLIAMENT must not be allowed to `` thwart '' Britain 's exit from the European Union , David Davis said yesterday amid a growing rebellion from Conservatives who backed the failed Remain campaign . Mr Davis , the Secretary for Leaving the EU , warned of a `` blame Brexit festival '' as he rejected demands from a cross-party coalition of MPs that backbenchers should be allowed to vote on the terms of Britain 's exit from the EU . Theresa May also attacked MPs for not `` accepting '' the Brexit vote , telling the Commons : `` We are siding with the British people who voted to leave the European Union . '' Yesterday , a succession of Tory MPs faced criticism from their colleagues over their `` weasel words '' as they attacked the Government 's handling of the aftermath of the Brexit vote . Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , hit out at `` the briefers and spinners at the centre of this Government '' for criticising Conservatives pushing for a `` soft Brexit '' which would see Britain retain membership of the single market . Anna Soubry , a former business minister , urged the Prime Minister to abandon attempts to reduce immigration in the wake of the referendum while Claire Perry , another former minister , accused the Government of putting `` ideology '' before national interest . Mr Davis told the Commons : `` I 'm afraid in the immediate aftermath of the vote to leave there was an extraordinary outpouring almost of grief - a blame Brexit festival , if you like . `` We saw it ranging from the Italian finance minister - who blamed us for the state of his bond markets - more significantly to banks in this country , saying they 're laying people off because of Brexit , which , of course , it turned out to be entirely untrue . '' He added : `` While we welcome parliamentary scrutiny , it must not be used as a vehicle to undermine the Government 's negotiating position or thwart the process of exit . '' Meanwhile , Tom Scholar , the Treasury 's permanent secretary , warned that official forecasts are likely to show that there will be a `` period of weaker growth over the next few years '' . But he also admitted to MPs that figures in leaked draft Cabinet papers suggesting Brexit could cost the Treasury £66 billion in tax revenues were `` not directly applicable '' . Separately the Bank of England was accused of `` talking down the economy '' after warning that Britain was likely to leave the single market and jobs could go to New York . Sir John Cunliffe , the Bank 's deputy governor , raised concerns that Britain 's financial markets could lose the `` frictionless '' trading relations they currently enjoy . Steve Baker , a Tory member of the Treasury committee , said the Bank had a duty to stop `` all comments which could be seen as talking down the prospects of the UK economy '' . Allister Heath : Page 18 Blue-on-blue How Conservative malcontents criticised ministers during Commons debate Nicky Morgan Ex-education secretary and MP for Loughborough ( where 53.78 per cent of voters backed Leave and 46.2 per cent backed Remain ) `` Those who are asking questions about the scrutiny by this Parliament of these fundamental negotiations are not trying to thwart the will of the people . `` I resent that implication . I resent it from newspapers , I resent it from ministers , and I resent it from the briefers and spinners at the centre of this Government . '' Dominic Grieve Former attorney general and MP for Beaconsfield ( Leave 50.7 per cent , Remain 49.3 per cent ) `` As a lawyer I see the Repeal process as a legal nightmare , it undoubtedly impinges on the devolution settlement and competence . The rule of law will be jeopardised . '' Claire Perry Extransport minister and MP for Devizes ( 52.5 per cent Leave 47.5 per cent Remain ) `` I think the problem the Secretary of State is not acknowledging is that many people in the country do n't think there is a policy to put the national interest first , they think there is a policy to put people 's narrow ideological interests first . `` What he should be setting out is quite clearly how we are going to protect British jobs and businesses , and put ideology in the past , where it belongs . '' Anna Soubry Former employment minister and MP for Broxtowe ( Leave 54.6 per cent , Remain 45.4 per cent ) `` We have to abandon that target [ on migration ] . We ca n't keep it , we know the reality : people come here to work , and , in simple terms , who is going to do the jobs that these people who come here do ? ''
Scotland May 's Brexit dilly-dallying offers a golden opportunity for Scotland ; If it acts now , the Scottish Government can put its demands at the top of the UK-EU negotiation agenda
Three months on from the European Union referendum it is blatantly obvious the UK Government has n't a clue about how or when to proceed with Brexit . Theresa May 's Cabinet ca n't even agree amongst themselves what their definition of Brexit is , as witnessed by their contradictory statements on the future relationship between Britain and the European single market . The Scottish Government therefore has a golden opportunity , which it should not let slip , to fill the void by putting Scotland 's Brexit demands at the top of the UK-EU negotiations agenda and doing so now . Rather than wait until Mrs May eventually gets her act together , the Scottish Government should immediately publish its `` List of Scottish Demands '' for the Brexit negotiations . Do n't wait for Whitehall . Set the agenda now . Force the UK Cabinet to acknowledge Scotland 's priorities . Preempt any attempt by the UK Government to place unacceptable limitations on Scotland 's Brexit ambitions . Top of the list of Scottish demands should be the transfer of the powers being repatriated from Brussels , as they relate to Scotland , to the Scottish Parliament - not Westminster . All the powers relating to existing devolved matters , such as farming and fishing , should automatically transfer to Edinburgh . Brexit also provides the ideal opportunity to devolve all the other powers currently controlled by Brussels to the Scottish Parliament . This would include powers currently exercised by the EU covering employment laws and workers ' rights , environmental protection , social policy , consumer protection , certain aspects of transport policy , some aspects of energy policy , public health matters , and certain aspects of justice and home affairs policies as well as external affairs . Finally , a range of other powers which have n't been devolved to Scotland because of EU rules should also be transferred to Edinburgh . The most important of these would be giving the Scottish Parliament full control over value added tax ( VAT ) . Until now the UK Treasury has argued that VAT could n't be devolved because the EU would n't allow rate variations within a member state . After Brexit , this excuse is no longer valid . VAT could easily be transferred in toto to Edinburgh . The Leave campaign 's promise during the referendum that if the UK voted for Brexit , then Scotland would get control over immigration policy must also be honoured and included in Scotland 's list of demands . The second item on that list should be the transfer of all the funding associated with these new powers mentioned above , including Scotland 's share of the UK annual contributions to the EU budget , itself estimated by the Scottish Parliament 's Information Centre ( Spice ) to be worth around £800 million a year net of the funding Scotland currently gets from the EU . With this money , post-Brexit , the Scottish Government could continue to finance all the projects currently supported by the EU in Scotland to the same level of funding as at present , and still have another £800 million or so a year left over to invest as we choose . The accumulation of all these new powers and finances would bring about 'neo-Independence '' for Scotland , creating the ideal platform for advancing to full sovereignty for the Scottish people in the early 2020s . The third key item on Scotland 's list must be continuing access to the benefits of the single market . Eleven per cent of all goods and services sold furth of Scotland every year go to the EU . These exports support many thousands of jobs in Scotland that we ca n't afford to lose ; so retaining both free access to this market along with the other benefits of the single market , such as `` passporting '' for our financial sector , is essential . Scotland should continue to benefit from the free movement of people between Europe and Scotland . The crucial role played by people from Europe and elsewhere in the world in staffing some of our key industries such as tourism , agriculture and horticulture has to be protected . There is no reason why Scotland should not be able to implement its own immigration policy which would allow free movement to continue . The UK Government would find it difficult to refuse these demands , if Scotland plays its cards right . To help ensure our demands are met , the Scottish Government should organise a `` Brexit coalition '' of the nations and regions of the UK . Such a coalition could form a shared platform of key demands that the nations and regions need to be met from Brexit and force Mrs May to reach a deal which is as acceptable to them as it is to her . Alex Neil MSP is a former Scottish Government Cabinet Secretary
Europe must keep UK close , says Germany 's vice-chancellor ; Merkel 's deputy offers prospect of access to single market - but warns that Brexit is taking too long
THE European Union should aim to maintain close ties with Britain after Brexit , the German vice-chancellor said yesterday . In comments which will encourage hopes that Germany could be prepared to broker a `` soft '' Brexit deal , and access to the single market , Sigmar Gabriel said the EU should `` do everything '' to keep Britain `` as close to Europe as possible '' . But Mr Gabriel , who is Angela Merkel 's deputy in the German government , also warned that it would `` not be easy '' to preserve ties , and said Britain was taking `` far too long '' over Brexit . `` My personal view is that we should do everything , as far as it is politically justifiable , to keep the British as close as possible to Europe , '' Mr Gabriel told reporters in Berlin . `` This will not be easy . But above all , it must be done quickly . The uncertainty is the biggest problem . In our estimation , the process is taking far too long . '' The comments will be seized upon by supporters of a soft Brexit as evidence that Germany is prepared to offer Britain a deal . But Mr Gabriel made it clear that he was expressing his `` personal views '' . He is the leader of Mrs Merkel 's current coalition partner , but is gearing up for an election campaign in which they will be rivals next year . His comments come just two days after Mrs Merkel took a hard line on Brexit at her party conference , repeating her warning that Britain will not be allowed to `` cherry pick '' in the negotiations . In a speech that marked the start of her election campaign , Mrs Merkel made a point of stressing her commitment to freedom of movement . Access to the single market was con-ditional upon accepting the EU 's four basic freedoms , including free movement , she said . Proponents of a soft Brexit are hopeful that the threat to Germany 's own economic interests will change Mrs Merkel 's mind . But there is little sign of that yet . In his remarks to reporters yesterday , Mr Gabriel said Germany was concerned about the possible economic effects of Brexit , but said : `` We 're not experiencing a strong impact at the moment . '' On the basis of his comments , Mr Gabriel appears to be more open to a deal with Britain than Mrs Merkel . But that may have little effect on negotiations . Germany 's elections are not due for another 10 months , by when the talks will have been under way for some time . Mrs Merkel 's Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) party is currently well ahead of Mr Gabriel 's Social Democratic Party ( SPD ) in the polls , on 37 per cent to the SPD 's 22 per cent . 'In my view , we should do everything , as far as it is politically justifiable , to keep the British as close as possible '
Remainers 'paying lip service ' to Brexit vote ; Davis attacks Labour MPs in bitter Commons debate as timetable for triggering Article 50 is approved
Caroline Lucas ? SDLP ( 3 ) : Mark Durkam , Alasdair McDonnell , Margaret Ritchie Independent 2 ) : Natalie McGarry , Michelle Thomson Plaid Cymru 3 ) : Jonathan Edwards , Liz Saville-Roberts , Hywel Williams ? SNP ( 51 ) : Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh , Hannah Bardel , Mhairi Black , Ian Blackford , Kirsty Blackman , Philip Boswell , Deidre Brock , Alan Brown , Lisa Cameron , Doug Chapman , Joanna Cherry , Ronnie Cowan , Angela Crawley , Martyn Day , Martin Docherty , Stuart Donaldson , DEPUTY POLITICAL EDITOR DAVID DAVIS has accused Europhile MPs of paying `` lip service '' to Brexit while doing `` everything they can '' to stop it . The Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union committed to producing a `` strategic plan '' for Brexit before triggering Article 50 and formally beginning Brexit negotiations . However he said the Government would not do anything that might `` jeopardise our negotiating position '' as he warned that a second referendum would be `` destructive '' to negotiations . Mr Davis spoke as MPs embarked on six hours of debate before waving through Theresa May 's plans to trigger Brexit by the end of March next year . More than 40 MPs spoke in the debate , which revealed bitter divisions in the Labour Party over migration and saw Tory MPs trade insults with one another on the floor of the Commons . MPs voted overwhelmingly in favour of the Government 's Brexit timetable , in a motion that also committed the Government to revealing details about its plans . However a hardcore group of pro-Remain Labour MPs voted against the motion , despite the fact it was first tabled by leader Jeremy Corbyn and largely accepted by the Government.Mr Davis said : `` Many on the benches opposite pay lip service to respecting the result of the referendum , while at the same time trying to find new ways to thwart and delay . `` The shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respects the will of the people . Today we will see whether they are prepared to back Britain , support our plan to follow the instructions of the British people and leave the European Union . '' Government 'on notice ' Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , called the Government 's decision to give more information about its plans for leaving the EU a `` victory '' . He claimed that he did not want to `` frustrate or delay '' Brexit , only to demand that the Government must spell out its plans on the Single Market , transition and the Customs Union . He said he was putting ministers `` on notice '' that Labour would try to write its own plans for Brexit into law unless ministers disclosed more information . While Labour 's official position was to back the Government 's amendment to invoke Article 50 by March next year , many of its MPs chose to rebel . 'Democratic outrage ' Twenty-three Labour MPs voted against the motion , warning that it would enable ministers to push ahead with Brexit without giving away any more detail about their plans . Ben Bradshaw , a Labour MP , said : `` It in effect gives a blank cheque for us to invoke Article 50 by March without any of us being any the wiser about the Government 's intentions today . '' Mike Gapes , another Labour MP , said the Government 's amendment was a `` democratic outrage '' . Heidi Alexander said she supported a second referendum on the terms of leaving the EU as she condemned the Government 's `` arbitrary '' timetable . Labour divide on migration Ms Alexander said Britain needed immigration because it is `` not having enough babies '' . She said : `` I am a 41-year-old woman without children . `` Babies grow up to become taxpayers . Who will be contributing to my pension and my care ? The answer is migrants and their children . '' By contrast Andy Burnham , Labour 's candidate for the Manchester mayorality , criticised the party 's `` paralysis '' over migration . `` Reluctance to confront this debate is undermining the cohesion of our communities and the safety of our streets , '' he said . `` I am no longer prepared to be complicit in that . '' It comes after Mr Corbyn suggested at Labour 's conference last year that he favoured uncontrolled immigration . Tory MPs trade blows Leading Europhile Conservative MPs came out in force during the debate , but Ken Clarke was the only member of the party to oppose the amendment . The former Tory chancellor said Mrs May 's Brexit plan was `` extremely vague '' as he called for a White Paper . He mocked the suggestion that she wanted a `` red , white and blue '' Brexit as he questioned whether the Government had a plan at all . Peter Bone , a Eurosceptic MP , attacked Anna Soubry , a leading Remain campaigner and former employment minister . He said she `` had no time for this place '' while in government but is suddenly a `` great '' supporter of parliamentary sovereignty . Ms Soubry said she and her colleagues were `` sick and tired '' of the abuse directed at them as she warned that many young people felt `` the older generation has stolen their future '' . She said she was prepared to back Brexit but warned the Prime Minister against playing `` silly games '' , adding that she must publish a White Paper . Remain is 'full of anger ' Eurosceptic Tory MPs used the debate to set out some red lines of their own . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader , said he would rather stay in the EU than leave and remain part of the Customs Union . He said : `` It seems completely pointless to me to actually embroil ourselves on the Customs Union , go through all this rigmarole of arguments and debates and rows , only to find at the end of the day there is no jewel in the crown at the end . '' Michael Gove , a former chief whip , said Remain campaigners look back in `` anger , remorse and regret '' . MPs who voted against Ken Clarke the only Conservative rebel ? Tory ( 1 ) : Ken Clarke ? Labour ( 23 ) : Rushanara Ali , Graham Allen , Ben Bradshaw , Ann Coffey , Neil Coyle , Stella Creasy , Geraint Davies , Jim Dowd , Louise Ellman , Chris Evans , Paul Farrelly , Mike Gapes , Helen Hayes , Meg Hillier , Peter Kyle , David Lammy , Chris Leslie , Ian Murray , Barry Sheerman , Tulip Siddiq , Angela Smith , Catherine West , Daniel Zeichner ? Liberal Democrats ( 5 ) : Alistair Carmichael , Nick Clegg , Tim Farron , Sarah Olney , Mark Williams ? Green Party ( 1 ) : Marion Fellows , Margaret Ferrier , Stephen Gethins , Patricia Gibson , Patrick Grady , Peter Grant , Neil Gray , Drew Hendry , Stewart Hosie , George Kerevan , Calum Kerr , Chris Law , John McNally , Angus MacNeil , Stuart McDonald , Callum McCaig , Anne McLaughlin , Carol Monaghan , Paul Monaghan , Roger Mullin , Gavin Newlands , John Nicolson , Brendan O'Hara , Kirsten Oswald , Steven Paterson , Angus Robertson , Alex Salmond , Tommy Sheppard , Chris Stephens , Alison Thewliss , Michael Weir , Eilidh Whiteford , Philippa Whitford , Corri Wilson , Peter Wishart 'The shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respects the will of the people '
To boldly Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Michael Groom ( Letters , October 26 ) suggests that Brexit can be solved by being bold . Does bold mean showing assertive self-confidence - or blindly ploughing ahead regardless of consequences ? Ernie Waddell Edlesborough , Buckinghamshire SIR - You suggest that MPs have `` misread the mood of the nation '' over Brexit ( Leading article , October 24 ) . At lunch the other day , of six of us who had voted for Brexit , four said that they would now vote to remain . MPs may be picking up similar views . There may be a public desire to decide whether we favour `` hard '' or `` soft '' Brexit - or even to have a second , better-informed referendum . Many who voted Leave will be grateful to those MPs who keep questioning an over-enthusiastic handful of ministers . Adrian Martin Loddiswell , Devon SIR - I would happily turn the clock forward to Christmas 2018 ( Letters , October 27 ) to avoid the cantankerous talks between two irreconcilable sides , which will simply lead to hard Brexit . Justin Tooth London W3
Scotland Mrs May plays a joker but keeps the full Brexit hand close to her chest ; Sketch
Tory MPs adore Theresa May . You can tell because at Prime Minister 's Questions she delivered what was very possibly , against stiff competition , the feeblest scripted putdown I 've ever heard in the Commons ( `` Even on rolling stock , Labour are a laughing stock ! '' ) - and yet her backbenchers hooted and cheered , instead of , for example , clawing in anguish at their own faces and pelting her with balled-up order papers . Bernard Jenkin ( Con , Harwich & N Essex ) drenched her in praise . `` In adding my congratulations to the many she 's received on her appointment as Prime Minister , '' he oozed , `` may I just comment that following the EU referendum , and under her leadership , I feel more confident about the future of our country than ever in my lifetime ? '' I have n't heard such a bruising line of interrogation since a Scottish football journalist asked Rangers ' Brian Laudrup , `` How come you 're so good ? '' But , while Mrs May is getting an easy ride now , it surely ca n't last . The Brexit negotiations will see to that . Yesterday she was asked three times by the SNP 's Angus Robertson whether she wanted the UK to retain full access to the European single market - and each time she dodged the question . `` She does n't know ! '' chorused the SNP . Firmly , Mrs May explained that she would not `` reveal our hand '' . In truth , though , it would n't be possible for Mrs May to reveal her hand , because she has n't yet got one.This is because her Government 's most senior figures disagree on what Brexit should be like . For example , the Foreign Secretary , Boris Johnson , has advocated a points-based system for immigration , but the Prime Minister opposes it . And after the Brexit Secretary , David Davis , said on Monday that it was `` very improbable '' Britain would stay in the single market , a spokesperson for Mrs May was sent out to make clear that this was `` not policy '' . In other words : the man appointed to speak for the Government on Brexit was n't speaking for the Government on Brexit . As well as the one about not revealing her empty hand , the Prime Minister has devised another cunning line to help her dodge questions about what she wants from Brexit . `` We will not , '' she sniffed three times , `` provide a running commentary on every twist and turn of the negotiation . '' Or , to translate : `` I 'm not going to tell you what I want from Brexit , so that I do n't look bad when I do n't get it . Then , whatever it is I end up getting , I can tell you afterwards that that was what I wanted all along . '' This , as it happens , was the approach David Cameron took to negotiating concessions from the EU , before the referendum . He too trumpeted relentlessly that he would get `` the best deal for Britain '' , while remaining as vague as he could about what the best deal would involve . The only thing we really knew he wanted was to stay in the EU . And he did n't get it . 'Tories cheered instead of clawing in anguish at their own faces and pelting her with balled-up order papers '
UK economy 'to grow faster from 2018 ' after Brexit divorce deal
BRITAIN 'S economy should grow faster in 2018 and 2019 as the expected agreement of a Brexit divorce bill - reported by The Daily Telegraph as ( EURO ) 45bn ( £40bn ) to ( EURO ) 55bn - should inspire more business and household confidence . Berenberg Bank now expects a sharp pick-up in business investment in the coming months as well as a more modest increase in consumer spending . As a result , it has raised its GDP growth forecasts by 0.1 percentage points in each of the next two years , with growth rising from 1.5pc this year to 1.8pc in 2018 and 1.9pc in 2019 . `` 2017 was probably the low point , '' said Kallum Pickering , Berenberg 's senior UK economist , as he cut the probability of a `` no deal '' Brexit from 30pc down to 20pc . `` With the chance of a soft Brexit rising , the global upturn can now begin to rub off on the UK more . Higher business and household confidence from the lower risk of a hard Brexit should underpin stronger gains in long-lived consumption and investment . '' The Brexit talks are still far from over , however . Andrew Bailey , chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority , urged the Government and the EU to agree a transition period as soon as possible to avoid a crunch in which contracts across the UK-EU border are thrown into a legal void . `` There does need to be a transition agreement , we need to agree it very soon now , frankly , '' he told the House of Lords EU financial affairs sub-committee . `` There is obviously then a question as to what rules of engagement the EU and UK agree during that period . In many ways I am not so fussed about what they are , provided that they are clear . We can not have ambiguity . '' He added : `` We could live with a world where the UK goes on implementing EU legislation rules , and obviously could live in one where we do n't . '' That is just as important for the EU as it is for the UK , he said , as financial contracts spanning the border are vital for the continental businesses that rely on British banks and insurers . The Government proposed a new industrial strategy earlier this week to attempt to boost domestic growth , productivity and wages .
Union may compromise over Brexit , says Irish PM
THE EU could compromise over giving Britain access to the single market and customs union after Brexit , the Irish prime minister has suggested . Leo Varadkar proposed that the EU could enter into a `` deep '' free trade agreement with the UK after Brexit and still enjoy access to the single market . He also suggested that the UK could follow the example of Turkey and make its own customs deal after leaving the EU to reduce red tape . But he warned he was prepared to delay Brexit talks unless he was satisfied that `` sufficient progress '' had been made on key issues including the Irish border , the Brexit bill and the rights of EU citizens . The Taoiseach , who was making his first official visit to Northern Ireland , has signalled that he is prepared to make the Irish Sea the border with the UK because Dublin believes proposals to create a frictionless land border are unworkable . However , he appeared to adopt a significantly softer approach than other EU nations to other aspects of Brexit negotiations . He said : `` If the UK does not want to stay in the customs union , perhaps there can be an EU-UK customs union . We have one with Turkey . Surely we can have one with the United Kingdom ? He added : `` If the UK does not want to stay in the single market , perhaps it could enter into a deep free trade agreement with the EU and rejoin EFTA of which it was a member prior to accession . And if this can not be agreed now , then perhaps we can have a transition period during which the UK stays in the single market and customs union while these things are worked out . '' The EU 's 27 remaining nations are due to meet for a summit in October when they will decide whether enough progress has been made on the divorce settlement to allow trade talks to begin . Mr Varadkar hinted Ireland could block the start of phase two of talks unless it is happy with proposals for the Irish border . He said he did not want there to be `` an economic border on our island nor do I want one between Ireland and Britain '' and that it was up to advocates of a `` hard Brexit '' to set out how such border controls could work .
Labour to foil clean Brexit with help of minor parties
LABOUR is preparing to join forces with the Liberal Democrats , the SNP and the Greens in an attempt to thwart Theresa May 's plans for a clean Brexit and ensure the EU still has oversight over British laws . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , will publish the Great Repeal Bill on Thursday , which will transfer up to 12,000 European laws and regulations into British law on the day Britain leaves the European Union . Opposition MPs are preparing to table a series of amendments in the autumn to ensure the European Court of Justice and EU institutions retain influence over British laws and rights after Brexit . The Prime Minister has previously made clear that Britain will not `` return to the jurisdiction '' of the European Court of Justice after Brexit and has insisted : `` Our laws will be made not in Brussels , but in Westminster . '' The Bill is likely to prove one of the biggest tests of Mrs May 's authority after her failure to secure an outright majority in the election . Bernard Jenkin MP , a Brexit campaigner , said : `` These arguments that somehow we need some foreign jurisdiction to provide enforcement for UK law are phoney . '' Theresa May has called on Jeremy Corbyn to condemn `` bullying '' supporters as they were accused of drawing up a `` hit list '' of 49 moderate Labour MPs they want to leave the party .
It 's still not too late to change your mind , Germany tells UK
BRITAIN would be welcomed back into the European Union if ministers reversed the decision to leave , according to the German finance minister . Wolfgang Schauble said Britain could rejoin if it chose not to go ahead with Brexit , although he admitted it is unlikely to happen following the nation 's vote to leave last year . His remarks , just days before Brexit talks are due to begin , appeared to be a deliberate jibe at Theresa May after she lost her Commons majority having asked the country for a stronger mandate for a hard Brexit . Mr Schauble claimed Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , had agreed that the aim for talks should be to `` minimize the potential damage and maximize the mutual benefit '' . Mr Hammond , seen as the most Europhile member of the Cabinet , is said to favour a `` jobs first '' Brexit , putting him at odds with Mrs May 's stated intention of putting a reduction in migration centre stage . Guy Verhofstadt , the EU 's lead Brexit negotiator , said Brussels is `` impatiently waiting '' for Mrs May to decide her position on any exit and to begin talks with other leaders of the 27 member states . In a series of highly critical tweets Mr Verhofstadt , who has been a fierce critic of the UK 's decision to leave the union , said the Prime Minister must get a handle on her Government and start negotiations as soon as possible . He said : `` We are impatiently waiting for the negotiating position of the UK government . The current uncertainty can not continue . '' Mr Verhofstadt added : `` Brexit is n't just about the Tories leaving the EU , it 's about the whole UK . Everyone 's voice should be heard . '' He said that the `` Good Friday Agreement must be a priority in Brexit talks '' as an alliance between the Northern Irish DUP and the British Government took shape . In an interview with Bloomberg , Mr Schauble said `` it 's up to the British Government to take their own decisions '' as he suggested that EU leaders would give ministers `` some days '' to decide how to proceed with talks . He added that it `` would not be helpful '' to speculate on whether the UK will reverse its decisiont , but added : `` The Government has said we will stay with the Brexit . We take the decision as a matter of respect . But if they wanted to change their decision , of course they would find open doors . '' The Prime Minister 's spokesman replied : `` The British people voted to leave the EU and we will be delivering on that will . '' 'We take the decision as a matter of respect . But if they wanted to change their decision , of course they would find open doors '
Brexit Britain needs a radical vision but timid Hammond played it safe ; A woeful failure to seize the historic moment is becoming the hallmark of this Government
Everything has changed , and yet everything has stayed the same . This was a risk-averse , unrushed , incremental Autumn Statement fit for a comfortable , content , steadyas-she-goes country , not a manifesto for Brexit Britain . Our angry country has just voted to smash the status quo , upend the establishment and tear up 50 years of foreign policy ; yet there was no commensurate response from Philip Hammond , no fireworks , no game-changing tax reforms , no thinking the unthinkable . Prudence and caution are ordinarily great attributes in a chancellor ; and Mr Hammond is right that spending a little bit more on roads makes sense . Yet these are times that require visionary leadership , not managerialism . It 's not enough merely to tweak a few schemes here and there , or even , in time , to increase capital spending by a few tenths of a percentage point of GDP . We needed a Ronald Reagan style `` it 's morning in Britain '' moment ; instead , we were offered a collection of micropolicies that could almost all have been delivered by George Osborne , Vince Cable or even Ed Miliband . This Government 's passivity in the face of seismic changes at home and abroad , its inability to imagine and describe a great , exciting future for this county , its refusal to seize the moment - these are fast becoming its defining features . This is tragic : the Tories have n't been this popular since the Eighties , yet they are failing utterly to take advantage of it . There are three possible explanations for this extraordinary timidity . The first is that the Treasury remains in denial , that it secretly hopes that Brexit will go away , that Donald Trump will be unelected and that the French elections wo n't happen next year . While plenty of powerful people still hope that Brexit will be derailed , Mr Hammond is n't one of them , so this theory can be dismissed . The second is that the Government wants to retain some firepower in case the economy slows . This is plausible , but regrettable : it should be leading , not following , boosting the economy pre-emptively . The third , and in my view most plausible , explanation as to why Mr Hammond chose not to rock the boat is that Project Fear lives on , and that the Chancellor does n't have the desire or appetite to take it on . Britain has voted to leave the European Union , the Government has pledged to make it a success and yet the country 's official forecaster continues to assume that Brexit will be bad for growth , productivity and the budget deficit . It 's like a scene from Yes , Minister , a case study in how the establishment never gives up . It would be comical if it were n't so serious . The Office for Budget Responsibility believes that the state will now borrow £122 billion more by 2020-21 than it forecast in March , a huge change that will send the national debt shooting up all the way to 90.2 per cent of GDP in 2017-18 . Mr Hammond 's decisions are responsible for £26 billion of this increase ; and another £26 billion can be accounted for , the OBR guesses , primarily by the fact that it is becoming harder to wring income tax out of the economy because of the rise in self-employment . But the OBR also assumes that £59 billion of higher borrowing is `` related to the referendum result and exiting the EU '' over this fiveyear period : that number therefore becomes the `` official '' cost of Brexit , and has been welcomed with hysterical glee by Remainers . The hit is based on highly contestable assumptions , including lower productivity , reduced business investment , increased barriers to trade and less immigration than there would otherwise have been . For those of us who believe that Brexit will , in time , be good for growth and bolster openness and competition , this is maddening : what 's the point of winning a referendum if the government machine is on autopilot , pre-programmed to trash Brexit and to assume the worst at every stage ? This inbuilt Remainian bias risks becoming self-fulfilling : the Chancellor can not cut tax because it is assumed the economy will slow , so he does n't and it does . As it happens , the only one of the assumptions that the OBR makes that might be true is that immigration will fall , but it 's still impossible to predict precise numbers . I do n't blame Robert Chote , the boss of the OBR and a first-class economist , for this deeply unsatisfactory set of forecasts : his job has become impossible . The Government has n't told him anything about the shape of Brexit , so he has taken the consensus , establishment view on it . What choice did he have ? Had he said that Brexit will , in fact , be good for growth , the explosion of establishment rage would have engulfed him . His report makes it very clear that these are not really predictions but merely deductions from assumptions . In fact , it could have been far worse : the hit from Brexit in the OBR 's forecasts is actually very small : the economy will grow by 2.1 per cent this year , faster than the 2 per cent expected by the OBR in March . Growth next year will be a perfectly respectable 1.4 per cent ( down from 2.2 per cent ) , then 1.7 per cent in 2018 ( down from 2.1 per cent ) , before returning to the 2.1 per cent previously expected . Britain would still be growing faster than the Eurozone . This is a dramatically better picture than the catastrophic fantasy recession predicted by the Treasury during the referendum campaign . Even if growth did perform as the OBR suggests over the next two years and then eventually bounced back , as Eurosceptics believe it will , the UK would still end up better off as a result of Brexit . But all of this means that any forecasts for public finances have become even more meaningless than usual . The supposed massive fiscal loosening announced at this Autumn Statement is primarily a statistical fluke . Regardless of Brexit , George Osborne 's deficit reduction target was unachievable ; Mr Hammond was right to ditch it . The real tragedy is not that the national debt is spiralling out of control - I just do n't believe the numbers . It is that the Government is doing almost nothing to build a new , stronger , free-market Britain to capitalise on Brexit . As wasted opportunities go , this one truly takes some beating . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Hammond in Cabinet Brexit row ; Senior ministers attack Chancellor for 'arguing like an accountant ' over risks of Britain leaving the EU ; PM has told Cabinet to 'get on ' with delivering Brexit
PHILIP HAMMOND is facing accusations of attempting to `` undermine Brexit '' by pushing for delays to Cabinet measures designed to control immigration . The Chancellor has been criticised by Cabinet colleagues for `` arguing like an accountant seeing the risk of everything '' rather than pressing ahead with plans for Brexit . It is understood that Mr Hammond was one of a number of voices urging caution during a Brexit Cabinet committee meeting last week , during which proposals were discussed for a new work permit system designed to reduce immigration . At the meeting Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , presented plans for a post-Brexit visa regime that would see all European Union workers forced to prove they have secured a skilled job before being allowed into Britain . It was seen as confirmation that Britain will leave the single market as part of the Brexit process , something which Mr Hammond is previously understood to have warned against . Sources claimed that Mr Hammond raised questions about the plans . Government sources rejected any suggestion that there was open dissent from Mr Hammond over the proposals , and said the meeting was about exploring proposals rather than reaching any concrete position over future immigration policy . However , members of the Cabinet are said to be growing increasingly frustrated by Mr Hammond 's position on Brexit . One Cabinet source said he is `` overly influenced by his Treasury officials who think it is a catastrophe that Britain voted to leave the EU '' . Another source said : `` He is arguing from a very Treasury point of view . He is arguing like an accountant seeing the risk of everything rather than the opportunity . '' Another source suggested that while the Treasury is quick to criticise solutions proposed by members of the Cabinet , it has been `` less forthcoming '' in tabling its own policies . The source added : `` The Home Secretary presented an immigration paper at the meeting . Other departments are not quite so proactive . There are difficulties . '' There were claims yesterday that tensions have increased to the point where there are fears Mr Hammond could resign as Chancellor . Treasury sources last night moved to deny those claims as `` complete and utter nonsense '' . One source said : `` It is ridiculous to Continued on Page 4 Anton Muscatelli : Page 18 Slippery slope Euro bound to collapse , warns economist One of the fathers of the euro has said that the single currency is `` a house of cards '' that is bound to collapse . Prof Otmar Issing , a German economist and former central banker who played a key role in the birth of the euro , said EU financial authorities were on a `` slippery slope '' as the political drive to closer union increasingly conflicts with their duties as a watchdog . Comment : P19 Business : P1 Continued from Page 1 suggest he is doing anything other than trying to make [ Brexit ] work . '' However , the Treasury source added : `` He is very clear that the vote to leave the EU was not a vote to sink the economy . '' At the Brexit committee meeting last week , Mrs May is understood to have demanded that her Cabinet `` get on '' with delivering Brexit . `` The Prime Minister made it clear that we have to get on this , '' a source close to events said . `` But there are very big personalities arguing different things . It 's not easy . '' Under the proposals submitted by Ms Rudd last week , EU tourists and students would still get free access to the UK . The work permit system would be designed to stop low-skilled migrants coming to live in the UK in order to search for a job . It is believed the Home Secretary also proposed a `` seasonal worker scheme '' to allow low-skilled migrants to come to Britain temporarily if there are shortages of workers in industries such as agriculture or construction . Any attempt to create a work permit scheme is likely to be criticised by business leaders . The Government was earlier this month forced to abandon plans to `` name and shame '' businesses hiring foreign workers instead of Britons . Meanwhile , a think tank has suggested that City firms could move their headquarters out of Britain unless they are given assurances that the finance industry will be protected in Brexit . Open Europe , an independent think tank , warned that the banking sector needs at least one year 's notice of what access to the EU market will look like . `` The financial services industry needs maximum certainty on future trade arrangements with the EU as early on as possible in the negotiations , '' it said . `` Firms have been planning for the worst , and some of them may start putting those plans into motion if uncertainty drags on for too long . ''
Scotland EU 's plan to put UK off Brexit ; Brussels hopes that taking tough stance will see country abandon plan to leave bloc ; Politicians lied about EU for 40 years , claims Juncker
SENIOR figures in the EU believe that Britain will give up on Brexit if they make negotiations as tough as possible , The Daily Telegraph understands . British officials are fighting to stop Europe adopting a no-compromise position in the hope that the UK will change its mind about leaving the bloc . The revelation came as Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , said British politicians were to blame for Brexit because they spent 40 years spreading `` lies '' about the EU . More than five prominent EU figures interviewed by The Daily Telegraph expressed doubts that Britain would go through with Brexit when confronted by the `` reality of the bureaucratic nightmare '' and the `` insane act of economic self-harm '' . One senior UK official involved in setting up forthcoming negotiations said the EU elite `` seem to think the game is to make us change our minds '' . The stance has left representatives fighting to explain to EU leaders that their approach was `` dangerous '' and `` unlikely '' to succeed . A second UK source added there was a risk of positions in the Brexit talks becoming `` dangerously entrenched '' , even before Theresa May invokes Article 50 that will open formal `` divorce '' proceedings . The sense that battle lines are hardening came as the 27 EU leaders prepared for a summit today in the Slovakian capital , Bratislava , designed to show unity and a determination to forge ahead with a future without Britain . The toughening mood was indicated by Donald Tusk , the European Council president , in a nine-point letter urging EU leaders to use the Bratislava summit to restore citizens ' fading faith in the Union . In a barely disguised appeal to make sure Britain was left demonstrably worse off by Brexit , Mr Tusk insisted that the 27 should resolutely `` stick to the treaty '' on issues such as free movement . `` If we do so , there will be no room for doubt that it is a good thing to be a member of the Union , '' he wrote . Burkhard Balz , a German MEP and influential figure on the European Parliament 's economic and monetary affairs committee , said Britain must not underestimate the determination of the rest of Europe to deprive the UK of its EU financial passporting rights and euro clearing . He also warned Europe would accept economic pain to defend its core principles and that the British belief that the demands of German and French exporters could soften the terms of Brexit was overblown . WIREIMAGE `` This summer I travelled all over Germany , and the main reason was to talk about Brexit . BENETT/ DAVE Every time , in every place , the biggest round of applause was when I said the 'the time of cherry-picking and rebates is over ' . That is how the German Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 people feel about the situation , '' he told The Daily Telegraph . In the European Parliament , which must ratify any Article 50 deal agreed by the EU 27 , the mood against Britain was further soured this week by personal attacks on Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian prime minister and a leading Brexit negotiator , by former Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , and David Davis , the minister for leaving the EU . Mr Davis referred to his future interlocutor as `` Satan '' when addressing the foreign affairs select committee , while Mr Farage lambasted Mr Verhofstadt as a `` fanatic '' . `` Perhaps there was a time when this could not have got nasty , '' said one source close to Mr Verhofstadt , `` but when the Brexit minister calls the chief negotiator 'Satan ' what response , really , does Britain expect ? '' Yesterday Mr Juncker said it is no surprise that the country voted to leave the European Union earlier this year because the public have been told that the EU is `` stupid '' for decades . Of British politicans , he said : `` On Europe there are so many lies , so many halftruths that are circulated around , that one can not be surprised . '' He admitted that the union must shoulder some of the blame for the decision but claimed there is `` something wrong '' with the UK in comments that prompted fury among British MPs . In a YouTube question and answer session Mr Juncker said : `` Of course Brexit means that something is wrong in Europe . But Brexit means also that something was wrong in Britain . `` If , over 40 years , you are explaining to your general public that the EU is stupid ... you ca n't be surprised that the day you ask people 'do you want to stay or do you want to leave ? ' , that a too high number of British expressed the view that it is better to leave . '' `` On Europe there are so many lies , so many half-truths that are circulated around , that one can not be surprised . '' Douglas Carswell , the Ukip MP , called Mr Juncker `` arrogant '' following his remarks .
Brexit is a fantasy , says German trade chief ; Voice of exporters claims Britain leaving the EU is seen by markets as political chatter rather than reality Germans risk miscalculation over costs of messy Brexit
GERMANY 'S powerful trade chief has dismissed Brexit as a pipe dream that will never happen , insisting that markets remain calm only because investors are entirely discounting the political noise from Westminster . `` Brexit is just talk so far . I doubt it will ever happen , '' said Anton Börner , president of the German federation of trade and services ( BGA ) and voice of the country 's exporting interests . `` The markets are not expecting Brexit either . Otherwise you would see the stock market crash through the floor or British interest rates would be exploding . British financial markets are ticking along relatively well because investors assume that Brexit is just political chatter rather than reality , '' he told Die Welt . The comments offer a revealing window into attitudes in Berlin , where much of the political class still thinks that the UK will recoil from the Article 50 process and opt back into the EU - albeit on diminished terms . The assumption that Britain 's bluff can be called lends itself to political gamesmanship and has coloured the Brexit talks , perhaps tempting the German authorities to think they take a particularly tough line without serious consequences . This is fertile ground for misjudgments . German trade data suggests that the cost of an acrimonious Brexit - with EU trade tariffs , reaching 10pc on cars - are higher for German industry than often acknowledged . Last year the German trade surplus with the UK was ( EURO ) 50.5bn ( £44.7bn ) , bigger than its surplus with any other country , and four times its entire surplus with the rest of the eurozone ( ( EURO ) 12.9bn ) . This is not trivial . Mr Börner 's breezy assertion that Brexit will never happen suggests that German industry is misreading the political situation and has yet to assess the actual damage if Britain is pushed too far and talks break down . `` There is still an assumption that the UK will blink and ask for Brexit to be called off , '' said David Marsh , an expert on Germany and head of the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum . Mr Marsh says British leaders are equally misled in thinking that Germany will come to the rescue and force through a friendly deal to shield its car industry . `` Both sides are misjudging the other , '' he said . For now the position of the BGA and Germany 's industrial combines is to uphold the `` integrity of the EU single market '' even if this means sacrificing unfettered access to the lucrative UK market . They are not deviating one iota from the inflexible line of the German government . Brexiteers hoping that German industry would lobby for a softer deal have been sorely disappointed . Mr Börner says that the British must learn the hard way that withdrawal comes at a cost . `` There are rules that we have all agreed to . It would be a devastating signal - both internally and externally - if the EU were to give something away , '' he said . To the surprise of many in Britain , Germany has so far proved to be one of the most unyielding countries in the EU , shooting down proposals by other states and EU think tanks for a creative way out of the impasse . Berlin was strikingly hostile to an British-Italian initiative and to a Bruegel paper by France 's Jean Pisani-Ferry calling for a `` Continental Partnership '' to preserve close trading ties , with inner and outer circles to reflect better the changing geometry of Europe . It has been quick to reprimand any of the EU-27 states that step out of line . Germany has played a lead role in stipulating there can be no discussion of the relationship with Britain until the issue of Brexit reparations payments is settled and the UK has jumped through a set off hoops , an aggressive stance that risks forcing Britain to walk out . While the mantra from Berlin is that the EU is a `` rules-based '' structure that must be protected , there is a darker reality behind the rhetoric . Germany flouts EU law over its illegal current account surplus and forged its own Nord Stream 2 gas deal with the Kremlin against vehement protests from East European states , and in breach of EU principles . The EU system both heightens and masks German power . The single market has served Germany extremely well but often at the expense of other EU states . Italy has seen no benefit from the arrangement for a quarter century . It correlates with national decline . In demanding the EU uphold the sanctity of the single market and the EU Corpus Sanctum above all else , Berlin is conflating its own interests with the interests of others : those that do not see the matter in such didactic , ideological terms and want to preserve close defence ties with the UK , such as Poland ; or those that could be hit hard by a no-deal debacle , such as Ireland . The risk for Germany as it seeks to make an example out of Britain is not only that it could trigger an anti-German `` buyers ' strike '' by offended British consumers but also that its own relations with other EU states will become even harder to manage . 'There is a darker reality behind the rhetoric . Germany flouts EU law over its current account surplus '
Amber Rudd accuses Johnson of being a 'backseat driver ' over Brexit negotiations ; Home Secretary denies Cabinet split over EU withdrawal and refuses to deny ambitions of top job
AMBER RUDD has accused Boris Johnson of being a `` backseat driver '' over EU negotiations after his essay on Brexit re-opened Cabinet rifts . The Home Secretary said that she did not want Mr Johnson `` managing the Brexit process '' and criticised his decision to go ahead with the article the day after the latest terrorist attack . Ms Rudd also refused to deny that she has ambitions of becoming prime minister , saying only that she has not `` got time '' to think about it . Ms Rudd , a Remain campaigner during the EU referendum campaign , was less than complimentary about the Foreign Secretary in the run-up to last year 's Brexit vote , saying he was : `` The life and soul of the party , but he is not the man you want driving you home at the end of the evening . '' Asked by the BBC 's Andrew Marr what she meant when she said that , she replied : `` What I meant by that is I do n't want him managing the Brexit process . '' She insisted that Theresa May is `` driving the car '' and , when pressed on Mr Johnson 's intervention , she said : `` You could call it backseat driving . '' Her views were echoed by Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , who said : `` It is absolutely clear to everyone that the driver of the car in this instance is the Prime Minister . '' The Home Secretary described Mr Johnson as an `` irrepressible enthusiast '' on Brexit who brought `` enthusiasm , energy , and sometimes entertainment '' to the Cabinet . Asked if the intervention was helpful , she replied : `` I think it is absolutely fine . I would expect nothing less from Boris . '' She said she had not read his article in The Daily Telegraph because : `` I had rather a lot to do on Friday . There was a bomb that nearly went off in Parsons Green . Yesterday I chaired Cobra , I went to see the www.police.No , I did n't have time to read the piece . '' She agreed that Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , `` has a point '' in criticising Mr Johnson for submitting the piece as London suffered another terror attack . Denying the Cabinet was split over Brexit , Ms Rudd said : `` The fact is that most people , like myself , who campaigned for Remain , believe that now we need to get on with it . `` We need to do it in away that protects the economy , that does n't have a cliff edge , that makes sure that immigration attracts the brightest and the best ... '' Many ministers are reportedly irritated by Mr Johnson 's intervention , which has exposed differences of opinion in the Cabinet about the size of any Brexit bill that should be paid . Theresa May had spent much of the summer restoring discipline in the Cabinet over Brexit and until now appeared to have been largely successful . The Home Secretary has been widely touted as a potential successor to Mrs May and she failed to rule out a bid for the top job . Asked about her future ambitions , she said that as Home Secretary she was focused on `` keeping people safe '' , adding : `` I have n't got time for the rest of it . '' However , Conservative colleagues were unconvinced by her reticence . One senior Tory MP told The Daily Telegraph : `` Of course she is lining herself up for a leadership bid , without any question or doubt at all . But she knows , as does everyone else in the party , that it is not in anyone 's interests to have a leadership challenge before Brexit is a legal reality . '' BBC OVERS/ JEFF `` One of the biggest obstacles to Ms Rudd if she did decide to stand in a future leadership contest is the size of her majority in her Hastings and Rye constituency , which slumped from 4,796 to just 346 in June 's general election . There has been speculation that Ms Rudd might change constituencies for a safe seat at the next election but she would only say : `` I 'm hoping over the next few years to build on it by showing the voters of Hastings and Rye how I can support them locally . `` I am down in Hastings and Rye most weekends working locally but my priority has to be , as Home Secretary , keeping people safe . '' Meanwhile , Mr Green was asked about his own relationship with the Prime Minister by Sarah Smith on BBC One 's Sunday Politics . Ms Smith reminded him that Margaret Thatcher talked fondly about her deputy leader William Whitelaw and joked that `` everyone needs a Willie '' . Asked if he viewed himself as `` Theresa May 's Willie '' , he replied : `` I was a huge admirer of Willie Whitelaw in my youth and absolutely I would be very content to have him as a role model . ''
OECD sees no reason to raise barriers after Brexit ; City expertise will not be brushed aside after Brexit
EU NATIONS have `` ample room '' to keep trading in financial services with the UK after Brexit even within the current international rules , and there is no need to build any barriers between the Continent and its finance hub , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) said . Shutting out Britain , which would risk starving the EU of the capital vital City of London , is entirely unnecessary , the international group said in its annual business and finance outlook . All 35 OECD members states agree to a Code of Liberalisation and the group argues that , if the members follow this mutual agreement , they can carry on operating smoothly - though that may rely on them staying on good terms . `` Erecting new barriers to financial services in the post-Brexit environment will not be in the collective interest of the global economy , where London plays such a key role in international banking , bonds and foreign exchange , '' the report said , noting that it took decades for the UK to build up its expertise , something which can not be simply transferred elsewhere . `` For OECD countries , international obligations in the form of the OECD Codes of Liberalisation should present no legal barriers to operating in the collective interest post-Brexit . '' These codes `` provide ample room for a pragmatic approach to the United Kingdom 's exit from the European Union '' , the OECD said . Access to the single market for services essentially means that the countries have the similar regulatory regimes - something the OECD expects will continue , given varying regimes including those in the US and Japan are deemed to be equivalent by the EU . `` Unless UK and EU financial services regimes diverge significantly after Brexit , it can arguably be expected that the United Kingdom would benefit from the sort of selective recognition arrangements provided for by the Codes , '' the OECD said . `` The converse - recognition of EU financial service providers by the UK authorities as meeting UK standards - is also to be expected , even though the material significance of this may be smaller . '' In most areas the World Trade Continued on Page 4 Continued from Page 1 Organisation insists its members offer access to their markets on a level playing field for all countries - the most favoured nation , or MFN , rule - except in the case of striking a trade deal covering `` substantially all '' trade . If the EU offered the UK 's financial services sector special access then it could look like it is breaking that rule , though traditionally this has only been tested in disputes over trade in goods , not in services . `` No breach of the MFN principle results from EU Directives that allow the European Commission to take the so-called `` equivalence decisions '' , by which third country service providers can be entitled to access European financial services markets without incorporation , '' the OECD said . `` Such third countries identified so far include Japan and the United States , for example , and the financial service operations concerned relate to such areas as capital market prospectus , credit rating , statutory audit , insurance and reinsurance , credit institutions , or investment firms . ''
Scotland Sturgeon accused of manufacturing Brexit grievances
NICOLA STURGEON was yesterday accused of manufacturing `` synthetic grievances '' about Brexit after claiming that the UK Government is attempting to use it to attack `` the very foundations '' of Holyrood 's powers . The First Minister used a speech to a think tank in Edinburgh to claim that Westminster is plotting to strip Holyrood of some of its responsibilities despite Theresa May specifically pledging not to do so . She said that it would be a `` gross betrayal '' for the UK Government not to devolve powers repatriated from Brussels covering policy areas such as farming and fishing . The SNP leader also argued that a second independence referendum would give Scots a `` proper choice '' on whether they wanted to remain part of a post-Brexit Britain and it would `` almost '' be necessary if the Prime Minister ignores her demand for a special deal . But Ruth Davidson attacked Ms Sturgeon 's `` shrill '' tone and said the Prime Minister 's Brexit White Paper had made clear more powers would be devolved to Holyrood . The Scottish Fishermen 's Federation ( SFF ) said the First Minister was making `` the wrong argument at the wrong time '' and called for the Scottish and UK governments to work together to make the most of Brexit 's `` sea of opportunity . '' David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , told a Holyrood inquiry last week that none of Holyrood 's powers would be `` re-reserved '' after Brexit . He said civil servants have identified several hundred powers that will be repatriated from the EU , of some of which will be entirely devolved to Holyrood , others will go to Westminster and a third group will be shared . However , speaking to the David Hume Institute in Edinburgh , Ms Sturgeon said that after 20 years of progress , devolution now faces a `` grave threat '' . She said : `` Far from the promises of the Leave campaign that a Brexit vote would automatically see swathes of new powers repatriated from Brussels to Holyrood , the Tories are actually threatening to strip the Scottish Parliament , and the other devolved administrations , of some of their powers . `` It is clear from their statements that even elements of farming and fishing policy - which have been a wholly devolved competences from day one - now risk being taken back to Westminster . '' Arguing this was `` a gross betrayal of the claims and promises made during the EU referendum campaign '' , she concluded : `` So what we have is in effect an attack on the very foundations of the devolved parliament we voted for 20 years ago . '' Warning Mrs May of the consequences of ignoring her plan to keep Scotland in the single market , Ms Sturgeon said : `` Proposing a further decision on independence would n't simply be legitimate , it would almost be a necessary way of giving the people of Scotland a say in our own future direction . '' But Ms Davidson said : `` This hyperbole from the First Minister takes synthetic grievance to a whole new level . Frankly , she sounds shrill . `` Nicola Sturgeon 's attempt to use Brexit to manufacture the case for a second referendum has quite simply failed . She should now take it off the table so Scotland and the UK can work to get the best Brexit deal possible . '' Bertie Armstrong , the SFF 's chief executive , said : `` What we want is for the UK Government and Scottish Government to pull together . '' He said the organisation wanted fishing regulations to be devolved but argued that international negotiations over Britain 's waters had to continue being led by the UK Government with input from the Scottish authorities . 'This hyperbole from the First Minister takes synthetic grievance to a whole new level '
Labour vows not to stand in way of PM 's Europe plan
LABOUR will back Brexit even if the party loses its bid to amend the Article 50 bill , the shadow foreign secretary , has admitted . Emily Thornberry told the BBC that Labour is using `` back channels and private conversations '' to seek assurances from the Government and vowed not to block the formal EU exit process even if ministers do not pledge to keep key protections . The remarks were criticised by Labour MPs who warned that the party must set out a clear alternative to Theresa May 's Brexit plan . Furious MPs have demanded Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , be sacked for missing last week 's vote . Jeremy Corbyn hinted yesterday that some of the shadow ministers who defied him to vote against Article 50 may not be sacked , despite parliamentary convention . Asked whether frontbenchers who defied party orders could keep their jobs , Mr Corbyn told BBC Radio 4 's The World This Weekend : `` I will be making an announcement during the week . '' He added : `` I am a very lenient person . '' Lisa Nandy , a former shadow energy secretary , expressed growing frustration in the party that Mr Corbyn 's team have no clear stance on Brexit . She said : `` The real challenge for Labour is to become the alternative and that means you have to know not just what you are against , but what you are for . '' Outlining the party 's decision not to block Brexit , Ms Thornberry told the BBC One 's Andrew Marr Show : `` We have said that we will not frustrate Brexit . We have got our instructions from the British people . We are democrats and the public have voted to leave the European Union . `` We are speaking to Government , we are speaking to Tory backbenchers and we are trying to get a compromise that will work . '' Her statement on the party 's Brexit position came as MPs prepare to demand Mr Corbyn sack Ms Abbott for missing last week 's Article 50 vote as she claimed she had a migraine . They will today demand she loses her shadow home secretary job during a private meeting of the parliamentary Labour Party . Caroline Flint , a former Labour cabinet minister , said : `` We now have Brexit flu that Diane has created here . It 's about being part of a team . `` She holds one of the most important portfolios within the shadow cabinet , if she ca n't support the leader on this then she should go . '' A number of shadow cabinet ministers resigned because they did not feel able to vote in line with Mr Corbyn 's demands last week , but Ms Abbott remains in the senior team . Ms Thornberry refused to be drawn on whether Ms Abbott would face the sack if she failed to support the Bill in Wednesday 's final third reading vote .
Hammond rebukes Johnson , warning no one is 'unsackable ' ; Tories in Manchester Conservative Party Conference
PHILIP HAMMOND delivered a clear rebuke to Boris Johnson for `` downplaying '' the complexities of Brexit as he continued his feud with the Foreign Secretary yesterday . The Chancellor said `` focus '' and `` unity '' would be needed if Britain was to come out of the Brexit negotiations with a good deal . And he warned the Foreign Secretary that no minister was `` unsackable '' . Meanwhile , Sir Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , espoused the virtues of `` discipline and loyalty '' in a sideways reference to Mr Johnson on a day when he faced mounting criticism from his Cabinet colleagues . Mr Hammond , speaking a day before Mr Johnson makes his own conference speech , said Britain will remain `` closely linked with the EU '' following Brexit , and stressed the need for a `` careful and cautious '' negotiation . Mr Johnson used articles in The Daily Telegraph and The Sun last month to set out his Brexit `` red lines '' and to demand that his Cabinet colleagues start to show more optimism about Brexit . He believes Britain should be prepared to leave the EU without a deal , and has suggested too many of his colleagues are downplaying the benefits of leaving the union . Mr Hammond took the opposite approach in his speech , saying : `` If we get this right , Britain will have a bright future beyond Brexit . But we must be clear-eyed about the challenges along our way . `` We must not downplay the difficulties nor underestimate the complexities . With focus and determination and unity , we will succeed . '' Mr Johnson 's conference speech today will be arguably the most anticipated of the conference . The reception it gets could make or break his ambitions of one day leading his party , and if he is seen as being disloyal it could also increase calls from some of his Cabinet colleagues for Theresa May to sack him . Mr Hammond did not name Mr Johnson in his speech , but in another barb clearly aimed at him , he said the Government must `` pick our way carefully and cautiously across the difficult terrain of EU negotiation , to ensure we arrive in good order on the fertile plains at the other side '' , adding that `` focus , determination and unity '' would be needed to succeed . In a series of media interviews earlier in the day , Mr Hammond had said that Mr Johnson was `` sackable '' , after the Prime Minister refused to answer a similar question on Sunday about the Foreign Secretary . He also suggested Mr Johnson 's disloyalty was making it harder for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , to negotiate in Brussels . He said : `` The more we can show unity , the stronger our negotiating position with the European Union would be . His hand would be stronger when it is clear that he has a united Cabinet behind him . '' Asked about Mr Johnson 's claim that the Brexit transition period should be `` two years and not a second more '' , he shrugged : `` I would describe that as a rhetorical flourish . '' Mr Hammond suggested that Mrs May had given Britain `` flexibility '' over the length of the Brexit transition period by saying it would last `` around '' two years . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , said the transition period could last `` a few months either side '' of two years . The Telegraph understands that several Cabinet ministers believe a period of two and a half years would be acceptable . Sir Michael Fallon was also scathing when asked about Mr Johnson 's chances of becoming the next Tory leader . Speaking on The Telegraph 's Chopper 's Brexit Podcast , Sir Michael said his advice to his squabbling colleagues was to `` have a look at the military . People admire our military the world over ? Why ? Because of ? those virtues of discipline and loyalty '' . He said a poll that showed 21 per cent of Tory members wanted Mr Johnson as the next leader `` does n't seem extremely high '' . Speaking on the same programme , Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader , said Mrs May needed to show by the end of the conference that she could `` lead a united party , or we will not succeed '' . Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , yesterday warned if Cabinet ministers did not `` pull in behind '' Mrs May they would be `` risking Brexit '' . Asked by the Guardian if he feared Mr Johnson was `` looking for the top job , '' Mr Hunt said : `` All I would say to anyone who might be eyeing a different job is that Jeremy Corbyn is also eyeing a different job . `` And if they do n't swing behind Theresa , who I think is doing a fantastic job in very difficult circumstances , they will just open the door to Jeremy Corbyn and probably the most dangerous Left-wing government this country has ever seen . '' At a conference fringe event , Mr Green refused to rule out paying for single market access after the Brexit transition period ? which would cross one of Mr Johnson 's red lines . He said : `` I 'm not ruling anything in or out that will be in the detail of the negotiation because David Davis has got a difficult job and he is eminently suited to doing it . I 'm not going to do anything that makes his job more difficult . '' William Hague : Page 14 Editorial Comment : Page 15 Business , page 1 'Brexit will be one of the most challenging tasks undertaken by a peacetime government '
Theresa May needs courage and ambition BODY : When a prime minister addresses a party conference , they have two audiences : the party and the country . Under Tony Blair and David Cameron , it became orthodox to overlook the party and reach out to the country - on the assumption that the former was repellent to the latter . But things have changed . Grass-roots activism is more vital to British politics than it has been for decades , and the re-emergence of philosophical debate means that a good leader has to engage seriously with the ideas bubbling away within their ranks . That is why , when Theresa May takes to the stage in Manchester next week , she must address the audiences in the hall and at home on the assumption that they are both looking for the same thing : a compelling Conservative vision . Jeremy Corbyn has vision by the bucketload . His ideas might be outdated , even dangerous , but the very fact that he believes in something attracts support , and that support has helped revive the Labour Party 's fortunes . So , too , has the Tories ' comparative lack of self-confidence . While Labour has spent the past few years making the case for big government , the Tories have been shy about advocating the free market . This has allowed Labour to give the impression that its activists are the only ones motivated by high ideals . And yet , listening to Mrs May 's speech will be small businessmen , charity workers , clerics , councillors and regular party activists - the backbone of civic Britain - who just want to give something back to their communities . This traditional Tory family has been expanded by Brexit . The Conservative vote in 2017 was older , poorer , and less southern than it has been in a while . Opinion in Manchester over Brexit may be fairly diverse , yet the question on everyone 's minds is now identical : `` We 've heard that Brexit means Brexit , but what does that actually mean in practice ? '' There are those who want Brexit to be as light as a feather : a slow retreat from the EU , paying it off to keep it sweet and staying in the single market , with a few cosmetic changes . On the other hand , there are those who want Britain to win the maximum of liberty at the lowest price : keeping control of our borders , our courts and our ability to trade with whomever we wish . Getting the most out of Brussels might require brinkmanship , saying that the UK is willing to walk away without a deal . It is a risk ; Brexit always involved risk . But one never gets what one wants without asking . The voters understand this : only the most militant Remainers take every threat from the EU negotiating team as a statement of fact . And as the weeks go by , the stakes of that negotiation are becoming clearer . We were told during the referendum campaign that the EU was just a trade club motivated by mutual self-interest . This week , however , Emmanuel Macron called for faster , closer integration - EU identity cards , a shared defence budget , an EU army . Just as the domestic battle has become dramatically sharper - socialism vs capitalism - so the debate over Brexit has crystalised into pan-Europeanism vs nation-state democracy . Brussels has sheer contempt for Britain 's dream of self-determination . Mrs May signalled she was willing to make concessions to the EU in her Florence speech , and how did Jean-Claude Juncker react ? By saying there will be little progress in talks `` unless miracles would happen '' . This is Mrs May 's chance to lay out this epochal choice and say , both to her party and her country : `` This is what I 'm up against . This is why I need your support . '' But she should also say : `` And this is what I propose to do . '' Activists will be listening for detail : what happens after this transition deal ? Will Britain set targets on immigration ? What domestic policies will see the economy through ? Will the UK build more houses , cut taxes , slash regulation and invest in infrastructure ? If the choice posed is between a Brexit in name only and a Brexit that makes the most of Brexit - one that exploits free trade and slims down the regulatory state - Mrs May would be wise to hammer out the case for freedom . There is absolutely no point in sitting on the fence . If the party and the public crave decisive leadership , there is nothing to be gained from skipping over the big questions and offering a reiteration of the slogans that served the party so poorly during the general election . Strong and stable ? These are good qualities , but they need to be allied to courage and ambition . The Tories must trust their instincts more . They particularly need to trust the instincts of their members . Mrs May should speak to them boldly and , yes , tell them what they are waiting to hear - if only because it 's what the country wants to hear , too . Brexit is a magnificent , once-in-a-generation chance to reassert the authority of Parliament and liberate the individual , to re-establish Britons as the sovereign of their own affairs . On Brexit , this is Mrs May 's chance to say , both to her party and her country : 'This is what I 'm up against . Support me ' If the party and the public crave decisive leadership , there is nothing to be gained from skipping over the big questions
Scotland Tory anger at officials over Brexit divorce bill ; Civil servants accused of keeping Cabinet 'out of the loop ' with £36bn offer to EU ; Settling Brexit bill 'a sign of weakness '
BREXIT negotiators have been accused of trying to `` ram through '' a £36billion divorce bill while most of the Cabinet is on holiday in a furious backlash from ministers and senior Eurosceptic Conservatives . Yesterday , The Sunday Telegraph disclosed that senior Whitehall officials had concluded that the offer was the only way to break a deadlock in negotiations with the EU and push ahead with discussions on a future trade deal . The scale of the divorce bill has infuriated Eurosceptic Cabinet ministers and Tory MPs , many of whom believe that Britain is under no obligation to pay anything once it leaves the EU and should in fact get some money back . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , told MPs three weeks ago that European leaders can `` go whistle '' if they expected Britain to pay an `` exorbitant '' divorce bill . Theresa May and senior Eurosceptic Cabinet ministers including Mr Johnson and Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , are on holiday while Parliament is in recess . Eurosceptic ministers have long been concerned that British officials are intent on derailing plans for a clean Brexit , particularly after their role in David Cameron 's `` Project Fear '' campaign during the EU referendum . A government source said : `` It feels like a lot of work is going on over the summer and a lot of decisions are being made while the Cabinet is out of the loop . It 's not good . Cynics would say that they are trying to ram it through while there is n't time for proper scrutiny . '' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , is leading talks but nearly 100 officials are working on the negotiations and are understood to have been involved in drawing up the plans for the divorce bill . Last month it was claimed that Mr Johnson and Dr Fox had been `` kept in the dark '' about an announcement that EU citizens will be allowed to continue to come to the UK after Brexit . Both were abroad when the announcements were made by Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who were both senior figures in the Remain campaign . Downing Street yesterday dismissed the £36billion figure as `` speculative '' . David Jones , a former Brexit minister , said : `` It looks very much as if officials are trying to bounce ministers into accepting an outcome of negotiations they will not be happy with . The whole thing is extremely unhelpful and against the national interest . `` Any payment we make to the EU should not simply be a sweetener for a trading relationship . The Eurosceptics in the Cabinet will not accept a figure of this scale . '' Last month British Brexit negotiators concluded the EU had created a straitjacket for the negotiation process by refusing to talk about trade until it Continued on Page 4 Juliet Samuel : Page 14 Continued from Page 1 reached a deal on citizens ' rights , money and Northern Ireland . Senior Whitehall officials are now looking to propose a transition deal under which Britain would continue to offer to make net payments to the EU of ( EURO ) 10 billion ( £9.03 billion ) a year for up to three years after Brexit . The payments would represent a partial payment on a final £36billion bill that negotiators hope will jump-start talks on trade and future relations . Mrs May and Mr Davis have accepted that an amount will have to be paid and that they need to `` determine a fair settlement of the UK 's rights and obligations '' . Jacob Rees-Mogg , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , said that he and his colleagues would vote down the Brexit divorce bill in Parliament . He said : `` I think £36billion is much too much . We have no legal obligation to pay anything . Accepting the premise that you have to pay to leave the club is fundamentally wrong . In terms of a negotiating strategy it is a sign of weakness for us to offer money before we move on to other things . `` They have set this straitjacket ; they should untie it . We should not fall into their trap ... we want the money for British public services , not commission fat cats and their pensions . '' Peter Bone , another Eurosceptic Tory MP , said `` I would have thought we should be getting some of that money back , we should n't be giving them money . I do n't understand what the logic is behind giving the European Union any money whatsoever because we have been paying in and in and in . '' However , other Eurosceptic MPs believe that the divorce bill may be a price worth paying . Conor Burns , parliamentary private secretary to Mr Johnson , said : `` Britain is a nation that honours her obligations . Many of us who campaigned to leave the EU are more focused on the prize than the price . '' A series of position papers setting out Britain 's approach on a new customs agreement and a solution to the Northern Ireland border issue could start to be published as soon as next week .
Sack treacherous envoys , May urged
THERESA MAY is facing calls from her own ministers to sack government trade envoys who have opposed her plans for Brexit amid accusations that they are `` talking Britain down '' as it leaves the EU . Six of Britain 's 21 trade envoys have defied the Government in key votes over Brexit , including one who suggested that people who voted to Leave are `` little Englanders '' . Eurosceptic ministers joined Iain Duncan Smith , the MP and former Conservative leader , in calling for them to be axed for `` being opposed to Brexit '' . One minister told The Daily Telegraph : `` At a time when we are trying to build a global Britain , having people who do n't believe in the nation 's future outside the European Union is not at all in the national interest . `` These people should be championing Britain abroad , not damaging its prospects by talking it down . '' Mr Duncan Smith told the Brexit-Central website : `` It is quite absurd that at the moment the UK leaves the EU and starts to make new free trade deals , we should have as our trade representatives people who are viscerally opposed to Brexit . '' Trade envoys are appointed by the Government to promote Britain in 50 markets around the world . They are not paid for the role although their expenses are covered . They include Rushanara Ali , a Labour MP and trade envoy for Bangladesh who voted against triggering Article 50 and formally starting the process of leaving the EU . In the Lords , Baroness Bonham-Carter of Yarnbury and Baroness Northover , two Liberal Democrat peers who serve as trade envoys , supported amendments opposing the Government 's plans for Brexit . Baroness Northover previously described people who voted for Brexit as `` the voice of little England '' . Lord Faulkner of Worcester and Lord Hollick of Notting Hill , two Labour peers who serve as trade envoys , opposed the Government along with Lord Janvrin , a cross-bench peer . A government spokesman defended the envoy programme and said they brought a `` wealth of experience '' to the table to help British businesses succeed internationally . The envoys were either unavailable to comment or declined to do so . A Lib Dem spokesman said : `` Liberal Democrats always talk up Britain when seeking to promote trade in foreign countries . `` There is nothing patriotic about trying to yank Britain out of the world 's most lucrative market without a single trade deal in place to replace it . '' It came as it emerged that Tory rebels are threatening to side with Labour in a bid to keep Britain in the Single Market and Customs Union after Brexit . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , is planning to table an amendment to ensure Britain keeps `` the same basic terms '' during a transition period after leaving the EU .
Scotland May , the magnificent multi-tasker ; Election 2017 Sketch
Yesterday afternoon , a journalist asked Theresa May whether she 'd watched the big TV debate . `` I think Amber Rudd did an excellent job , '' replied the Prime Minister . An intriguing answer . The day before , Mrs May had explained that she could n't take part in the debate herself , not because she was running scared , but because she would be too busy `` thinking about Brexit negotiations '' and `` meeting voters '' . Yet here she was , the next morning , delivering her personal review of her stand-in 's performance . Apparently , Mrs May had n't had time to attend the debate - but did have time to watch it . Then again , we should n't make assumptions . Perhaps Mrs May spent Wednesday evening doing all three tasks at once : thinking about Brexit negotiations , meeting voters , and watching Amber Rudd . It 's perfectly possible . Knock on voter 's door ; think about Brexit negotiations while waiting for voter to answer ; talk to voter ; then watch a bit of Amber Rudd on iPlayer smartphone app while walking to next voter 's house . Then repeat , all evening . The more I think about it , the more impressed I am . That truly is worldclass time management . How people can say Mrs May is having a bad campaign , I do n't know . Yesterday , the Prime Minister was at a company in Cleveland , giving a speech about Brexit . She presented two alternative visions . If she remained Prime Minister , she explained , Brexit offered `` a bright future '' ( for emphasis , these words were emblazoned on the board behind her , in sunny yellow ) . If Jeremy Corbyn became Prime Minister , however , Brexit was bound to go wrong . `` Our economic prosperity will suffer , '' she scowled . `` Jobs will be put at risk ... We wo n't have the financial means to fund the public services we rely on ... Sounded worrying . And , according to Mrs May , a Corbyn victory next week is not impossible . So , aboard the Tory battle bus afterwards , I attempted to follow the Prime Minister 's logic . If a Corbyn-led Brexit is guaranteed to be an economic nightmare , I asked her , would the Tories in Opposition seek to overturn the referendum result , to prevent this disaster ? `` The referendum result should be respected , '' said Mrs May . Right . But if a Corbyn-led Brexit was going to ruin the country - as she 's telling us it will - would n't she feel a duty , in the national interest , to try to prevent it ? `` I 'm not going to predict the election result , '' said Mrs May . `` I 'm working for the campaign until election day . But I do believe there 's an important issue about trust in politicians . People gave their choice . '' So even though she 's telling us that under Prime Minister Corbyn , Brexit will mean job losses , economic damage and no money for public services , she would n't do anything to stop it ? `` What I 'm doing is working over the next week for the General Election , '' said Mrs May . And that was that . Well , I suppose we 'd better hope she wins then , had n't we ?
Corrections and Clarifications ; NEWS BULLETIN BODY : Brexit survey An April 16 article reported on a `` Brexit survey '' said to have found that 55 per cent of poll respondents `` backed Brexit '' . Although a clear majority did not disagree that Britain will be economically better off and will have more control over immigration post Brexit , the 55 per cent figure related to respondents ' approval of the way the Government is handling Brexit negotiations , not to their support for Brexit per se . We are happy to clarify this .
Corrections and Clarifications ; NEWS BULLETIN BODY : Brexit survey An April 16 article reported on a `` Brexit survey '' said to have found that 55 per cent of poll respondents `` backed Brexit '' . Although a clear majority did not disagree that Britain will be economically better off and will have more control over immigration post Brexit , the 55 per cent figure related to respondents ' approval of the way the Government is handling Brexit negotiations , not to their support for Brexit per se . We are happy to clarify this . Calum Dowers , the teenager killed in a road accident by a driver using his mobile phone , was incorrectly named in the picture caption accompanying the article ( `` Driver killed teen while using app to track down wife '' , May 6 ) as Calum Best . We apologise for the error .
Scotland Corrections and Clarifications BODY : Brexit survey An April 16 article reported on a `` Brexit survey '' said to have found that 55 per cent of poll respondents `` backed Brexit '' . Although a clear majority did not disagree that Britain will be economically better off and will have more control over immigration post Brexit , the 55 per cent figure related to respondents ' approval of the way the Government is handling Brexit negotiations , not to their support for Brexit per se . We are happy to clarify this . Calum Dowers , the teenager killed in a road accident by a driver using his mobile phone , was incorrectly named in the picture caption accompanying the article ( `` Driver killed teen while using app to track down wife '' , May 6 ) as Calum Best . We apologise for the error .
Scotland Tusk : You 'll want to stay when reality of Brexit hits
BRITAIN may decide not to leave the EU when faced with the reality of a `` hard Brexit '' , Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council said last night , warning that forthcoming divorce talks would be `` painful '' . His intervention came as Europe continued to harden its approach towards the negotiations after Theresa May 's pledge to trigger Article 50 by early next year . Mr Tusk said that Mrs May 's promise to end the free movement of EU workers , stop EU budget payments and restore the primacy of UK law-making meant Britain had opted to `` radically loosen '' its ties to Europe . `` The only real alternative to a hard Brexit is no Brexit , even if today hardly anyone believes in such a possibility , '' he said in a speech to the European Policy Centre , a Brussels think-tank . Brexit continued to dominate the news agenda amid rows over foreign-based food companies `` profiteering '' from the falling pound and a High Court bid to force a parliamentary vote on triggering Article 50 . After a day of closed-door talks , Unilever , the Anglo-Dutch consumer conglomerate , apparently backed down in its stand-off with Tesco over a 10 per cent price hike on foods such as Marmite , which it had blamed on Brexit . A Telegraph analysis discovered that of its 40 leading brands at least 33 are made in its nine UK factories , not imported . Mr Tusk , who next week will chair a European Council meeting in Brussels which will be Mrs May 's first as prime minister , said it was `` pure illusion '' Britain could leave the EU while retaining the benefits of membership . He singled out Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , for saying that Britain could have its cake and eat it . `` The brutal truth is that Brexit will be a loss for all of us , '' Mr Tusk added . `` There will be no cakes on the table for anyone . There will be only salt and vinegar . '' Mr Johnson dismissed such negativity , telling MPs it would `` take time '' for the full benefits of Brexit to appear . He added that Britain could get a trade deal that was `` of greater value '' to the economy than access to the EU single market , adding that Commonwealth countries were already `` stepping up '' to reach trade agreements . He made the upbeat comments as the Attorney General contested the legal bid by Remain supporters to force the government to hold a vote on triggering Article 50 . Jeremy Wright said the legal move by Gina Miller , a wealthy City investor , would be a `` backdoor '' attempt to bypass the democratically expressed will of the people . BREXIT REPORTS News Pages 8-9 Comment Pages 16 & 17
Post-Brexit bonanza for investors in UK firms ; Plunge in sterling benefits shareholders as top British companies pay out billions more in dividends
STERLING 'S post-Brexit tumble is set to deliver a multi-billion-pound boost to UK investors this year after record dividend payouts in the last quarter . Shareholders are expected to take home more than £82.5bn in dividends in 2016 as sterling 's Brexit devaluation helps to drive forecast payouts for the year up by £4.3bn compared with 2015 . The dividend bonanza gathered pace in the second quarter , hitting a record £28.8bn , boosted by a bumper round of special dividend payouts from the likes of InterContinental Hotels and GlaxoSmithKline . The latest Dividend Monitor study by Capita Asset Services shows that the decline of the pound in the months leading up to the referendum - and in the wake of the Brexit result - will swell the payouts received by UK shareholders when converted from US dollars . Around two fifths of UK-listed companies run their finances in the stronger dollar currency , which could lead to exchange rate gains of just over £2.8bn in the second half of the year alone , on top of the £1.4bn already booked in due to the pre-Brexit pound slump . `` [ Brexit ] has dramatically changed the picture for UK dividends in 2016 . Even though steep cuts are still coming through from a number of large mining concerns , banks and others , overall , they are being largely offset by the much weaker pound , '' the report said . In addition , special dividend payouts quadrupled compared with the same quarter last year after bumper shareholder paydays from 22 companies , which Capita said was `` easily '' the largest number on record for any quarter . InterContinental Hotels paid out £1bn after selling hotels in Paris and Hong Kong , and GlaxoSmithKline paid £970m following an asset swap with Novartis . At the same time , record 2015 profits at ITV brought in a £400m shareholder windfall , while Lloyds Bank paid out an extra £360m . The report warned , however , that beneath the `` froth of special dividends '' the outlook was `` less positive '' . Dividends , excluding special payouts , fell 2.7pc to £25.2bn in the second quarter and could struggle in the coming years if economic jitters over the UK 's exit from the EU begin to hit the profits of mid-cap companies . Underlying dividends are still expected to rise , creeping up £1.9bn to £76.9bn , but the 0.5pc increase from 2015 falls well below the 3.8pc boost expected when special dividends are included . Capita said the swift post-Brexit bounce-back from the top 100 companies should offset the weakness in midcap companies , enabling equity yields to hold steady at 3.7pc . By contrast , UK bond yields hit new lows of 0.8pc in the aftermath of the vote , Capita said . Justin Cooper , Capita 's head of shareholder solutions , said : `` The Brexit vote has completely changed the picture for dividends this year and beyond . `` In the short term , investment and consumption will be depressed while the country waits for a response from the new Government , and for a Brexit timetable to emerge . Dividends will suffer from any slowdown in economic growth , particularly among the UK 's mid-cap companies , though a persistently weak exchange rate will cushion sterling investors in the UK 's large multinationals . ''
Brexit 'a great opportunity - not a time bomb ' says Fox
LIAM FOX has called for the `` obsession with criticising Brexit '' to end in 2018 , as he insisted the UK 's withdrawal from the European Union `` is not a time bomb to be defused '' . The International Trade Secretary said it represented a `` great opportunity to be embraced '' as he attacked critics who would `` rather see Britain fail than see Brexit succeed '' . Mr Fox 's intervention came as he travelled to China to try to improve the UK 's trade and investment ties with Beijing . Writing on the Conservative Home website , he said that he found `` returning from a positive and optimistic international visit only to encounter a wave of negativism at home '' most frustrating . He said that interest abroad in investing in post-Brexit Britain was in `` stark contrast to the self-defeating pessimism that is too often on show '' in the UK from some politicians , pundits and media outlets . `` Attitudes need to change as we go into 2018 ; Brexit is not a time bomb to be defused , but a great opportunity to be embraced , '' he said . `` Our international competitors are already out there trying to carve out their slice of the world 's growing markets . We need to get beyond the obsession with criticising Brexit , lift our horizons , and be out there , too . '' Mr Fox said that establishing an independent trade policy for the UK will allow Britain to pursue agreements with nations that the EU does not currently have free trade deals with . The Department for International Trade said : `` [ Mr Fox ] is visiting China , our fifth largest trade partner , to build independent trading relationships with the rest of the world . We have instigated 14 trade working groups across more than 20 countries to make sure we hit the ground running . ''
Brexit plan gets airborne - then nosedives ; Brexit deal chaos Either Mrs May is keeping the UK in line with Europe , or she 's selling NI down the river
AFTER 18 months of phoney war - of talking , positioning and negotiating behind the scenes - the rickety craft of Theresa May 's Brexit strategy briefly took flight yesterday , and then promptly nosedived back to earth . Within hours of Ireland 's state broadcaster reporting that the Prime Minister had agreed that the UK would ensure `` continued regulatory alignment '' between Northern Ireland and the EU , political gravity took over . If the game of leaking the compromise was to railroad Mrs May into signing off the deal at her lunch with Jean-Claude Juncker , it backfired spectacularly , exposing this most carefully worded of texts to more scrutiny than it could bear . Wrapped up in the language was a subtle compromise that officials had worked on for the best part of a month , and tried to be all things to all parties . The UK had not been forced to agree to Ireland 's initial demand for `` no regulatory divergence '' ; instead it was electing to use newfound freedoms after Brexit to maintain convergence . To Dublin the compromise gave clear reassurance that Northern Ireland would not diverge , obviating the need for a return to a hard border , while simultaneously giving Arlene Foster 's Democratic Unionists a promise that the `` alignment '' would only be in the sectors that were relevant to the Good Friday Agreement . It was at this moment that Brexit 's immutable logic took over , and inexorably over the course of the next few hours began to unravel the deal . Mrs Foster was emphatic that Northern Ireland must not be treated differently from any other part of the United Kingdom . The North , she said , could not become a regulatory exclave of the Republic , or the EU itself . But how then to square her demand for equality , with the idea that Northern Ireland was apparently being granted a soft Brexit that seemed to make it part of the EU 's single market and customs union in all but name ? Either Northern Ireland was being treated differently , which would imply an east-west border to monitor mainland Britain 's divergent trade policy after Brexit , or , contrary to everything we have been told by Mrs May , the UK was not diverging at all ? It could not be both . In trying to placate the DUP , Downing Street signalled that Mrs May was signing up to `` regulatory alignment '' for the whole of the UK but only in those areas that impacted the Irish border question , principally agriculture and electricity . But there lies the rub . If that is the case - and there are some 140 areas that have reportedly been identified as crucial for north-south cooperation in Ireland - how free , really , would the UK be to diverge with Liam Fox 's muchvaunted independent trade policy ? EU officials are privately very clear that the `` fudge '' on Ireland leaves little room for manoeuvre . The level of regulatory convergence required to avoid a hard border - and the east-west border that implies - is inescapable . So either Mrs May was signing up the UK to vast swathes of convergence with the EU , something Boris Johnson and free-trading Brexiteers have explicitly ruled out , or she was selling her DUP partners down the river with false promises . Clearly Mrs May hoped the reality of these conflicting positions could survive unnoticed at least until the EU had granted `` sufficient progress '' at the European Council in 10 days ' time , and she could claim a pre-Christmas victory at the end of a disastrous year . In the event , her gambit did not survive the afternoon . Such are the political horizons of a prime minister whose cabinet has not even held a substantive discussion on the shape of the UK 's future relationship with the EU . On today 's showing it is not difficult to see why .
Labour resistance to Brexit is futile BODY : Brexit is going to happen : claims to the contrary are time-wasting mischief . Britain voted to the leave the EU ; in June more than 80 per cent of voters backed pro-Brexit parties . Negotiations are under way . If there is any serious domestic debate to be had it is over transitional arrangements . Militant Remainers prefer to engage in pointless grandstanding . Take the Repeal Bill , which next week begins its journey through Parliament . The Bill is purely procedural . It repeals the 1972 European Communities Act while , for the sake of ease and meeting the trading standards of Europe , all existing EU legislation is translated into domestic UK law . This is not ideal : the purpose of leaving the EU is to cut red tape rather than protect it . But Parliament will then have an opportunity to `` amend , repeal and improve '' as necessary . This is the practical beginning of Brexit , a repatriation of sovereignty that we saw advance this week with Britain 's withdrawal from the 1964 London Fisheries Convention . This will be extended , hopefully , to the writing of laws , free trade and justice . And as these steps are taken , the true destination of the Brexit project should become clear . Britain is regaining control and using that control to become a freer , more competitive country . What must not happen is what Labour hopes to achieve by tying up the Repeal Bill in the Commons : Britain leaves the EU in name only , retaining every vestige of legislation that kills free enterprise . Nor must the country become stuck permanently in a no-man 's land of transitional arrangements . The CBI has suggested that Britain stay inside the Single Market and Customs Union until a Brexit deal is enforced , which would be a bad mistake and risks becoming an indefinite state of limbo . Moreover , there are those who want to use the debate over transitional arrangements not just to delay Brexit but overturn the referendum result - to kick start another Project Fear , hamstring UK negotiators and build the case for Britain to think again . The Government has to press ahead with its negotiations with clear resolve , explaining exactly what it is doing and why - taking the public with it . Opponents have to be reminded that to delay or undermine Brexit is to resist the stated will of the people . The country is either in the EU or out of it . There is no third way .
Scotland Sturgeon calls for stability ahead of Brexit
NICOLA STURGEON yesterday appeared to row back on her timetable for a second independence referendum after Michael Gove warned her to stop `` grandstanding '' if she wants to win concessions over Brexit . The First Minister said `` everything '' that politicians do in the midst of the Brexit talks should restrict `` uncertainty '' and Scottish and UK ministers `` have all got a responsibility to try to act in ways that limit that uncertainty . '' It was the clearest hint yet she will abandon her original plan for a referendum between autumn next year and spring 2019 when she discloses her response next week to the SNP 's mauling in the general election . However , she said `` it 's not about now but when the time is right '' . Mr Gove , the Environment Secretary , said the First Minister must stop trying to `` manufacture grievance '' and adopt a `` fundamental alteration '' in her approach if she wants progress on issues such as Scotland getting flexibility over immigration policy . Speaking ahead of a meeting with fishermen in Peterhead , he praised Fergus Ewing , the SNP rural economy minister , and Roseanna Cunningham , the SNP environment minister , for their constructive tone during his talks with them and expressed his hope that relations between the UK and Scottish governments will enter a `` more mature phase '' . His intervention came after Mike Russell , the SNP 's Brexit minister , threatened to derail an `` orderly '' Brexit by withholding consent for key UK Government legislation . But failing to pass the Repeal Bill would cause chaos in Scotland as it will replace thousands of redundant EU laws . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , has said it would be `` incredible '' not to give consent . Ms Sturgeon was pressed to accept that her independence referendum threat is also causing uncertainty during a breakfast meeting with representatives of farming and other countryside industries at the Royal Highland Show in Edinburgh . She argued that Scots should get a separation vote so they can have their say on Brexit , but added : `` In everything we do , a year on from the Brexit referendum should be about trying to limit that sense of uncertainty . Of course people feel very uncertain and the Scottish Government and the UK Government have all got a responsibility to try to act in ways that limit that uncertainty ... '' Speaking to the BBC 's Good Morning Scotland programme , Mr Gove urged Ms Sturgeon to have `` open and inclusive '' discussions with the UK . The prominent Brexit campaigner , who was raised in Aberdeen , said : `` We know now that the SNP is licking its wounds after a disastrous election campaign . We hope that as a result there will be a period of humility . '' Brexit talks : Pages 4-5
The IMF must stop playing political games and get back to its roots
The International Monetary Fund this week kicked off its annual meeting in Washington on the typically downbeat note we have come to expect from these events . The global economy is weak and fragile , it warns in its latest World Economic Outlook , prompting a destructive backwards slide into protectionism , economic malpractice and reduced openness . This sub-par growth , moreover , `` risks perpetuating itself `` because of `` the negative economic and political forces it is unleashing '' . Brexit is cited as a prime example of this potential plunge into the abyss . Maurice Obstfeld , the IMF 's chief economic counsellor , goes further . Brexit , he says , is part of a political backlash `` that blames globalisation for all woes and seeks somehow to wall off the economy from global trends rather than engage cooperatively with foreign nations '' . I was a remainer , but I ca n't accept this interpretation of Britain 's vote to leave . Mr Obstfeld does n't overtly lump Brexit in with Trumpism , but he might as well have done . His meaning is clear , and as seems ever more frequently to be the case with the IMF , he could not have been more wrong about it . Nobody yet knows how Brexit will pan out . Lots of things could go wrong , not least a defensive and vengeful reaction from the European Union that attempts to lock Britain out of the single market . But on present evidence , Brexit is a very long way from the sort of protectionist , inward looking , reactionary force Mr Obstfeld imagines . To the contrary , as articulated by the new Government , Brexit is about embracing the many positives of globalisation and standing up for free trade , not turning the nation 's back on them . Economically , Brexit will undoubtedly be difficult and troublesome , but it is most unlikely to be disastrous . Not for the first time , the IMF has become captive to `` group think '' and powerful establishment forces . Over the last 10 years , the fund has been pretty much wrong about everything of substance . It failed to see the financial crisis coming , and it failed to anticipate the eurozone debt crisis , having essentially become a cheerleader for integrationist ambitions of monetary union . It then proceeded to become part of one of the biggest economic policy blunders of the modern age , overriding its own rules and conventions to save the euro and bail out the bankers . It has also been consistently wrong about the UK . Some serious soul searching is in order . The very purpose of this institutional corner stone of the post-war , Bretton Woods economic settlement is being called into question as rarely before . Time and again , the IMF has been found guilty of faulty forecasting , analysis and policy . Too often it becomes captive to powerful political interest in its membership , as occurred in Britain 's referendum campaign when it was used as a key part of George Osborne 's `` Project Fear '' . Yet the big failure was over the euro . First the IMF ignored the design flaws at the heart of European monetary union , and therefore completely failed to see its propensity to crisis . Then , as the debt meltdown began , it remained upbeat about the health of the Europ=ean banking system , taking at face value the self interested reassurances of national and euro area regulators . And finally it squandered the fund 's resources on an unprecedented scale supporting the continuation of a currency which for some of its members had become an economic doomsday machine . Ensuring the single currency 's survival was routinely prioritised over the individual nation 's best interests . This may have been understandable in view of America 's still recent banking crisis . Larry Summers , a former US Treasury Secretary , warned that a sovereign default within the eurozone would be `` like Lehman 's on steroids '' . Yet fear of contagion provides only a partial excuse . The effect was to bail out bankers at the expense of citizens . The internal devaluation imposed on large parts of Europe gave it no plausible way back to growth or liberation from mountainous debts . Greece 's former finance minister , Yanis Varoufakis , has called it a form of `` fiscal waterboarding '' . In carrying out these policies , the IMF disobeyed a number of the cardinal principles it traditionally applies to programme countries , in particular that austerity should be offset by devaluation and debt relief . Within the straightjacket of the euro , there was neither . Officials got around these stipulations by slipping through a radical change in IMF rescue policy , allowing an exemption ( since abolished ) if there was a risk of systemic contagion . `` The board was not consulted or informed , '' last summer 's IEO post mortem on the debacle found . Instead , directors discovered the change in policy `` tucked into the text '' of the Greek package , but by then it was too late . It is small wonder there has been a political backlash . The IMF is deeply complicit in causing it . The IMF has been equally guilty of misdiagnosing the UK economy , though fortunately in Britain 's case the consequences have been confined to mere embarrassment . Osborne 's fiscal consolidation was routinely criticised by the IMF as too deep and too fast , culminating in a warning from the organisation 's chief economist , Olivier Blanchard , that the chancellor was `` playing with fire '' . Within a year , the UK had become the fastest growing economy in the G7 . Repeating some of the same mistakes as were made in the eurozone debt crisis , Christine Lagarde , managing director of the IMF , waded into Britain 's referendum debate , saying that a vote to leave the European Union would have `` pretty bad to very , very bad '' consequences . So far it seems to have had zero impact on the world economy , and beyond an initial flurry of financial markets turbulence , virtually none in the UK either . There is a vital need for supranational organisations such as the IMF . But rather than providing solutions , the IMF has too often found itself part of the problem . It needs to stop playing political games and get back to its roots , which lie in the sole purpose of providing liquidity support for countries that get themselves into fiscal difficulties and sound policy remedies for getting them out again . 'It failed to see the financial crisis coming , and it failed to anticipate the eurozone debt crisis '
Scotland Sturgeon told to stop her Brexit sulking
RUTH DAVIDSON has challenged Nicola Sturgeon to focus on getting the best Brexit deal for Scotland instead of sulking and trying to `` wish away '' the EU referendum . The Scottish Tory leader hit back at the First Minister 's jibes that she has become a `` born-again Brexiteer '' despite playing a prominent role in the Remain campaign before June 's EU vote . Ms Davidson said that both she and Ms Sturgeon are disappointed with the Brexit result but `` she ca n't wish away the idea that this is going to happen because it is going to happen '' . Scotland 's political leaders now have a choice of either sulking or working to make it a success , she said , before concluding : `` I 'm not a natural sulker . '' In contrast , she said Ms Sturgeon was trying to use the result as a `` constitutional chisel '' . Speaking at the Tory conference in Birmingham , she also rejected the SNP leader 's accusations that she had changed her mind about wanting the Brexit deal to include access to the single market even if that meant accepting free movement . But Ms Davidson was forced to deny that she was on a collision course with Theresa May , who has indicated that she favours a `` hard '' Brexit with controls on immigration . Her intervention came as the Scottish Secretary insisted the Prime Minister wants Ms Sturgeon 's input into the UK Government 's negotiating stance . Although he reiterated that the Scottish Government has no veto or opt-out from Brexit , David Mundell said Mrs May wanted to `` look at any options that reflect Scotland 's best interests '' . Ms Sturgeon said a second independence referendum was `` highly likely '' only hours after the referendum result , which saw 62 per cent of Scots vote Remain , and has since focused on trying to somehow keep Scotland in the EU . Ms Davidson argued Ms Sturgeon should focus on ensuring the Brexit deal protects key sectors of the economy and identifies opportunities outside the EU . `` That 's the choice you have - you either sulk or you work . And I 'm not a natural sulker , '' she said . `` You either put your shoulder to the wheel or you refight something . I did n't want the referendum to go the way that it did - I worked really hard to make sure that it did n't . '' She argued it was premature to state that the Government 's pledge to prioritise cutting immigration in the Brexit talks damaged chances of getting single market access . Ms Davidson said the different `` strands '' of the UK 's stance would only be pulled together when Article 50 is triggered . She also questioned whether powers held by Brussels in devolved areas such as fishing should come to Holyrood , saying fishermen 's groups wanted a UK-wide approach . The Scottish Tory leader said David Davis , the Brexit minister , had told her the powers would all come back to the UK Government in the first instance , then talks will be held about which should be devolved . A spokesman for the First Minister said : `` Ruth Davidson is tying herself in knots over her position on the key question of whether we stay in the single market . `` Scotland deserves better than that - just three months ago Ms Davidson was saying single market membership was vital , but now she is spinning furiously to avoid upsetting her boss the Prime Minister '' .
PM : Isil would love Brexit ; Keeping jihadists out is close to impossible , says minister
DAVID CAMERON provoked a furious response from leading Eurosceptics yesterday after saying that the head of Isil would be `` happy '' if Britain left the European Union . The Prime Minister said that both Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and Vladimir Putin , the Russian president , would favour a Brexit as he sought to `` demolish '' nine economic `` myths '' from the Brexit campaign . Boris Johnson , a leading Brexit campaigner , suggested that he `` no longer recognises '' Mr Cameron and the Remain campaign 's `` negative '' vision of Britain . He added that it is `` a bit much '' to say that Brexit campaigners are `` allies '' with Mr Putin and Isil , and accused the Prime Minister of `` colluding '' with Britain 's businesses to win their support during the referendum . In one of his most outspoken attacks on Mr Cameron yet , Mr Johnson described his EU deal as `` the biggest stitch-up since the Bayeux Tapestry '' and suggested it made Britain look like Continued on Page 4 Ediiorial Comment : Page 17 a `` banana republic '' . It came as Penny Mordaunt , a Eurosceptic defence minister , said it was `` almost impossible '' for the security services to keep jihadists out of Britain while it is a member of the EU . She said : `` It is undermining our security and again , as in so many areas , we have the EU with the authority but none of the responsibility at all . It is the first duty of any government to protect its citizens and we need more tools to do that . `` It is not just the threat now - 5,000 Daesh-trained fighters in Europe , according to Europol - it 's what 's coming over the horizon as well . '' Last week Mr Cameron suggested the EU could descend into war if Britain votes to leave . He said in a speech yesterday at Mansion House in London : `` I never said if we leave on Thursday , World War Three breaks out on Friday . It is worth asking the question who would be happy if we left . Putin might be happy , I suspect al-Baghdadi might be happy . `` This is the time for strength in numbers . This is the time to stick with our friends and neighbours and our allies rather than breaking [ Europe ] apart . '' He also defended the deal to give Turkey visa-free access to the EU after it was heavily criticised by Sir Richard Dearlove , a former head of MI6 , who compared it to `` storing gasoline next to the fire '' . Mr Cameron highlighted a recent article by Sir John Sawers , a former head of MI6 , and Lord Evans , the former head of MI5 , calling for Britain to stay in .
EU lays down law on transition ; Long road to the deal ; Do not 'roll over ' and accept EU terms , warns Rees-Mogg
EU LEADERS have been accused of trying to `` bind '' Britain to Brussels for years after they insisted the UK must bow to the will of the European Court of Justice until 2021 . Negotiating guidelines for the second phase of the Brexit talks published by the European Council yesterday state that `` all existing European structures '' including the `` competence '' of the ECJ will apply to the UK throughout the two-year transition period . But leading Brexiteers said staying in the ECJ for another four years meant `` delaying Brexit until 2021 '' . Donald Tusk , the President of the European Council , confirmed yesterday that leaders of the 27 other EU member states had agreed that Continued on Page 4 Reports : Pages 4-7 Editorial Comment : Page 21 Continued from Page 1 `` sufficient progress '' had been made over the issues of the Brexit divorce bill , the Irish border and citizens ' rights for talks to move to the next phase , covering the transition period and Britain 's future relationship with the EU . Theresa May said it marked an `` important step '' on the road to Brexit and promised to deliver `` the Brexit people voted for '' . She has made it clear that she intends to end the ECJ 's power over British courts before the end of the transition period . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the staunch Brexiteer Tory MP , warned that she must not `` roll over '' by accepting the EU 's terms , which also include staying in the single market and customs union and retaining free movement until 2021 . Mr Rees-Mogg said : `` Demanding the Court of Justice and free movement is trying to bind us into the EU when we voted to leave . This is delaying Brexit until 2021 . There is also a political risk if no advantages of Brexit are shown shortly before the general election . The EU does n't want us to leave and believes if it delays it long enough it wo n't happen . '' Iain Duncan Smith , former Conservative leader and another staunch Brexiteer , described ECJ jurisdiction during transition as `` unworkable '' . But another row was brewing last night over exactly when trade talks would begin . Mrs May said they would start `` straight away '' but the guidelines stated talks will not begin before March . Mr Tusk had repeatedly declared that `` sufficient progress '' was enough to trigger talks on transition and future relationship , said a Whitehall source , adding : `` And we will hold them to that . '' Mr Tusk said only that `` exploratory '' talks could begin now . Mrs May 's aim of agreeing the terms of Britain 's withdrawal by next October was possible , to allow the deal to be ratified by all 28 member states , including Britain . The head of the EC said this was `` still realistic , but dramatically difficult '' .
Forecasters are ignoring the only certainty - another recession
'T is the season , it seems , of `` official '' economic forecasts , and the more that roll in , the more depressing they get . Last week it was the Office for Budget Responsibility , which sharply downgraded its productivity assumptions , and therefore its growth forecasts , for the wider UK economy . This week , it 's the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , which has chimed in with even bleaker predictions than the OBR . In the OBR 's case , there was at least no attempt to calibrate the forecasts against other advanced economies , but the OECD spared us no such blushes ; other than Japan , Britain 's growth prospects are judged to be significantly worse than the rest of the G7 , at least for the next two years . Implicit in both sets of forecasts was a substantial negative impact from Brexit . With political sensitivities in mind , the OBR tried its hardest to disguise the Brexit effect , blaming the downgrades on a lower post-financial crisis trend in productivity growth . But it was nonetheless there as a factor in those very same productivity assumptions . With the OECD , the Brexit judgment was a good deal more overt ; the closer the eventual trade deal with Europe , the OECD opines , the better it will be for growth . As it is , the OECD assumes the talks will result in relatively favourable transitional arrangements , which is by no means a given . Brexit presents a particularly thorny issue for forecasters . If you could park it as an unknowable quantity , leaving it out of the equation altogether , you most certainly would , if only to avoid the opprobrium heaped from both sides of the debate on any positive or negative judgments . Yet no forecaster can credibly ignore it . Furthermore , it is already obvious that whatever the long-term impact , Brexit uncertainty is indeed having an economically chilling effect . The chill instructs the forecasts , which in turn inevitably feed into the wider political narrative , where their nuances and context quickly become ignored . In any event , as with the referendum campaign itself , we are again subject to a relentless diet of negative prediction . Whether it turns out to be right or wrong is almost irrelevant . As Brexit negotiations reach their most politically difficult and defining stage , the tone of the forecasting becomes steadily more doom laden . This is going to affect both the public mood and the concessions that UK politicians are prepared to make to ensure single market access . Support for Brexit will erode the more leaving the EU is seen to damage the UK 's economic prospects . Sir Michael Caine , one of the UK 's national treasures , said of Brexit that he would rather be a poor master than a rich servant . Noble , inspiring and widely shared though this sentiment might be , it 's not a choice that anyone of sound mind would voluntarily want to make ; we 'd all much rather be a rich master . To be a poor one was not the way Brexit was sold . As Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , keeps stressing , the UK did not vote to become poorer . Unfortunately , the implication of both the OBR and OECD forecasts is that this is precisely what we have done . I worry a lot about the political repercussions if their gloom turns out to be justified . Already the financial crisis has caused the UK to miss out on an entire decade of wage growth . The implication of the OBR 's productivity downgrade is that we are heading for a second such hiatus . Real wage growth never equates exactly with underlying productivity growth , but the two are closely related . Without productivity growth , there can be no appreciable increase in living standards . In recent years , we 've seen a reasonable amount of economic growth , but much of this was down to rising levels of employment , which in turn boosted overall consumption ; it added to spending power in the round , but not at an individual level . Most of us are worse off than we used to be . The jobs boom has now very likely run its course , making the depressed OECD and OBR growth forecasts all too plausible . If the vote for Brexit was at least in part a howl of rage against years of belt-tightening , just think what a further prolonged period of the same is going to do to the political landscape . The OECD had better get its modelling up to speed , for whatever the negative economic consequences of Brexit , they will be as nothing compared to a full-on dose of Jeremy Corbyn . If the OECD forecasts look bad for Britain , it ought to be added that they do n't look particularly good for anyone . Poor productivity growth is a universal disease afflicting all advanced economies . For the time being , world growth is being swept along by recovery in the previously depressed eurozone . This cyclical upswing will eventually abate , leaving everyone in much the same boat as the UK , with still quite poor trade intensity compared with the pre-crisis period , not enough investment to sustain the present growth spurt , very high levels of private and public indebtedness , and a distinct lack of both business dynamism and innovation . Hammond has declared that he will prove the OBR wrong on productivity . I hope he does , though I do n't see much in the Government 's industrial strategy White Paper to support the ambition . As is the way of these things , the paper is a great deal better on the diagnosis than on likely cures . In any case , I 'm with Ronald Reagan on these matters . `` The nine most terrifying words in the English language are : I 'm from the government and I 'm here to help , '' he said . Governments tend to impede growth , not facilitate it . Still , it might be said , at least our banks are off the critical list . According to the Bank of England 's latest stress tests , they are now sufficiently recovered from the financial crisis to survive almost anything the world economy could throw at them . Which is , I suppose , a relief , because far from easing since the financial crisis , overall national indebtedness - household , corporate and public combined - is now a great deal higher . And although the latest forecasts might look unduly gloomy , there is one thing they do n't predict which is actually almost certain - another recession . The present expansion has already been long by past standards ; that it can last another five years without mishap is almost inconceivable . It is unfortunately the case that the OBR and the OECD are being too optimistic , not too pessimistic . 'If the OECD forecasts look bad for Britain , it ought to be added they do n't look that good for anyone '
May must unite Tories on Brexit or lose election , warns Hague ; Prime Minister faces Cabinet split over EU deal as she prepares for key speech to set out planMrs May looking for third way as Cabinet splits on EU deal
THERESA MAY must use a landmark speech on Friday to unite the Cabinet around an agreed plan for Brexit or risk an irreversible split in the Conservative Party , Lord Hague warns today . The former party leader says senior ministers `` lack co-ordination '' 15 months on from the EU referendum and it is `` high time '' they settle on an agreed plan . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Lord Hague says that if Mrs May 's landmark Brexit speech in Florence on Friday fails to unite the Cabinet , `` Jeremy Corbyn will be prime minister '' . As the Prime Minister prepares to set out her vision for post-Brexit Britain in her speech , a fresh Cabinet row has emerged over what sort of deal the Government should aim for . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , favour a deal similar to the one being negotiated with the EU by Canada , which eliminates 98 per cent of trade tariffs and involves a clean break from Brussels . But Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , are said to favour a Swiss-style arrangement , in which Britain could pay to access the single market . At a press conference in Canada last night , Mrs May insisted she did not face a `` binary choice '' between the two models as Britain was pursuing its own bespoke deal . Following days of in-fighting , Mrs May attempted to regain control of the Brexit process by appointing Oliver Robbins , the UK 's chief day-to-day Brexit negotiator , to a new post where he will report directly to her rather than his old boss , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . She also issued a put-down to Mr Johnson , described as a `` backseat driver '' on Brexit at the weekend , by saying : `` The Government is driven from the front . '' The discord over Brexit was further highlighted when Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , who works closely with Mr Hammond , used a speech in Washington DC to make a series of gloomy predictions about the effects of leaving the EU . He said the referendum result was `` a real shock about which monetary policy can do little '' and said it would lead to `` weaker real incomes '' as well as higher inflation and increased interest rates . He also suggested that `` abrupt decreases in migration '' could lead to labour shortages that would have a detrimental effect on the economy . Mr Johnson seized the Brexit agenda last week when he set out his own detailed vision for Britain 's future in an article for The Daily Telegraph , and it has now emerged that he fears that Mrs May will use Friday 's speech to signal a Swiss-style deal that would yoke Britain to EU laws and regulations . Switzerland pays for access to the single market but does not contribute to other EU funds such as the Common Agricultural Policy . It also accepts freedom of movement but is not part of the customs union . Its arrangement means it has to abide by vast swathes of EU regulations . According to a House of Commons research paper , such an arrangement would mean Britain paying 40 per cent of what it currently does , or £4billion per year . Mr Johnson , who met President Donald Trump in the US yesterday , warned that Britain must not agree to pay `` extortionate sums '' for access to the single market , adding : `` They would not pay us for access to our market . '' He also said it was `` pretty important '' that any transition period `` should not be too long '' while conceding that Britain would have to pay what it is `` on the hook for '' in the short term . Mr Johnson is furious that the Cabinet met behind his back to discuss Brexit while he was in the Caribbean surveying hurricane damage , and believes that Mr Hammond and Ms Rudd used the opportunity to lobby for a Swiss-style deal , known as European Economic Area Minus , or EEA- . Instead , Mr Johnson and Mr Gove are pressing for a deal that is more akin to Canada 's Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) that removes 98 per cent of trade tariffs . The Foreign Secretary will meet Mrs May in New York today or tomorrow for a showdown over the content of her Florence speech as they both attend the United Nations General Assembly . Meanwhile , Dominic Cummings , the former campaign director of Vote Leave and a close friend of Mr Gove , suggested that the Cabinet had been `` led like lambs to the slaughter '' by Sir Jeremy Heywood , the powerful Cabinet Secretary . He suggested that backing Mr Johnson and Mr Gove gave Tory MPs `` a shot of saving your skins '' , while backing Mr Hammond meant the Government would be `` in dire danger '' . But Mrs May said there was a third way that did not involve a Ceta or a Swiss-style deal . Speaking in Canada , she said : `` I do n't recognise the simple binary approach . I have always said we are not looking to take a model off the shelf or a relationship that currently exists because the position of the UK is unique . `` We are already in the European Union . `` We have the relationship with the EU already and when we come out we want to ensure we can negotiate a good deal , a bespoke deal , a deal that is right for the United Kingdom and that would be in the economic interests of the European Union as well . '' Mrs May has invited Mr Johnson , Mr Hammond and Mr Davis to Florence but Mr Johnson has not yet confirmed whether he will accept the invitation .
Macron told Britain 's military makes it 'too important ' to sideline
EMMANUEL MACRON was told that Britain is `` too important '' to sideline after Brexit because of its military strength , according to leaked emails from the president 's campaign team . A trove of tens of thousands of emails released by WikiLeaks yesterday showed senior Macron advisers arguing for continued British involvement in European defence projects while highlighting the bitter divisions between Paris and Berlin on EU defence cooperation . The behind-the-scenes advice , which dates from before Mr Macron 's presidential win in May , paints a stark contrast with the European Union 's recent claims that Brexit could open the door to a new golden age of EU defence cooperation . It also gives weight to British Brexit negotiators ' belief that security and defence cooperation will be a key bargaining chip when negotiating the future relationship with the EU . One of the emails , sent by Hervé Grandjean , Mr Macron 's industrial affairs adviser and a defence specialist , contained a report on the future of Franco-British defence relations after Brexit . The report , written by Alice Pannier , a European security expert , warned that France would be `` caught between the temptation to seize Brexit to advance the CSDP [ the EU 's common defence plans ] and the desire to maintain a critical mass of exchanges with the British , who ... remain the most important and the most active country in the field of defence . '' In the report , which was passed on to Quentin Lafay , the president 's speech writer , on Oct 2 2016 , Ms Pannier added : `` Brexit will necessarily have potentially contradictory effects on bilateral cooperation . Both governments have insisted on the preservation and strengthening of the bilateral partnership . '' In another email , dated Oct 3 2016 , François Heisbourg , Mr Macron 's former defence adviser , discusses EU plans for the closer integration of European defence forces in withering terms . Mr Macron 's party , La République En Marche , declined to comment on the specific email exchanges when contacted by The Daily Telegraph , and repeated warnings that some of the emails in the cache could be fakes , planted to deter cyberhackers . `` These emails were obtained and published illegally . We are not going to comment on whether specific emails are false , '' a spokesman said .
Scotland Peers demand UK 'raises its game ' on Brexit
THE UK Government needs to `` raise its game '' and co-operate with the devolved administrations over Brexit , a Lords committee warns today . A new report said that while a committee was set up to allow ministers from the UK , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland to discuss the process , its meetings were `` not being treated with respect or organised efficiently '' . Peers on the EU Committee said the Joint Ministerial Committee ( JMC ) should be allowed to agree common positions on the Brexit issues of most importance to the governments in Edinburgh , Cardiff and Belfast . The intervention comes after Mike Russell , Scotland 's Brexit Minister , demanded urgent meetings with the UK Government . He claimed at the weekend that the Repeal Bill had precipitated a constitutional crisis after it emerged that vital Brexit legislation to return EU laws to the UK would take them to Westminster , and not to the devolved governments . The UK Government insists the move is an interim measure and leaving Europe will ultimately lead to a `` powers bonanza '' for Holyrood . But in their report into the impact of exiting the EU on the devolved administrations , peers said they backed `` the view of most of our witnesses that the UK Government needs to raise its game '' . They said this should include a willingness to accept that the JMC , even if not a formal decision-making body , was `` more than a talking-shop '' . The peers suggested the committee `` should be authorised to agree common positions on key matters affecting devolved competences in time to inform the UK Government 's negotiating position '' . Lord Jay of Ewelme said : `` Brexit 's impact on the future of the United Kingdom will be profound and unpredictable . At the moment the internal politics are pretty toxic , and we saw only last week the start of what could become a deep and bitter dispute on the role of the devolved institutions in passing the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill . `` We ca n't afford this . The UK Government must respect the devolved institutions . It 's not enough saying it 's listening to them , it 's actually got to take account of what they say and adjust its approach to accommodate their specific needs . `` Equally , the devolved administrations must work with , not against , the UK Government to get the best Brexit for the whole of the UK . '' The report highlighted concerns over the `` apparent deterioration of relations between the UK and Scottish governments '' as a result of the UK 's vote to leave the EU . After almost two-thirds of Scots voted to remain , peers stressed there was a `` strong political and economic case for making differentiated arrangements for Scotland '' . However , they dismissed Scottish Government calls to remain in the single market after the rest of the UK leaves the trading bloc as being `` politically impracticable '' . Mr Russell said an extreme Brexit outside the single market and customs union would cause `` severe long-term economic damage , hitting jobs , growth and living standards '' . He added : `` This report makes clear Brexit should not be used as cover for a 'power grab ' , and that powers in areas such as fisheries , agriculture and environmental protection should be returning from Brussels to Edinburgh , Cardiff and Belfast - not Westminster . ''
Scotland Business threat to derail Brexit ; City leaders demand indefinite delay in Britain 's departure from Single Market and Customs Union Business leaders appeal for 'transitional ' Brexit deal
DAVID DAVIS will be confronted today by business leaders demanding an indefinite delay in Britain 's departure from the Single Market and the Customs Union . The Brexit Secretary has invited some of Britain 's most senior executives to his grace-and-favour residence at Chevening in Kent for an informal summit . In a major escalation of the business community 's attempt to soften Brexit , the CBI group last night called on the Government to reach an open-ended `` transitional deal '' with the European Union to protect businesses . Mr Davis and other senior Tory Eurosceptic MPs have said that they expect Britain to leave the Single Market after Brexit negotiations end in March 2019 . However , Carolyn Fairbairn , the director-general of the CBI , yesterday warned that it will be `` impossible '' to reach a final deal by then . She urged the Government to build a `` bridge to the future '' by agreeing a transitional deal as soon as possible that will retain membership of the Single Market and Customs Union until a Brexit deal comes into force . This would mean that Britain would have to accept free movement of EU citizens and the oversight of the European Court of Justice for an unspecified transition period . It would also prevent the UK from negotiating new trade deals with countries outside the EU . Ms Fairbairn said : `` This is a time to be realistic . Instead of a cliff edge , the UK needs a bridge to the new EU deal . Even with the greatest possible goodwill on both sides , it 's impossible to imagine the detail will be clear by the end of March 2019 . '' The CBI 's position - strengthened by recent figures suggesting the economy is slowing - appears to reflect that of Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who has repeatedly said that Britain needs to agree a transitional deal to avoid a `` cliff-edge '' Brexit . It will raise fears that with no time limit applied to the transition deal , Britain may never effectively leave the EU , leading to accusations the group is trying to derail by stealth Britain 's decision to leave the EU . Mr Davis has previously stated that he expects Britain to leave both the Single Market and the Customs Union by the end of the decade . Business leaders privately believe that Theresa May 's failure to secure an outright majority at the general election will give them significantly more influence over Brexit . Labour last night announced that it is backing the CBI 's demands , placing more pressure on the Prime Minister . The approach is likely to provoke significant splits in Conservative ranks . Change Britain , a pro-Brexit pressure group previously endorsed by Boris Johnson , said last night : `` Committing to stay in the EU 's Single Market and Customs Union during a transition period would only serve to tie our hands during negotiations , and make it more likely that the EU gives us a bad deal . '' The guestlist at Chevening is understood to include Xavier Rolet , the chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , Carolyn McCall , the chief executive of Easyjet , Dave Lewis , the head of Tesco and Gavin Patterson of BT . The CBI , Institute of Directors and manufacturers ' organisation EEF will also attend . The group 's demands came as Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , accused British politicians of failing to understand that the UK can not leave the Single Market and Customs Union without losing out . He also warned that Britain has `` more to lose '' than the EU if it walks away from negotiations without a deal . Mr Barnier will meet Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , next week . Downing Street said the Government did understand the EU 's position and was focused on `` getting a deal that works for both sides '' . `` It is n't new that some on the EU side have strong feelings about the decision the British people took last year but the UK Government is focused on getting the best possible deal for our whole country and a deep and special partnership that 's in the interests of the whole continent , '' said the PM 's official spokesman . Lord Hague , the former Foreign Secretary , yesterday warned that Brexit will damage `` undoubtedly '' Britain 's ability to influence world events . He said : `` Brexit will be damaging to our ability to work with other EU countries , obviously on foreign affairs and influence their outlook overall . '' `` There is no doubt we are a big player in the foreign affairs council , bigger than we are in the financial and economic affairs of the EU . It is also true that they will want to consult us , to temper the gloom a little bit . ''
This is the Brexit I 've been waiting for ; The Tory manifesto shows the PM 's plan for taking Britain out of the EU will make us a global champion
'We are leaving the European Union . We want to ensure our departure is smooth and orderly and to agree a deep and special partnership with the 27 remaining member states . '' Stop for a moment and savour those words . If I had told you , 20 or 10 or even five years ago , that they would appear in the election manifesto of one of the big parties , you 'd have laughed . After something takes place , we tend to think it was inevitable all along ; psychologists call it the hindsight fallacy . So it 's easy to miss the revolutionary nature of what is happening - revolutionary in the exact sense that a wheel is completing its turn , that something is being set the right way up again . Theresa May has upended the assumption that has guided the entire Establishment for 40 years . Politicians , captains of industry , academics , lobbyists , civil servants - all operated on a premise that the general population never accepted , namely that the UK 's future was as a subordinate unit within a European polity . When I joined the European Parliament in 1999 , I was the first Conservative returned in a national election to call for Britain to leave the EU . Openly proposing withdrawal was a sackable offence under John Major , William Hague and even , at least in theory , Michael Howard ( who , to his credit , went on to vote Leave himself ) . A Eurosceptic , in the 1990s and early 2000s , was someone who did n't want to join the euro . Leaving the EU was not on anyone 's agenda in Westminster , despite between 40 and 50 per cent of the electorate consistently favouring the idea . Brexit has gone from being unthinkable to being inevitable with almost no intervening phase . The chief author of the manifesto is Ben Gummer , the Minister for the Cabinet Office , who could not have been more fervent in his support for Remain . He has accepted the referendum result with exemplary good grace , grasping that the worst of all worlds would be to go about Brexit sulkily . Like most Remainers , he understands that the challenge now is to leave in a way that maximises the advantages to the EU and to Britain , and that addresses the chief concerns of both the 52 and the 48 per cent . The 52 per cent have every reason to be content . At the manifesto launch , Mrs May reiterated that Brexit would mean taking back control of our laws , borders and money . There is even a promise to withdraw from the Common Fisheries Policy - something that Ukip had tried to claim was in doubt . If Mrs May wins next month , no one can argue that there is no mandate for any particular form of Brexit . What of the 48 per cent ? Those who refuse to accept anything short of staying in , will , of course , be disappointed , but they are a minority within a minority . Most Remainers want a business-like outcome which minimises uncertainty and preserves the positive elements of our relationship with the EU . Talking to friends in this category , I find them reassured by the commitment to a comprehensive trade deal with the EU , by the promise of continued participation in some of its programmes and by the guarantee of a smooth transition , in which Brexit is a process than an event . The idea that Brexit would lead , as George Osborne put it during the campaign , to `` Nigel Farage 's Britain '' now looks downright silly . Ukip has collapsed in the polls and Mr Farage himself is sidling away from his old party . It is the Conservatives who are delivering Brexit , and they are doing so on internationalist principles . A large chunk of the manifesto is called `` Global Britain '' , and sets out how `` the United Kingdom will be a global champion for an open economy , free trade , and the free flow of investment , ideas and information '' . The theme of remaining open for business runs through almost every other section , too . The pledges on infrastructure and university funding , for example , and the promise to simplify the tax system - they 're all about making Britain a place where people want to invest . Nothing could be further from the nativist , protectionist Brexit that some feared . Here , in short , is a plan for a competitive Britain , interested and involved in the affairs of every continent , including Europe . I 've waited a long time to vote for a manifesto like this . Daniel Hannan is Conservative MEP for South East England READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
'Come on , what do you want ' : Merkel mocks PM 's reticence on Brexit ; Politics German leader said to have had journalists in stitches with claim May refuses to provide answers
ANGELA MERKEL has mocked Theresa May 's Brexit negotiating tactics , saying the two leaders end up going around in circles because the Prime Minister never says what she wants . The German chancellor said that whenever she asks Mrs May what she wants from the EU , she always replies : `` Make me an offer . '' Mrs Merkel is said to have left journalists laughing `` uproariously '' when she gave them a behind-the-scenes insight into Brexit talks during her visit to Davos last week . According to ITV 's Robert Peston , Mrs Merkel 's constant refrain to Mrs May when she asks for an offer is to say : `` But you 're leaving - we do n't have to make you an offer . Come on , what do you want ? '' Mrs May then repeats : `` Make me an offer . '' Mrs Merkel said she and Mrs May were trapped in an endless cycle of questions and counter-questions . `` We do not comment on these reports , '' a spokesman for the German government said . He referred instead to Mrs Merkel 's comments in her speech at Davos last week , in which she said : `` With regard to Europe , we have a problem that I would now like to address . `` Naturally , we all very much regret that the United Kingdom will no longer be part of the European Union . `` Our colleague Theresa May will be here tomorrow . On behalf of Germany , but also other countries , I would like to say that we want to continue having a good partnership with the United Kingdom in the future . `` However , we will also make clear that access to the single market is tied to Europe 's four freedoms . We can make no compromises on that . But we know that we are closely linked to the United Kingdom through values , convictions and foreign policy interests . It is up to the United Kingdom to say how close it wants this partnership to be . We are open to all forms of partnerships . '' It comes as George Freeman , Mrs May 's former policy chief , said : `` It looks as though we have nothing to say , other than a daily commentary on Brexit . '' Mrs May is facing deep divisions within her party over the sort of Brexit she should pursue . A planned speech in which she would have set out her vision for Britain 's post-Brexit future has been put on ice until the party and her Cabinet can agree on its Brexit stance . Comments made by Philip Hammond , Mrs May 's Chancellor , in Davos last week that Brexit would lead to only a `` very modest '' change in Britain 's circumstances provoked uproar among Eurosceptic Tory MPs . John Redwood , the Tory MP and former minister , told The Andrew Peach Show on BBC Radio Berkshire yesterday : `` I am recommending that the Prime Minister , who 's been extremely friendly and encouraging to the EU , should now firm up and say 'The UK 's made lots of generous offers about future agreements , there has n't been much coming back from the EU yet , so is n't it time now for the EU to deliver ? ' Otherwise why would we want to go ahead on the basis we 've been talking about ? '' Mr Redwood said he would like `` a very clear timetable and a much tighter timetable than some of her officials are talking about '' for Brexit . Asked whether the Prime Minister was coming under pressure from pro-Brexit Tories to sack Mr Hammond , Theresa May 's official spokesman told reporters : `` The Chancellor is doing a good job . '' 'It is up to the UK to say how close it wants this partnership to be . We are open to all partnerships '
Tory rebels have made 'no deal ' Brexit more likely , say EU leaders
TORY rebels have increased the chances of a `` no deal '' Brexit by giving Theresa May less time to negotiate a good deal for Britain , EU leaders have warned . By insisting they have a `` meaningful vote '' on the final deal , the mutineers weakened Mrs May 's hand because Brussels knows anything she agrees could be overturned by Parliament . She will also have to allow time for a vote , cutting short the time available for reaching an agreement with the EU . Together , the two factors make it less likely that she will achieve the best possible deal , EU leaders said , and if Parliament rejects what is on offer Britain will crash out of the EU without a deal . Brussels will not renegotiate , meaning the vote will still be a `` take it or leave it '' choice . Christian Kern , Austria 's outgoing chancellor , said he still hoped Brexit could be reversed , but Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , insisted that it was `` unstoppable '' . He said Wednesday night 's defeat for the Government `` wo n't for one second stop Brexit '' . Danuta Hübner , a Polish MEP and chairman of the European parliament 's constitutional affairs committee , said : `` Once it is finalised and it is signed by both parties , then any change to it means reopening negotiations , meaning we will not make it within the two years , meaning there is a hard Brexit . '' Mrs May was in Brussels last night for the start of a two-day European Council summit at which the leaders of the other 27 countries are expected to agree that negotiations on a post-Brexit trade deal can begin . The Prime Minister told them she wanted to move on to the next phase of negotiations `` with ambition and creativity '' . She said : `` A particular priority should be agreement on the implementation period so that we can bring greater certainty to businesses in the UK and across the 27 . '' Xavier Bettel , the prime minister of Luxembourg , said Mrs May 's job had been made harder by the 11 rebels in her party who helped Labour defeat her in the Commons on Wednesday night . He said : `` As soon as she negotiates something she will need to go back to London to get approval from the Parliament and this is not making her life easier . If every time we announce something there is a risk that it will unravel in London , it is not very good for making concrete progress . '' David Davis agreed , telling the Commons that Wednesday 's vote left him with `` a very compressed timetable '' . Mrs May , meanwhile , is preparing to back down over plans to enshrine the Brexit date in law after Tory rebels threatened to inflict another defeat on the Government next week . The Prime Minister and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , both refused to rule out a climbdown , while another minister told The Daily Telegraph `` we 're not going to die in a ditch over it '' . The rebels argue that the Government should give itself extra flexibility in its negotiations by leaving the Brexit date open-ended in case the process over-runs by a matter of days or weeks . Downing Street said there were `` no plans '' to take the date off the Bill , while Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , said : `` We will take the Bill forward , we will assess where we stand in the wake of last night . '' The rebels now face a grass roots backlash with calls for them to be deselected . Nicky Morgan , a former Cabinet member , was accused by constituency councillors of handing Jeremy Corbyn a significant win . One said : `` She is going to cost us votes , at the last election her majority was down quite heavily . It puts her in a ... precarious position . '' Heidi Allen is also facing criticism from local party members in South Cambridgeshire for rebelling . Paul Diamond , a barrister , said : `` We are concerned that she is acting without accountability ... I am taking soundings from fellow members about what further action we should take . '' However , despite being `` disappointed '' with the Government 's defeat the Prime Minister is refusing to support any moves to deselect the MPs . Meanwhile , Leo Varadkar , the Irish prime minister , said there was still a hard battle ahead to ensure Ireland 's interests were laid down in a legally binding international treaty . He said Ireland had secured `` very strong language '' assuring there would be no hard border with Northern Ireland but `` we 're not complacent either ... this is politics and we 're going to need to stay very engaged in the months and years ahead and be vigilant '' . Editorial Comment : Page 23
Boris : Yes , we will take back £350m from EU for NHS ; Foreign Secretary sets out grand vision for country after Brexit Staying in single market and customs union would be mockery Chancellor must cut taxes and regulation to boost economy Brexit specialBoris : Corbyn 'chickening out ' on the EU
BORIS JOHNSON today sets out a grand vision of Britain 's `` glorious '' post-Brexit future as a low-tax , low regulation economy paying nothing to the EU for access to the single market . In a 4,000-word article in today 's Daily Telegraph , the Foreign Secretary restates a key demand of the Leave campaign - that the £350million a week currently sent to Brussels should be redirected to fund the NHS . He says that Britain should not continue to make payments to the EU after Brexit and that ongoing membership of the European single market and customs union would make a `` complete mockery '' of the referendum . Mr Johnson makes no reference to any transition period after 2019 and makes repeated reference to how EU bureaucracy is a drag on Britain 's economic performance . His blueprint differs markedly from that of Philip Hammond and other Cabinet ministers , who have stressed the need to remain close to the single market and pay money to maintain access . It comes less than a week before Theresa May delivers a pivotal Brexit speech in Florence , and effectively amounts to an ultimatum to the Prime Minister on what she is expected to say . It is understood that the Foreign Secretary had hoped to make a speech about Brexit but has not had the opportunity . Whitehall sources suggested that the Prime Minister and Chancellor were unaware of Mr Johnson 's article . His Brexit blueprint will send shockwaves through the Tory ranks and will spark speculation that Mr Johnson - who sources say supports the Prime Minister and her agenda - may still harbour leadership ambitions , as the Conservative Party prepares to meet at its annual conference next month . In his passionately patriotic article , he insists that Britain can be `` the greatest country on Earth '' and rounds on so-called Remoaners `` who think we are going to bottle it '' . The most striking inclusion in his article is the repetition of his claim that Britain will be £350 million a week better off after leaving the EU and that the money could be spent on the NHS . The claim appeared on the side of the Leave campaign bus during last year 's referendum campaign and has been bitterly disputed by Remainers ever since . However , Mr Johnson says : `` Once we have settled our accounts , we will take back control of roughly £350 million a week . It would be a fine thing , as many of us have pointed out , if a lot of that money went on the NHS , provided we use that cash injection to modernise and make the most of new technology . '' Mr Johnson is also dismissive of the suggestion that Britain should pay to access the single market during the transition period or beyond , saying : `` We would not expect to pay for access to their markets any more than they would expect to pay for access to ours . '' He deploys soaring rhetoric in the tub-thumping article to insist that Britain `` will succeed in our new national enterprise , and will succeed mightily '' , while slapping down opponents of Brexit who are `` woefully underestimating this country '' and think Brexit `` is n't going to happen '' . The Foreign Secretary also settles old scores by attacking those who tried to prevent the Leave vote , such as `` the BBC , Barack Obama , the Archbishop of Canterbury , the CBI [ Confederation of British Industry ] , every major political party and much of the media '' . Under Mr Johnson 's blueprint , leaving the EU must `` logically entail '' leaving the single market , the customs union and the European Court of Justice . He says Britain will `` keep environmental and social protections that are fair and wise '' , but will ditch EU regulations , which cost between 4 and 7 per cent of GDP . Mr Johnson says : `` We should seize the opportunity of Brexit to reform our tax system '' , pointing out that the Bank of England 's chief economist said in 2015 that the system is `` skewed '' and discourages investment . He also suggests that Britain should think about taxing foreign buyers of British property to prevent them pushing house prices up . Another way of tackling the housing crisis , he says , would be to simplify planning laws and environmental impact assessments . He singles out the Communities Secretary , Sajid Javid , and the Health Secretary , Jeremy Hunt , for praise , but makes no mention of the Brexit Secretary , David Davis . On immigration , he says businesses should be able to access the skills they need but `` will no longer be able to use immigration as an excuse not to invest in the young people of this country '' . He also wants a Britain where `` fat cat '' bosses are not rewarded for failure . On trade , Britain will be able to `` get on and do free trade deals '' , particularly with the Commonwealth , rather than looking to the EU for ways to expand . His view challenges Mr Hammond 's preference for a lengthy transition . Mr Johnson sees Brexit as a `` chance to catch the wave of new technology , and to put Britain in the lead '' . As automated vehicles take over the car market , the car industry will transform itself in Britain , while the protectionist EU will try to hold back the revolution . He also accuses Jeremy Corbyn of `` chickening out '' of Brexit with his party 's preference for remaining in the single market and customs union , or nearest equivalent . `` He would make a complete mockery of Brexit , '' he writes , `` and turn an opportunity into a national humiliation . ''
Hunt joins long list of briefing paper blunderers ; Sketch
Yes , they 're still doing it . Even though countless colleagues have been caught out in exactly the same way , Government figures continue to amble dozily out of Downing Street clutching confidential paperwork , directly in front of photographers with zoom lenses . We know times are tough , and the Government is determined to keep tight control of the public purse . But really : I 'm sure the taxpayer would n't object if , in the name of basic security , ministers invested in ring-binders . Yesterday 's daydreamer was Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , who was photographed holding notes he and his team had prepared on Brexit . One line in particular caught the eye : `` Hard Brexit means people fleeing UK . '' I assume that this is not Mr Hunt 's own view , given that a so-called `` hard Brexit '' ( leaving the single market and customs union ) happens to be official Government policy . I imagine he noted it down as an example of the kind of criticism his opponents might make . On the other hand , maybe it 's the Government 's new line on immigration . `` Hard Brexit means people fleeing the UK - and that 's why we 're pursuing it ! There 'll be far less pressure on the NHS once everyone 's left the country ! Instead of waiting months for an operation , you can have it straight away ! Although admittedly you may have to perform it yourself ! '' Later , when Mr Hunt faced MPs , Labour 's Heidi Alexander ranted that `` doctors and nurses are leaving in their droves '' and `` EU staff no longer want to come here '' . The blame , she said , lay squarely with Mr Hunt . `` Well , '' he huffed , `` she may have noticed a little thing called Brexit happened - which is the cause of understandable concern . '' Funny how things turn out . According to his notes , Mr Hunt 's opponents were supposed to blame Brexit , and he was supposed to defend it . Instead , his opponents did n't blame Brexit , he did . Afterwards , Labour tabled an urgent question about education spending . They were led by Angela Rayner , the shadow education secretary . `` The Education Secretary bid for extra money for schools this weekend ! '' she bellowed . `` Not at Cabinet , but on the front page of the Torygraph ! And no wonder , when Arlene Foster [ DUP leader ] got a billion pounds ! She must be the most expensive right-winger since Cristiano Ronaldo ! '' Personally , I enjoyed that joke more when the SNP 's Alison Thewlis told it a week earlier . I look forward to hearing it again . Perhaps the next MP will bear in mind that Ronaldo actually enjoyed his greatest success in the centre .
Scotland Double blow to Sturgeon over Brexit deal ; EU and Westminster deal blow to Sturgeon on Brexit deal hope
NICOLA STURGEON 'S hopes of a separate Brexit deal for Scotland suffered a double blow yesterday when the Scottish Secretary ruled out both Scottish membership of the single market and the transfer of immigration powers to Holyrood . The First Minister has demanded that Scotland remains inside the single market - either with the rest of the UK or on its own - after Brexit . Her plan rests on Scotland getting control over immigration so the country can remain open to free movement of people across Europe , even if the rest of the UK rejects that position . Ms Sturgeon has warned that she will hold a second independence referendum if the UK fails to back these aims . Alex Salmond , the former first minister , suggested during his LBC radio phone-in show yesterday that a second vote could take place in the autumn of 2018 , just four years after the 2014 referendum which he previously described as a once in a lifetime opportunity . He said a second vote would have to take place during the two-year Brexit negotiating period , which is due to begin in March . Yesterday David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary dismissed any suggestion that Scotland could remain inside the single market after Brexit . Building on the speech made by the Theresa May , the Prime Minister , earlier this week when she said the UK would be leaving the single market , the Scottish Secretary told MPs : `` It 's absolutely clear that Scotland can not be a member of the single market if it is not Continued on Page 7 Continued from Page 1 a member of the EU , and the United Kingdom will not be a member of the EU . '' Mr Mundell also gave a very clear indication that the UK Government would not allow immigration policy to be devolved to Scotland . The Scottish Secretary said : `` I will always look at evidence-based proposals that come forward and that 's our commitment for example in relation to the Scottish Government 's paper [ on Brexit ] produced just before Christmas . `` But it was quite clear within the settlement agreed in the Smith Commission that immigration would remain a reserved power . '' Mr Mundell told MPs that the Scottish Parliament would , however , get control over agriculture and fishing after Brexit as these powers would be transferred from Brussels to Edinburgh and not to London . But this commitment fell far short of what the Nationalists have demanded and Ms Sturgeon will now have to decide whether this latest rejection of her proposals is enough for her to force another Scottish independence referendum . Representatives of the Scottish and UK governments will meet later today to discuss her plans in more detail and , although UK ministers have said they are still considering them , Mr Mundell has given the impression that it is only a matter of time before they are rejected formally by Theresa May , the Prime Minister . Margaret Ferrier , an SNP MP , accused Mr Mundell of `` backtracking '' on a previous promise to keep Scotland in the single market . She said : `` Clearly he has thrown in the towel on getting the best deal for Scotland , and now he and his UK government colleagues are going full steam ahead with their hard Brexit . '' Angus Robertson , the party 's leader in Westminster , asked Mrs May during Prime Minister 's Questions yesterday whether she would stick to her promise to treat Scotland as an `` equal partner '' . He accused her of steering the UK into a `` Little Britain Brexit '' that would hit jobs and pay . He added : `` Shortly after the Prime Minister confirmed that she wants to take the UK out of the single European market , the Scottish Parliament voted by a large , cross-party majority to remain in the single European market , just as a large majority of people in Scotland voted to remain in the European Union . '' Ms Sturgeon 's attempts to secure a `` differentiated '' Scottish agreement , inside the overall UK Brexit deal , were further undermined yesterday when one of the EU 's senior MEPs said there would be `` no exceptions '' . Elmar Brok , the chairman of the parliament 's foreign affairs committee , said : `` We can not have two agreements with the United Kingdom and with Scotland . '' He added : `` How can we do exceptions for Britain and then exceptions for Scotland ? `` I do n't think this is a cherry-picking thing , I am very sorry for Scotland because of that . '' 'We can not have two agreements with the United Kingdom and with Scotland . I do n't think this is a cherry-picking thing '
Davis ends up in the fire over his 'Satan ' quip
IF THIS country is to achieve the Prime Minister 's goal of `` a smooth and orderly Brexit '' , it is incumbent upon all of us to do our bit . I 'm delighted , therefore , to have already played my own small part . In September , I reported on a meeting of a Commons select committee , during which David Davis was asked about the EU 's top negotiator , Guy Verhofstadt . `` Get thee behind me , Satan ! '' chortled the Brexit Secretary . One person who read my account of this quip , it seems , was a Mr G Verhofstadt of Strasbourg . Two weeks ago , the night before the two men were due to meet for the first time , Mr Verhofstadt shared my sketch - headlined `` Get thee behind me , Satan ! How David Davis taunted a major EU foe '' - with his 104,000 followers on Twitter , and added that he was `` looking forward '' to their `` conversation '' . Then , upon Mr Davis 's arrival , Mr Verhofstadt held out his hand , and said : `` David . Welcome to hell ! '' Meeting new people can be awkward . I 'm so glad I could help break the ice . Yesterday the Brexit Secretary was questioned in the Commons for the first time since . His joke about Satan , he said , had been `` royally misinterpreted '' , but to avoid further `` trouble '' , he would now be `` polite to everybody '' . This does n't sound like the Mr Davis we know and love . I do hope he 'll reconsider . As usual , pro-Remain MPs were calling the Government clueless , and warning of catastrophes to come . David Nuttall ( Con , Bury North ) could take no more . Remainers , he snapped , must stop `` seeking to reverse the decision the people made '' . Personally , I think he 's right . Remainers should stop sticking their oar in . Indeed , I think it 's in Remainers ' own interests to stop sticking their oar in . Put it like this . Say , for the sake of argument , the Remainers ' predictions are right , and Brexit proves a disaster . Remainers , naturally , will want the public to blame the Brexiteers : Farage , Johnson , Fox and the rest . But if Remainers have in some way influenced the type of Brexit we get - by , for example , insisting we stay members of the single market , against Brexiteers ' will - then it will be all too easy for Brexiteers to say , `` Actually , this disaster is the fault of the Remainers . They ruined Brexit . Our type of Brexit would have been a success . But the Remainers sabotaged it . '' And so , in the public eye , the people to blame for the disaster wo n't be the politicians who urged us to vote for it . It 'll be the politicians who urged us not to , saying it would be a disaster all along . And if the Remainers ' are wrong , and Brexit proves a roaring triumph ? Well , then the Remainers should be so relieved they wo n't mind apologising . Jeremy Corbyn once suggested that Theresa May 's `` cunning plan '' for Brexit was to `` do nothing '' . For Remainers , I think that would be sound advice .
A conciliatory approach to Brexit will bolster Theresa May 's opponents ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - You report ( July 10 ) that Theresa May will ask Jeremy Corbyn to help her deliver Brexit . Before the election , Mrs May told us that victory for Mr Corbyn would be a disaster for Britain , but she now thinks that this man can help her govern . Mr Corbyn and all others in opposition must be pinching themselves to believe that they have been given this ace card . Myra Spalton Macclesfield , Cheshire sir - It is surely a forlorn hope for a terminally damaged Prime Minister to expect cross-party support for her version of Brexit ( report , July 10 ) . Despite the formal Labour policy on Brexit , Jeremy Corbyn and his cronies have made it clear that , whatever Mrs May proposes , they will oppose it . Sadly , Mrs May has proved that she does not have the qualities required to carry either party or country . She should go now.Brian Pegnall Falmouth , Cornwall SIR - If there were a referendum on the question , `` Should all political parties work together to produce the best Brexit for Britain ? `` , I expect the answer would be a resounding `` Yes '' . Tim Hoyle Butleigh Wootton , Somerset SIR - If Brexit is prevented by political squabbles , as Sir Vince Cable suggests it might be ( report , July 10 ) , does anyone seriously believe we would be welcomed back ? We would be placed on the naughty step . The Eurocrats would ignore any influence we once had and proceed to ramp up integration , while demanding more billions for their pet projects . Hew Goldingham St Leonards-on-Sea , East Sussex sir - Your leading article ( July 8 ) begins : `` Brexit is going to happen . '' Why take the trouble to state the obvious ? Doth the lady protest too much ? Is the reason for such an anti-heretic protestation that - as the complications and drawbacks of leaving become more apparent , the economic indicators become ever more gloomy , and more parliamentary time and money are wasted on this misguided exercise in populist `` democracy '' - serious doubts are emerging as to whether it is all really worth the pain and grief ? Richard Bird London W11 Emeritus Prof William Outhwaite Newcastle University Prof Joshua Silver University of Oxford David Wolchover Ridgeway Chambers , Barnet , Hertfordshire SIR - Sir Vince says that a deteriorating economy would make people think again about Brexit . From the post-Napoleonic depression of 1821 to the present day , there have been some 13 major recessions in Britain . Five of these have been since Britain joined the EU . Derek Poots Horsham , West Sussex
Labour torn apart as senior MP quits over Brexit vote ; May 's mission ; Three further shadow ministers could resign in rebellion over Corbyn 's Article 50 three-line whip
LABOUR 'S bitter divisions over Brexit deepened last night as a shadow minister resigned over Jeremy Corbyn 's decision to force his party 's MPs to back a vote to trigger Article 50 . The Labour leader yesterday announced he will impose a three-line whip on his party for next week 's parliamentary vote to trigger Brexit negotiations . He is now facing a rebellion by up to a third of Labour MPs , and three other shadow cabinet ministers are said to be considering their positions . Tulip Siddiq , a shadow education minister , said that she had decided with a `` heavy heart '' to quit the role because her constituency voted overwhelmingly against Brexit . Despite committing his party to backing Article 50 , Mr Corbyn yesterday tabled seven amendments , including one which would give Parliament the power to block Mrs May 's final deal . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , warned politicians that they must `` respect '' the result of the referendum . The Government yesterday tabled a 137-word Bill in the House of Commons which will enable Theresa May to formally trigger negotiations with Brussels . It is planning to rush the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill through Parliament in a fortnight , with the first vote on Wednesday . The legislation will then be sent to the Lords for further debate , enabling the Prime Minister to meet her deadline of triggering Article 50 by the end of March . It comes after Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats announced they would disrupt Theresa May 's plans for a smooth Brexit . Mr Davis said : `` I trust that Parliament , which backed the referendum by six to one , will respect the decision taken by the British people and pass the legislation quickly . '' However , Labour is already plotting to disrupt the plans and among the amendments it has tabled is one calling on the Government to guarantee `` full '' access to the Single Market . Some Europhile Labour MPs are also aiming to vote down the timetable for the legislation , a move which would delay the Brexit talks . Following Ms Siddiq 's resignation , three other senior MPs - Daniel Zeichner , a shadow transport minister , Catherine West , a shadow foreign minister , and Thangam Debbonaire , a whip - could follow suit . Ms Siddiq said in her resignation letter : `` The vast majority of my constituents voted last year to remain in the European Union , as did I . On the announcement of the 3-line whip on the Article 50 vote I therefore feel I have no choice but to resign from my frontbench role as shadow minister for early years . I do not support the triggering of Article 50 and can not reconcile myself to the front-bench position . '' Steve Reed , a Labour MP , said that Mr Corbyn had only agreed to support the triggering of Article 50 because he feared losing a snap general election . Mr Corbyn told Sky News : `` It 's clearly a three-line whip . I understand the pressures and issues members are under ... Labour is in the almost unique position of having MPs representing constituencies in both directions . `` I say to everyone , unite around the important issues ... I 'm asking all our MPs not to block Article 50 and make sure it goes through next week . '' The Bill had two clauses : 1 Power to notify withdrawal from the EU ( 1 ) The Prime Minister may notify , under Article 50 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union , the United Kingdom 's intention to withdraw from the EU . ( 2 ) This section has effect despite any provision made by or under the European Communities Act 1972 or any other enactment . 2 Short title This Act may be cited as the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Act 2017 . Editorial Comment : Page 17 Stoke by-election Just what the Labour leader did n't want to hear from his candidate Labour 's candidate for the Stoke Central by-election once described Brexit as a `` massive pile of s -- - '' . Gareth Snell has been selected as Labour 's candidate for the seat that Ukip leader Paul Nuttall is contesting . Seventy per cent of constituents voted for Brexit . Mr Snell also said on Twitter : `` If we have to prefix ( Owen ) Smith with 'Pfizer lobbyist ' , can we also say 'IRA supporting friend of Hamas career politician ' Jeremy Corbyn ? '' Other tweets included : `` We doing hyberbole ? If so , it 's a choice between IRA supporting friend of Hamas career politician Corbyn vs Smith . '' He also said : `` Smith learnt politics in the heat of the fight in South Wales . Corbyn sipped tea in trendy north London with career politician and Viscount . '' Later , Mr Snell added : `` For clarity , my previous comments were to demonstrate the absurdity of the hyperbole I 've read in the last two hours . '' A spokeswoman for Mr Corbyn said : `` We wo n't comment on this . '' Mr Snell will attempt to hold the Stoke-on-Trent Central seat for Labour next month after Tristram Hunt stepped down . Mr Nuttall will hope to capitalise on a strong Brexit vote in last year 's EU referendum and secure himself a place in the Commons . Borough councillor Mr Snell once tweeted : `` Soft Brexit , Hard Brexit , massive pile of s -- - . Sloppy Brexit , messy Brexit , quit , quit , quit . '' Meanwhile , the Tories have selected project manager Trudy Harrison to take on Labour in the Copeland byelection . The two contests on Feb 23 are a headache for Mr Corbyn , with strong challenges in both seats . President Trump returns a salute as he steps off Marine One helicopter before boarding Air Force One for his flight to Philadelphia to talk to Republicans at their retreat . He meets Theresa May today 'The vast majority of my constituents voted last year to remain in the EU , as did I '
Scotland Sturgeon 'using Brexit to distract from record and further separatist agenda ' ; Scottish Labour leader says First Minister is trying to seize 'political opportunity ' and SNP can not be trusted
NICOLA STURGEON is trying to use Brexit to divert voters ' attention away from her record in government and towards independence , the new Scottish Labour leader argued today . Richard Leonard warned Scots that they can not trust the SNP on Brexit , arguing they are treating it as a `` political opportunity '' to further their separatist agenda . He was speaking after Ms Sturgeon said leaving the EU without a trade deal is `` unthinkable '' and it `` beggars belief `` that Theresa May is to appoint a minister in her reshuffle with responsibility for preparing for this scenario . The First Minister reiterated that the case for a second EU referendum on the outcome of the talks may be `` irresistible '' if there is no deal and `` no Brexit '' would be a preferable outcome . She also said she would make an `` assessment and a judgment '' about another Scottish independence vote after the terms of the deal were known later this year . Her latest intervention came as Holyrood 's cross-party finance committee said it could not recommend MSPs consent to the EU withdrawal Bill , arguing it is `` incompatible '' with the devolution settlement . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , has already said that Clause 11 , which establishes that powers repatriated from the European Union are all returned to Westminster in the first instance , would be amended . But Ms Sturgeon wrote an article in a Sunday tabloid stating that independence must `` remain an option '' after Brexit and predicted a `` new spirit of Scottish assertiveness '' in 2018 . However Mr Leonard said his party would focus on getting a deal focused on jobs and the economy , while respecting the Brexit vote , `` unlike the SNP , who seem never to accept the result of any referendum '' . He said : `` The people of Scotland ca n't trust the SNP when it comes to Brexit - it is a political opportunity for the Nationalists to divert attention away from their record in government and towards their obsession with the constitution . The NHS over recent weeks has faced unprecedented pressure , with Scotland 's hospitals managing one crisis after another , while huge cuts to Scotland 's councils are having a massive impact on local services and the jobs that go with those services . '' Mr Leonard added that it was `` no wonder the First Minister wished to only talk about Brexit '' . Ms Sturgeon also yesterday refused to put a timescale for an investigation into Mark McDonald , the former childcare minister , more than two months after he resigned after admitting `` inappropriate '' behaviour towards women .
Carney says households and firms are taking Brexit in their stride
UK households and firms are taking the prospect of leaving the European Union in their stride , according to the head of the Bank of England . Some businesses were holding back on investments until clarity on a deal was established , but expectations for Brexit did not seem negative , said Mark Carney , Governor of the central bank , while addressing an audience in Liverpool yesterday . `` They [ businesses and households ] are n't acting as though it 's going to be a very bad outcome from Brexit , '' he said . Households were more concerned about the current squeeze on their incomes , arising from inflation and low wage growth , than they were about the impact on earnings of any potential Brexit scenario , he added . His comments came as Lloyd Blankfein , the chief executive of US investment bank Goldman Sachs , suggested on Twitter that the UK should hold a second referendum on Brexit . Mr Blankfein , an infrequent tweeter , having posted only 26 times , has made negative statements about Brexit , either directly or indirectly , on four occasions . In his latest comments , Mr Blankfein said : `` Here in UK , lots of hand-wringing from CEOs over # Brexit . Better sense of the tough and risky road ahead . Reluctant to say , but many wish for a confirming vote on a decision so monumental and irreversible . So much at stake , why not make sure consensus still there ? '' His comments come as the City 's calls for swift clarity on the terms of Brexit to prevent the triggering of relocation plans intensifies . The need for a clear and quick outcome was echoed by Mr Carney . He said : `` It matters what kind of deal we get , it matters the timeline over which we get [ it ] . '' Mr Carney said Britain 's economic performance had been hampered by the decision to leave the EU , as the UK fell from top performer , in terms of growth in the G7 , to second from bottom . `` We have not done as well in the short term as we would have done if the vote had gone the other way , '' he said on ITV yesterday . The Bank of England said this month that up to 10,000 jobs could be lost on day one of Brexit if no deal is struck . Earlier this week JP Morgan and Prudential told the House of Lords they had begun putting their relocation plans in motion . Goldman Sachs employs 6,000 in the UK and has signed a lease for office space in Frankfurt .
Carney : lack of Brexit transition risks inflation rise ; Bank of England Governor says an abrupt exit from the EU could hit the pound and investment
BRITAIN could suffer even higher inflation if Brexit negotiators fail to agree a transitional deal with the European Union , Mark Carney has warned . An abrupt exit might result in a further fall in the value of the pound and dent business investment , squeezing the UK economy and leading to higher prices . The Governor of the Bank of England said a transitional deal would help companies and households to adjust , adding he would `` cast my vote '' for such an agreement . `` On the moment of Brexit , it will very much depend on what the final arrangement is with the EU 27 , and what the transition path is from here to there , '' he told the European Central Bank 's communications conference . There has already been some fallout from Brexit - both in terms of investment and the value of the pound - because businesses and markets remain uncertain about the final shape of any deal , Mr Carney said . He pledged that the Bank of England will do everything it can to keep the economy growing , and the financial system stable , through Brexit : `` What are we trying to say to the people of UK ? Very simple : we will do whatever we can to support the economy subject to returning inflation to that 2pc target - so do n't worry about inflation . '' His comments came as data released by the Office for National Statistics showed that inflation was lower in October than expected . Rather than the rise that economists had predicted of 0.1 or 0.2 percentage points , inflation remained at 3pc last month . However , the slower than expected rise did not mark an end to the cost-ofliving squeeze . Households will still be hit by rising prices , as food inflation continued to climb , hitting 4.1pc - the highest level since September 2014 . This was offset by a slight fall in other common household expenses such as fuel . However , it raised questions among economists about whether the Bank of England had jumped the gun with its recent interest rate rise . Fuel was added to that debate by Sir Jon Cunliffe , the deputy governor of the Bank . He told the Oxford Economics Society he voted against the rate rise earlier this month because he wants to see pay growth start to pick up - a sign that inflationary pressures are rising - before taking any steps to rein in inflation . Unemployment is at 4.2pc , its lowest level in 42 years , which would normally push wages up rapidly . But , instead , pay is rising at the same pace as it was in 2011 when unemployment was twice as high , indicating that the traditional relationship between jobs and pay may have broken down , Sir Jon said .
Scotland Hammond fails to back May for next general election ; Chancellor refuses to give May his support
PHILIP HAMMOND has repeatedly refused to endorse Theresa May as Tory leader in the next general election . The Chancellor was asked four times if Mrs May should stay on as leader at the next election but declined to give her his support , instead saying that the focus must be on delivering Brexit . The Prime Minister 's future is expected to dominate the party conference this weekend amid deepening Cabinet splits over Brexit . It has been claimed that around 30 Conservative MPs are willing to sign a letter challenging her leadership in a bid to pressure her into quitting . It came as David Davis opened the latest round of Brexit talks by warning Brussels that there can be `` no excuses '' for standing in the way of progress . Speaking alongside Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , Mr Davis said that the UK would only pay a Brexit divorce bill in exchange for a `` new deep and special partnership '' with the EU . Mr Davis 's chief of staff yesterday suggested the comments were an `` early warning shot '' to Mr Barnier as the two attempt to break a deadlock Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 in negotiations . While Labour yesterday opened the door to a second referendum on Britain 's membership of the EU which could see Brexit reversed . Some of the party 's most senior politicians lined up at Labour 's conference in Brighton to suggest that another referendum could be held on the terms of Britain 's exit from the EU . Mrs May had hoped to settle the issue of her authority last month by announcing her intention to fight the next general election , telling rivals : `` I 'm not a quitter '' . She also attempted to cement her position in a speech on Brexit in Florence last week after brokering a shortlived truce between Mr Hammond and Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary . However during a visit to Scotland yesterday Mr Hammond repeatedly declined to say that Mrs May was the `` optimum '' person to lead the party in five years time . He replied : `` I am not going to get involved in the discussion about future Conservative party leadership politics . Theresa May has made it very clear that she has a job to do , I am completely behind her in doing that job . '' The Chancellor also failed to deny that he had sent a text to Mr Johnson offering his support for a leadership bid at 4am on the night of the Conservative 's disastrous election result . He said : `` There was an awful lot of communication during the early hours that morning . I do n't recognise some of the material I have seen in the papers . `` What I do know is that the most important conversation I had that night was with Theresa May when she said she had decided to seek to form a government ; she asked me to serve in it and I committed to do so . '' It comes as Mrs May is struggling to contain the mounting Cabinet divisions over Brexit . Mr Johnson has made clear that a Brexit transition period must last no longer than two years amid fears that it could risk damaging the Tories at the next general election . However allies of Mr Hammond told The Daily Telegraph that Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptics were `` simpleminded '' and warned that Brexit could take much longer . Mr Hammond yesterday insisted that he does not believe that Mr Johnson is `` simple-minded on anything '' , but suggested that a longer transition period may be necessary .
We need clarity on Brexit , not confusion BODY : No sooner was it reported that the Cabinet had arrived at a position on Brexit that most Conservatives and , indeed , most MPs , were prepared to support than the cracks began to open once more . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , indicated last week that an implementation phase lasting until 2022 - three years after Brexit - was now the `` broadly '' agreed position , or at least one that he and the Treasury were promoting . During the transition period , trade and immigration would continue pretty much as before . Business leaders welcomed this not so much because they agreed with the timetable or even with Brexit itself , but because it seemed to give them the clarity that they need to plan ahead . Similarly , Opposition parties - whose votes will be crucial when any deal comes before Parliament some time next year - signalled that this was a policy they could work with . However , the talk of consensus was premature . It has rekindled the suspicions among Brexiteers that transition is simply a ruse to stop the UK leaving the EU or for creating a permanent half-way house . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , who has been in America performing sterling work seeking a post-Brexit trade deal , says he has not been party to any Cabinet discussions on this matter , nor agreed to any continuation of free movement after Brexit , even temporarily . Meanwhile , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , has also been absent on official duties . He , too , seems to have been wrong-footed by the latest manoeuvrings . Writing in The Sunday Telegraph , Gerard Lyons , a former adviser to Mr Johnson , said a two-year transition period was sufficient . It would seem odd to the country if a three-year implementation phase was deemed to be `` outside the spirit '' of Brexit but a two-year transition period acceptable . Getting it right is what really matters . Even Mr Fox indicated that he might well be happy with the 2022 timetable ; he denied that a position had been agreed by ministers , as the Chancellor appeared to suggest . This matter could be easily rectified with a Cabinet meeting , even if it means interrupting holidays to hold one . For investors and voters , what is most important is clarity and a sense of shared purpose from the Government - something that had been emerging , only to fall apart again . This issue is too important for it to become the focus of a proxy war among ministers exploiting the weakness of Mrs May .
Hammond calls for 'soft Brexit ' taking 4 years
BRITAIN will not be able to leave the EU within two years without serious side effects , Philip Hammond suggested last night , as he opened a potential rift with Cabinet colleagues by saying `` thoughtful politicians '' would agree . The Chancellor said that a transitional deal - in which Britain would pay for access to the single market for about 24 months after leaving the EU - would help to ensure a `` smooth '' Brexit . His intervention throws new light on differences of opinion in the Cabinet . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , and Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , are both thought to oppose a transitional deal . Mr Hammond also raised further questions about Britain 's desire for a `` hard Brexit '' . He suggested that leaving the European customs union , which sets EU-wide tarriffs on goods , could lead to a fivefold increase in border checks and cost hundreds of millions of pounds a year . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , wants Brexit to be delivered `` as soon as possible '' and has said the UK is likely to have to leave the customs union so it can strike its own trade deals . In further signs that Mr Hammond is pushing against a hard Brexit , he insisted that controls on European migration , which will be possible after Brexit , need not `` choke off `` the supply of highskilled workers . He said : `` Just because you have a system of controlling immigration does not mean you have to use it to slam all doors shut . I ca n't conceive of any circumstance in which we would want to impede or prevent the flow of highly skilled , highly paid people . '' Mr Hammond 's intervention comes after Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , suggested that the UK needs a two-year transitional deal to cushion the impact of Brexit . The Chancellor told MPs on the Treasury select committee that a transition deal after Britain leaves the EU would be `` generally helpful '' . The deal would mean the UK would not formally quit until after the 2020 general election . He said : `` There is an emerging view among businesses , among regulators and among thoughtful politicians that having a longer period to manage the adjustment between where we are now as full members of the EU and where we get to in the future would be generally helpful , would tend towards a smoother transition and would run less risks of disruption . '' Michael Deacon : Page 4 Foreign aid Target may be scrapped Britain 's controversial foreign aid spending target could be axed by the Government . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , said the commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of Britain 's national income on aid will be examined as part of a spending review . He said the review would be `` the right time to look at priorities '' .
Spare us a tyranny of the minority ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : Suddenly , everyone wants to be an outsider , even the establishment . `` We are the insurgents now , '' said Tony Blair of the Remainers . Sir John Major has warned against the `` tyranny of the majority '' . These former prime ministers say they merely wish to represent the 48 per cent who opposed Brexit , to give them a voice and perhaps a second referendum . But the goal , as they admit themselves , is to keep Britain in the EU . That would amount to a tyranny of the minority . On Thursday , Sir John told a private dinner that : `` The tyranny of the majority has never applied in a democracy and it should not apply in this particular democracy . '' Sir John is a venerable statesman , greatly to be admired - but historians might take him to task . America 's founding fathers , for instance , framed their constitution to avoid a dictatorship of the masses - but , in reality , women and African-Americans were denied the vote , and the latter were enslaved . Democracies are messy and paradoxical . They evolve . In the case of Britain , we plumped for a parliamentary system that at times looks like an elected oligarchy . We give MPs the keys to the kingdom for five years and hope that they honour the manifesto they ran on . In 2015 , the Tories were elected on a promise to hold an in/out referendum . When they triggered it , they pledged to abide by the result . There were Remainers who opposed the referendum even before it was held , on the grounds that law ought to be written by Parliament rather than the people . Some even said that referendums are the instruments of dictatorships . The difference , however , between the EU referendum and a referendum of the Thirties is that fascists held plebiscites only to rubber stamp decisions they had already made . In this instance , Parliament asked the people what to do . It could not reach a decision on Britain 's EU membership , so it sought the public 's advice - on the clear understanding that it would follow their instructions . Most Remainers have probably accepted the voters ' decision . A few have not and work , openly , to overturn it . They say that the 48 per cent who voted against Brexit deserve representation . This is a nice sentiment , but disingenuous . A country is either in the EU or it is out of it , there is no halfway house , no cosy compromise . Ergo , when the British people voted to leave on June 23 the result was decisive . We can not create two new countries , one Brexited and one Remained . We must proceed as one nation according to the decision of the majority . And the vast majority of Britons , Leave and Remain , probably accept this logic . Only the militants continue to defy it . They are few and far between , yet there is no denying that their voices are gathering volume - and that no one is answering . Ukip is in chaos . Nigel Farage appears to be pursuing a new career in America . The most pro-Brexit ministers are silenced ; Boris Johnson is actually ridiculed by the Chancellor in the House . The Government is committed to Brexit but seems reluctant to make an enthusiastic case for it . We understand its caution . It could be argued that it is foolish to enter negotiations having already declared what one wants to get . And the Autumn Statement , although unexciting , was probably pitched at the international community and the markets rather than Brexit supporters . But the Government gives the impression that it will only pursue a Brexit that has next-to-no economic effect , which means a Brexit so soft that it is n't really Brexit at all . The public , by contrast , voted for Brexit fully aware of the economic risks - aware because they were spelt out by the IMF , the Treasury , David Cameron and by just such statesmen as Mr Blair and Sir John . Leave acknowledged potential downsides too , while adding that they could be ameliorated through economic reform . Some said that sweeping away EU regulations , for instance , could turbocharge British business . We strongly agree . In other words , the arguments of the militant Remainers might be flimsy and inaccurate but they demand a reply by the Government . The Eurosceptic case for democracy needs restating , too . Leavers did not vote for a tyranny : they voted for freedom from Brussels . The goal of their great movement is to restore the power of Parliament . How odd , how perverse , that an alliance of current and former parliamentarians is trying to stop them .
Scotland Brexit minister caught out ; Spain denies having secret talks with SNP over special deal for Scotland
NICOLA STURGEON 'S Brexit minister was yesterday caught out making inaccurate claims to Brussels diplomats about the level of Scottish support for the EU and suggestions of non-existent talks with the Spanish government . Mike Russell used a speech to EU officials to portray Scotland as separate from the rest of the UK , claiming five million Scots had demonstrated in the EU referendum that `` they do not want to give up their European citizenship '' . He also claimed that the only MSPs to vote for Brexit were four Tories and , pressed specifically about whether talks were taking placed with Spain over a special deal for Scotland , reassured the audience that `` we would not be talking in these terms unless we were having conversations '' . But the Tories accused him of attempting to paint `` a completely false picture '' to a `` sympathetic audience '' , pointing out that fewer than 1.7 million Scots voted to Remain compared to more than a million who backed Leave . The Daily Telegraph disclosed that Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 Alex Neil , a former Scottish government minister who served in Cabinet with Mr Russell , voted Leave and also reported his allegations that other SNP MSPs have approached him confirming they did the same . The Spanish government further undermined Mr Russell 's claims yesterday by confirming they had held no talks about a special Brexit deal for Scotland . A senior government source said the EU has been clear there would be no negotiations until the UK triggers Article 50 . Any deal would have to be agreed by all member states , including Spain , which is wary of offering Scotland preferential terms for fear of encouraging its own separatist movements . Mariano Rajoy , the Spanish prime minister , said in June that Scotland will have to leave the EU with the rest of the UK . The allegations against Mr Russell overshadowed a meeting in London yesterday between Nicola Sturgeon and EU ambassadors . A spokesman for the Brexit minister accused the Tories of a `` ludicrous attack '' but did not respond to the specific examples of inaccuracies cited . He made the speech on Monday in Brussels but the Conservatives recorded the proceedings and yesterday published the audio footage . Ian Duncan , a Scottish Conservative MEP , said : `` It 's no surprise that the Spanish government has confirmed that no contact has been made . In an effort to impress EU officials in Brussels , Mr Russell appears to have simply made stuff up . We know that SNP MSP Alex Neil supported Brexit and that as many as six other SNP MSPs did likewise . Yet Mr Russell has gone to Brussels and tried to paint a completely false picture . '' The minister used the speech to drop hints that a second independence referendum would be called unless a `` differentiated '' deal was offered to Scotland with the softest form of Brexit . But an audience member pointed out that he had little to say on whether the EU would agree to a special deal for a Scotland within the UK . Mr Russell said Brussels should be sympathetic to a country that believes in the `` European project '' . Pressed on whether he was in contact with the Spanish government , the minister said he would not disclose the identities of `` everybody we speak to '' . But he then dropped a heavy hint that talks were under way , saying : `` I think you can take it as intelligent people we would not be talking in these terms unless we were having conversations . '' However , a spokesman for Spain 's ministry of foreign affairs said no talks had taken place over a special deal for Scotland after Brexit . A senior Spanish government source added : `` The EU has decided not to start any negotiation before notification under Article 50 of the [ Lisbon ] Treaty . '' But a spokesman for Mr Russell said : `` This is a ludicrous attack from the Tories - for them to ask anyone else to clarify their plans for Brexit is like a burglar demanding a homeowner clean up the house he has just ransacked . `` This event was open to the public and the media as well as being filmed , and anyone who takes the time to listen to the recording would hear a discussion which was overwhelmingly positive about Scotland . '' Brexit exit ? Loss of EU seasonal workers may force fruit producers to move abroad Labour shortages could force fruit production to move abroad thanks to Brexit , a business leader warned MSPs yesterday . Holyrood 's economy committee heard Scottish fruit producers could have to scale back or move overseas as a result of any inability to recruit from EU countries post-Brexit . James Porter , from Angus Soft Fruits which accounts for 60 per cent of Scottish soft fruit production , told the committee it employed around 4,000 seasonal workers from EU countries such as Bulgaria , Romania , Poland and the Baltic states . He said the industry is completely reliant on seasonal labour with just 2-3 per cent of staff employed locally . While there is no problem in recruiting in Scotland in the shortterm , he said colleagues south of the border are facing `` serious problems '' recruiting for next year and workers are `` very worried '' about the future . Asked about the impact of not being able to recruit from the EU , he said : `` You could either scale right back and try and match your production to the labour that was available or you could move it abroad , and there 's already a lot of talk down south about doing that . '' Mr Porter said supermarkets prefer UKproduced fruit , but , without the necessary labour , producers may have to leave . He said the seasonal nature of the work , the unsociable hours , and the fact workers often live on the farm can make it difficult to recruit locally .
A Cabinet with both talent and purpose ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : Theresa May 's reshuffle has been startling . Some thought she might change little about the team she inherited , preferring continuity with the Cameron years . Others expected a half-Eurosceptic , half-Europhile fudge designed to reassure those who lost the referendum . Neither turned out to be correct . Instead Mrs May has unveiled a Cabinet characterised by both talent and purpose . Brexit , it would seem , really will mean Brexit . There is continuity where it makes sense : Jeremy Hunt stays on as Health Secretary to see through his bold and necessary list of reforms . Otherwise , out goes the chumocracy . Fairly or not , David Cameron was often accused of promoting friends and allies to the top jobs . Mrs May , however , is a different political animal . By not allying herself to one faction or another within Parliament - by remaining somewhat aloof in Westminster circles - she enters her administration beholden to no one . On the contrary , she has been quite ruthless . Out go George Osborne , Michael Gove , Oliver Letwin , Nicky Morgan and John Whittingdale . In their place she has appointed men and women who not only disagreed with her during the referendum , but even ran against her for the party leadership . The Eurocrats might not be so happy about Boris Johnson 's appointment as Foreign Secretary but , with David Davis heading up a new department dedicated to Brexit , it is unlikely that he will be handling as much of the European brief Theresa May has combined the best of old and new without implying messy compromise as one might otherwise have expected . Instead , he will be unleashed onto the world - a stage that he is eminently suited for . Mr Johnson , a hugely popular politician for all the Left 's jealousy , brings charisma to Britain 's global brand in the same way that Philip Hammond will bring maturity to the role of Chancellor of the Exchequer . Out too goes any uncertainty about the direction of this Government . Mrs May intends to achieve Brexit . To that end she has filled almost all the roles that will handle its consequences to prominent Leave campaigners . Mr Johnson at the foreign office ; Andrea Leadsom , another leadership rival , at environment ; Liam Fox at international trade ; Priti Patel at international development ; and Mr Davis as the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union . Of course , Mr Davis and Mrs May will play their hands very carefully - any negotiation process requires some degree of opacity to succeed . But the fact that Mr Davis has been arguing for so long and so consistently for Brexit means that we can finally divine some idea of what it might involve . He seems to favour what might be called a `` Brexit of both worlds '' . He wants to regain control of the UK 's borders while also retaining access to the single market - an ambition that others have warned might prove too great . Interestingly , Mr Davis has also spoken of an export-led Brexit . He favours snapping up trade deals , cutting taxes and reducing regulation , reframing Brexit not just as an isolated policy but a whole spirit of government . He does not , however , believe in a totally unregulated workforce : there will still be a place for One Nation values in the post-Brexit world . Mrs May has combined the best of old and new without implying messy compromise . There is plenty of talent in the mix , as there was under Mr Cameron . But whereas Mr Cameron used to think tactically and liked to appoint the people he was most comfortable dealing with , Mrs May is somewhat more strategic . We infer that she has understood the message from the referendum . Yes , it was a vote about leaving the EU . But it was also a cultural rebellion against a metropolitan elite that seems out of touch and unresponsive to the demands of the electorate . Voters will know that their cry of protest has been heard if they see Brexit delivered - and feel the consequences in a growing sense of political and economic empowerment . This is a Cabinet with the potential to do just that . Theresa May has combined the best of old and new without implying messy compromise
Scotland Hammond accused of Brexit treachery Senior Cabinet minister says Chancellor is deliberately trying to frustrate withdrawal
PHILIP HAMMOND is working to `` frustrate '' Brexit and is treating pro-Leave ministers like `` pirates who have taken him prisoner '' , a Cabinet minister has told The Daily Telegraph , in an extraordinary attack on one of the most senior members of the Government . All-out war appeared to have broken out in the Government as the furious senior minister branded the Chancellor and his Treasury `` the Establishment '' , and warned of a deep split over how to leave the European Union , as talks restart in Brussels . The source also revealed the need to keep a weakened Theresa May in No10 in an attempt shore up Brexit , warning of a `` critical moment '' as David Davis flies out today to meet his rival negotiators for discussions to set the terms of engagement on leaving . It came as Mr Hammond hit back angrily after days of damaging accusations against him , including claims that he made sexist remarks and said public sector workers were `` overpaid '' . The `` tittle-tattle '' , discussed in a Cabinet meeting , came from MPs who did not like his views on Brexit and were seeking to damage him , the Chancellor said . But a senior Cabinet minister told The Telegraph : `` What 's really going on is that the Establishment , the Treasury , is trying to -- -- it up . They want to frustrate Brexit . `` This is a critical moment . That 's why we have to keep Theresa there . Otherwise the whole thing will fall apart . '' Mr Hammond saw Brexit-supporters as `` pirates '' who had `` taken the Establishment prisoner '' , the source said , adding that Mr Hammond was `` trying to break out '' and get his own way . The unprecedented remarks , made after rows between the Chancellor and Cabinet colleagues over public sector pay , highlight tensions over Brexit as ministers squabble behind the scenes over what leaving the EU should entail . Frustration with Theresa May 's leadership , and plots to oust her as prime minister are also rumoured to be behind the leaks , with MPs trying to smear rivals . Last week MPs backing David Davis and Boris Johnson clashed at a party in London , reportedly claiming each would kick the other `` in the b -- -- -- -s '' if the briefings did not stop . Mr Hammond , a Remain supporter , yesterday told the BBC 's Andrew Marr : `` Some of the noise is generated by people who are not happy with the agenda that I have tried to advance of ensuring that we achieve a Brexit which is focused on protecting our economy , protecting our jobs and making sure that we can continue having rising living standards in the future . '' Mr Hammond repeatedly refused to deny he had told the Cabinet that public sector workers were `` overpaid '' but confirmed his view that public sector pay and pension packages were `` about 10 per cent ahead '' of the private sector . He also denied saying driving a train was so easy even a woman could do it . Reports : Pages 4 & 5 Juliet Samuel : Page 16 Editorial Comment : Page 17
For the Chancellor , cake is n't on the menu ; Sketch h
Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank of England , gazed levelly at his audience . `` Before long , '' he said , `` we will all begin to find out the extent to which Brexit is a gentle stroll along a smooth path to a land of cake and consumption . '' Mr Carney is , of course , a figure of scrupulous political neutrality . So we can be sure his reference to `` cake and consumption '' was intended wholly in innocence , and not as a mocking allusion to Boris Johnson , the Brexit figurehead who assured the public that after leaving the European Union we would be `` having our cake and eating it '' . Similarly , when Mr Carney spoke of `` a gentle stroll along a smooth path '' , we can be sure that he did not mean it www.satirically.No doubt he would be aghast were anyone to infer that he thinks Brexit will be a screaming nightmare , and that in pursuing it the Government has taken leave of its senses . He is , after all , politically neutral.This point can not be emphasised enough . The Governor was speaking at Mansion House in London , alongside Philip Hammond , the Chancellor . Originally the two men had been scheduled to speak at a lavish dinner last Thursday , but they cancelled the event out of respect for the victims at Grenfell Tower . In the circumstances , the public might not have responded favourably to images of the capital 's wealthiest and most powerful people enjoying a banquet in white tie . The speeches were therefore rescheduled for yesterday morning , without a tailcoat in sight . Like Mr Carney , Mr Hammond spoke about Brexit . His speech lasted more than 20 minutes . In that time , notably , he did not cite a single possible benefit of Brexit . Instead , he seemed to be speaking purely in terms of damage limitation . The Government 's job , he said , was to `` reassure employers that they will still be able to access the talent they need '' , to ensure `` trade can carry on flowing smoothly '' , and to encourage businesses to make investments `` that have been on hold since the referendum '' . It would `` require every ounce of skill and diplomacy we can muster '' . But if the Government could achieve all that , he concluded , `` the collective sigh of relief will be audible '' . Yes , a `` sigh of relief `` . Listening to him , you could easily run away with the impression that the best the country could hope for post-Brexit would be to keep life as close as possible to the way it was pre-Brexit . Above all , said Mr Hammond , the Government must aim for a Brexit that `` prioritises British jobs and underpins Britain 's prosperity '' , because the public had not voted `` to become poorer '' . And to protect our economy , we must remember `` how important it is for business to be able to access global talent '' . Rough translation : stop focusing on slashing immigration , Prime Minister . You ca n't do that without weakening the economy . Or , to put it another way : you ca n't have your cake and eat it . 'Philip Hammond spoke about Brexit for more than 20 minutes . In that time , he did n't mention a single benefit '
Woodford : 'Brexit 's a sideshow , UK is set fair ' ; Optimism about the economy has caused the star fund manager to buy more Britishfocused businesses , he tells Richard Evans
'Brexit is far from the most important influence on the UK economy . '' Neil Woodford , Britain 's most prominent professional investor , who is celebrating three years in charge of his Woodford Equity Income fund , has poured scorn on the economics profession for predicting instant disaster in the wake of the vote to leave the EU and sounded an upbeat note about the country 's future as exit negotiations begin . In an exclusive interview with Telegraph Money this week he explained why his optimism about the British economy had led him to tilt his portfolio towards businesses that are tied to it , such as banks , house builders and property firms . `` Ninety per cent of economists said we would have an instant recession if Britain voted to leave the EU . They were talking nonsense , '' he said . `` Other , more profound factors determine our economic future . I 'm not underestimating the impact of Brexit but I think I have a more balanced perspective . `` For example , there are record numbers of people in work . If businesses think the world is about to end , why are they advertising record numbers of job vacancies ? Why are foreigners still investing here ? Why are banks now finally lending normally for the first time since the financial crisis - this is a more significant development than the furore about Brexit . '' He said he expected the EU exit negotiations to produce an acceptable compromise and predicted that there would be a transitional arrangement of some kind , which would avoid the shock of a `` cliff-edge '' withdrawal . `` I do n't think business confidence is about to evaporate . '' Mr Woodford predicted that the British economy would benefit from a period of political stability after the election and would grow at about 2pc a year . As a result , he has invested in stocks whose fortunes are closely aligned with the domestic economy . Earlier this month the bought Lloyds Banking Group , Barratt Developments , Taylor Wimpey and British Land . He raised the money to invest in these firms by selling his entire stake in GLAXOSMITHKLINE , the drugs maker , which he had held for 15 years in portfolios at Invesco Perpetual and his current firm . It was previously his third largest holding . 'I do n't have any other Glaxos ' Mr Woodford sold Glaxo because he had given up hope that he could persuade the company to break itself up into more focused businesses , which he believed would produce better returns for shareholders . He said he feared that if Glaxo stuck with its current structure it could eventually be forced to cut the dividend . `` I have long believed that value could be created for the company 's shareholders if it split itself into separate , more specialised business units , '' he said when he sold the stake . `` The sum of the parts is significantly greater than the whole . My viewpoint , and that of other like-minded institutional investors , has been heard but ultimately ignored - repeatedly . '' But Mr Woodford reassured investors in his fund that none of his other holdings depended for their success on bringing about fundamental change at the company concerned . `` Glaxo was unique in this respect , '' he said . `` I was not seeking to dismember the company but to make it a better , more focused business . It is a really important part of the British economy . '' He said AstraZeneca , the UK 's other drugs giant , which is his largest holding , was `` completely different '' and `` much more focused '' . `` It 's done exactly what I wanted Glaxo to do , '' Mr Woodford said . 'Britain has huge potential as a knowledge economy ' When Telegraph Money interviewed Mr Woodford just as he was launching his equity income fund in 2014 , he said part of the appeal of fund management was that he was always learning . Asked what he had learnt in the three years since , he said : `` The biggest difference is that I have become significantly more convinced of the potential of Britain 's 'knowledge economy ' . `` We are experiencing a second industrial revolution and Britain is playing a leading role , '' Mr Woodford said . `` This country is now making commercial successes from its unbelievably high-quality science base - that never happened in the previous 30 years or so of my fund management career . This development could not be better timed . '' Mr Woodford launched an investment trust focused on hi-tech start-up businesses , Woodford Patient Capital , in 2015 . He added : `` The successful nations of the next 30 years will be those that take the lead in areas such as artificial Mr Woodford said he expected better performance from his investment trust intelligence , biomedicine and IT . This is potentially transformational for wealth creation . I 'm more optimistic about Britain 's part in it than ever . '' Patient Capital Trust : 'I 'm happy to be judged on the three to five-year record ' The Woodford Equity Income fund has performed strongly since launch , gaining 37.8pc against 25.2pc for the FTSE All Share index ; it has been the second best performing equity income fund over the period . However , the Patient Capital trust has disappointed many investors , with only a marginal gain in net asset value since launch ( the share price remains below the launch price because a discount has emerged ) . There have been well documented problems at three of the quoted stocks in the portfolio and Mr Woodford said other valuations had been hit by a severe lack of appetite among institutional investors for quoted start-up stocks . But he said he remained convinced of the trust 's potential and expected much better performance over the longer term . `` Our confidence in the hypothesis behind the trust has not been shaken one bit , '' he said . `` I know investors can be , well , impatient . But I am happy to be judged on a three to fiveyear view and I 'm very confident that the trust can deliver . `` I am very encouraged at the pace and scale of the progress of the businesses in the portfolio . We said at the beginning that investors should expect a wide range of outcomes from the holdings . Most have n't seen much change in value , some have had problems , but others have achieved way beyond what I expected . `` Over the trust as a whole I am astonished at the rate of progress , much of which has yet to be reflected in valuation uplifts . '' Telegraph Money also spoke to Craig Newman , who runs the business side of Woodford Investment Management while Mr Woodford concentrates on managing the portfolios . FEES Woodford prides itself on fee transparency ( it breaks down all its charges , including trading costs , each month and was one of the first to pay research costs itself ) . We asked Mr Newman if he would consider cutting the fee on the Woodford Equity Income fund in view of its size of more than £10bn . The fact that fund management firms invariably charge fees as a percentage of the fund size means that their income automatically rises as assets are attracted to the fund or as investment gains boost its value . He said : `` We will always aim to remain competitive and so I would never rule out a cut in the fee . '' Fund size When funds become very large , some investors worry that the manager will be forced to invest more in the biggest companies , limiting their options , because even great success with smaller holdings wo n't `` move the dial '' . Mr Newman said Mr Woodford was very comfortable at the current size , pointing out that he had not experienced problems running even larger sums at his previous firm . ? New funds He said the firm was interested in launching new funds , although he hinted that bond funds would not be top of his list . Cut in fund fee on the cards ? 'Economists predicted an instant recession . They were talking nonsense '
Britain faces EU bill until 2020 ; UK will send billions to Brussels in exchange for single market deal , say Whitehall sources Britain could continue paying billions to Brussels
BRITAIN will have to continue paying billions into the EU budget after Brexit to secure a `` transition '' trade deal with Brussels , senior Whitehall sources have told The Daily Telegraph . Britain 's exit will leave an £8billiona-year black hole in the EU 's finances , which is causing significant anxiety across the continent - including in Ger-many , which fears it will have to pick up the bill for any shortfall . British negotiators are examining plans under which the UK would contribute billions to cover the gap in the EU 's finances between Brexit in March 2019 and the end of the EU 's seven-year budget framework in 2020 . However , the payments will only be offered in exchange for a `` sensible '' transition deal , under which British businesses would retain access to the single market for two years after Brexit . A senior Whitehall source said : `` Payments up to the end of this MFF [ Multi-annual financial framework ] is something that we could put on the table which would help them fix a big short-term problem in their budgets . '' The source added that British negotiators have also not ruled out `` ongoing payments '' in exchange for a free-trade agreement with the EU . The ideas , which are highly sensitive given the likelihood of opposition from some Brexiteers in Westminster , reflect a growing recognition that money will provide key leverage in the coming talks . It comes as Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission and Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , arrive in London today for talks with Theresa May . Meanwhile , Boris Johnson will make his first speech of the election campaign , in which the Foreign Secretary is expected to say Britain will not turn its back on the world after Brexit . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , will also make a speech in London about the Government 's plans to make a success of Brexit , striking an upbeat note despite a stream of tough signals emanating form Brussels . Separately , a flagship Labour pledge to end free movement immediately unravelled yesterday as it said that EU migrants should be able to come to Britain as long as they have a job offer . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , yesterday announced that `` free movement has to go '' in what appeared to be a significant break with Jeremy Corbyn . However , the pledge unravelled within hours after he subsequently said there should be `` free movement of labour '' , adding that `` we must have immigration '' for the economy . The European side has been hardening its lines on Brexit since the Prime Minister triggered Article 50 last month , and is making a transitional arrangement contingent on continued budget payments , free movement of people and accepting the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) . The EU 's negotiating guidelines , which are to be finalised at a summit on Saturday , have also been toughened to include further expanded financial demands , including direct agricultural payments . On trade , the latest draft includes a demand from France to separate the key area of financial services from any trade deal , unless the UK agrees to accept the EU 's `` regulatory and supervisory standards regime '' , according to the Bloomberg news agency . Germany and France are leading demands not to backslide from Europe 's ( EURO ) 60billion ( £51billion ) `` Brexit bill '' which has already drawn an outraged reaction from leading Brexiteers . The prospect of paying significant sums to buy access also risks opening up Cabinet splits , with Mr Davis taking a hard line on financial payments , according to EU diplomatic sources . Charles Grant , the director of the Centre for European Reform , a pro-EU think tank said that Germany - egged on by France - was standing firm on the budget issue , which Europe says must be satisfactorily resolved before it will agree to trade talks . `` Some top officials suggest that they will not compromise on the ( EURO ) 60billion , '' he said , `` But if the British are willing to compromise on the money , they will find the 27 willing to start talks on [ a free trade deal ] . For British negotiators , the concern is principally about selling the idea of making substantial payments to the British parliamentarians and public . `` Everyone knows there are large commitments and that Britain is a country that pays its bills , '' said a second Whitehall source also involved in preparations for the talks , `` It 's a question of coming up with a methodology that can be defended at home . '' Mrs May , who will make the final decision on any British offer , has been careful not to make any cost-iron declarations on the question of budget payments . In a BBC interview after triggering Article 50 , she hinted that the UK would be prepared to make substantial payments - but was clear they would not be characterised as an exit 'bill ' or a payment for leaving .
Brexit , you 're killing us , say comedians ; Brexit
COMEDIANS have told how anti-Brexit jokes are hurting their careers as audiences walk out in offence . Several stand-ups have successfully tailored their take on Britain leaving the European Union for Leftwing audiences in London . But many come unstuck when they take their acts to the rest of the country . Marcus Brigstocke , who has been touring the UK with a routine that includes 20 minutes of material on Brexit , says it is the first time in his career that audience members have walked out `` every night '' . He said : `` People have been angry , people have walked out of shows and people have booed . `` A lot of the people I think of as my audience will not be back , they 're that angry , '' he told BBC Radio 4 . `` It seems that for the most part Brexit is not just the hideous social and political turn we have taken as a country , but is also comedic poison . '' Stewart Lee , a comedian , has also spoken of hostile reactions to his material poking fun at Leave voters . Aaron Brown , editor of the British Comedy Guide , said : `` I would say the comedy world 's reaction has been almost exclusively negative . Many jokes essentially paraphrase as 'shooting ourselves in the foot ' , and the rest rely on lazily branding 52 per cent of the voters as racist . '' The ability of UK zoos to breed and protect endangered species could be damaged if the UK leaves the EU without a deal , Kirsten Pullen , of the British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums , has warned .
A war is being fought for the soul of Britain - and the optimists must win ; The Tories must turn Britain into a free-trade haven and pledge to boost opportunities for the poor
There are two nations in Britain today , but they are not quite the ones that Benjamin Disraeli had in mind . On the one hand we have the optimists , Brexiteers as well as ex-Remainers , who are gradually coming together in their embrace of our new future , reuniting in their determination to make the most of the next few years to reform and improve our country . On the other , we have the pessimists , a shrinking but still extraordinarily vocal group : to them , the outlook is so unbearably gloomy that they can not bring themselves to think constructively about a country they no longer recognise . The good news is that , after a few difficult weeks , the optimists are finally in the ascendant . Theresa May is now their official leader , as well as our Prime Minister : she did n't back Brexit , but is going to implement it with gusto . Her strong leadership is exactly what was needed : it is no surprise that it is proving infectious . Support for the now officially pro-Brexit Tories has jumped to 40 per cent , according to YouGov ; consumer spending is holding up , according to the Bank of England 's regular regional survey ; and a growing number of institutions are starting to propose helpful , constructive ideas to make the most of Brexit . Take the President of the Royal College of Surgeons : she has urged the NHS to `` seize the moment '' and use Brexit to tear up red tape that damages patient safety , including rules that prevent hospitals from demanding a proper mastery of English and working-time laws that mean surgeons do n't undergo enough training . One leading regulator has told me privately that leaving the EU would allow a much more robust pro-competition policy ; Siemens , a pro-Remain company , now insists that it is fully committed to Britain and that it would build a `` huge manufacturing place ... in a heartbeat '' if it receives enough orders for its train carriages . The list is growing visibly longer by the day . Ineos , the giant chemicals maker , is relocating its headquarters and senior management back to the UK from Switzerland ; SoftBank , one of Japan 's biggest companies , is making the largest-ever Asian investment in the UK , arguing explicitly that it believes in a post-Brexit Britain . A number of companies have also agreed to rent or commission new offices in the City since the referendum . The optimists are not deluded : they know the going will be tough , that Brexit has crystallised long-standing structural weaknesses in the economy , that many big companies are scared , and that it will take hard work to sign trade deals and negotiate the right exit from the EU . There will be costs as well as benefits from Brexit . But they relish the challenge and are convinced that we now have a once-in-ageneration opportunity to change our country and economy for the better , or simply to continue making money in one of the largest , most prosperous economies in the world . Then there are the pessimists . Some are Remainers who still believe Brexit to be an epoch-defining catastrophe , who continue to plot and scheme to overturn the result , who cling to the deranged , insulting notion that those of us who voted Leave are either stupid , racist or evil , who scour the news for every negative data point and who , in a few isolated and extreme cases , would actually like a recession `` to prove them right '' . You also have some Leavers in this pessimistic camp who believe that nothing will ever change , either because we wo n't actually leave the EU or because they feel that the political classes will return to business as usual . This latter group often hail from deprived communities ; they voted Brexit in part to give the London establishment a kicking but fear that they will continue to be ignored . The challenge for the optimists is to reunite the two Britains . They need to inspire and assuage the angry Remainers , showing all but the most die-hard that the future can be rosy ; and they must reach out to those Leavers who feel that they have n't benefited enough from globalisation . All groups in society have a responsibility to take part in this project to rebuild Britain for a post-Brexit 21st century . Entrepreneurs and firms need to propose the reforms they believe are required to allow our economy to prosper outside of the EU : we need to hear solutions , not whining , from business . The same is true of other professionals , from university administrators to architects to the police forces , as well as from the charitable sector . Britain needs a `` can-do '' revolution , with as many positive ideas as possible from all quarters and perspectives . The question is no longer whether or not to Brexit - it 's how to make it work as well as possible for the whole country . The Government , for its part , needs to unveil a three-fold programme to woo the sceptics . The first pledge should be to turn Britain into the nation that is the most open to trade of any Western economy in five years ' time . To reach this target , the Government would seek to limit the reimposition of tariff or non-tariff barriers with the EU , while urgently pursuing as many free-trade deals as possible with faster-growing economies worldwide . The second pledge should be to make the UK the most entrepreneurfriendly country in the West by 2020 . This would include tearing up red tape , cutting tax , making it easy for tech firms to continue to hire skilled migrant talent , and encouraging universities to become incubators for start-ups . Last but not least , the Government should make an explicit promise to Britain 's poorer groups and regions that their opportunities will drastically improve . The free school programme should be turbo-charged by allowing for-profit companies to open new ones , starting in the north of England and Wales before being rolled out nationally ; new selective schools should be opened , as part of an extension of parent choice ; much more land should be made available for building in the south of England ; and expensive green energy rules should be ditched . Britain is also in desperate need of several low-tax , low-regulation new enterprise zones near universities in poor parts of the North and Wales , with a vision and management structure similar to London 's Canary Wharf . It 's been almost a month since the referendum and the optimists , thanks in large part to May 's steadying hand , are finally on the rise again . They must now begin the long , slow process of reuniting the country . That is the mission on which they will ultimately be judged . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Davis forced to backtrack on Brexit deal
DAVID DAVIS was forced to change tack on the legality of the Brexit deal yesterday as he admitted the agreement would become British law as `` soon as possible '' following an avalanche of criticism from EU officials . They unleashed a series of rebukes against Mr Davis over his suggestion that the UK could backtrack on promises made in the divorce settlement , which had only been agreed on Friday . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit coordinator , accused the Brexit Secretary of scoring an `` own goal '' with his `` unacceptable '' comments and said he had `` undermine [ d ] trust '' with London . Michel Barnier , the EU 's Brexit negotiator , stressed that there could be `` no backtracking '' . The EU had refused to begin negotiations on trade and transition until it judged `` sufficient progress '' was made on the Brexit bill , Ireland and citizens ' rights . On Friday , Britain was given the green light after sealing the deal . Meanwhile , Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council , warned that both sides were now locked in a `` furious race against time '' to agree on the terms of transition and future trade in just 10 months . The EU 's heads of state are expected to rubber-stamp sufficient progress at a summit on Friday . Mr Davis attempted to calm the troubled waters yesterday afternoon . He wrote on Twitter : `` Pleasure , as ever , to speak to my friend @ guyverhofstadt - we both agreed on the importance of the Joint Report . Let 's work together to get it converted into legal text as soon as possible . '' EU sources said Mr Davis 's comments prompted them to toughen up the language in the draft European Council resolution . MEPs in the European Parliament followed suit , amending a resolution to condemn Mr www.Davis.No to vote Ministers to offer 'clarity ' on final agreement Theresa May is trying to quell a Tory rebellion as pro-Europe MPs demand a `` meaningful vote '' on the final Brexit deal . Dominic Grieve has tabled an amendment to the withdrawal bill with support from 20 others and says Mrs May could be defeated . Ministers opposing the amendment say they believe all the MPs really want is more `` clarity '' . Iain Duncan Smith said Mr Grieve 's motion was just `` grandstanding '' .
Tories must regain their own convictions BODY : If Brexit was the revolution , we are entering a very British , bloodless version of the Terror . There are no guillotines in Westminster , but the sexual harassment scandal has created panic - plots within plots , scores to settle . Rather than making history , MPs are now forced to ride it and pray that they emerge with their careers intact . There is a way through : conviction politics . If honest , bold conservatism does n't win the revolution , there 's a terrible risk that Jeremy Corbyn 's socialists just might . One of the peculiarly British features of the Brexit upheaval is that after it happened , the managers of the old system largely stayed in place . It was Remainer Theresa May , in coalition with a few Leavers , who got to choose what kind of Brexit the UK would chase , and while she embraced revolutionary slogans such as `` Brexit means Brexit '' , she failed to translate this into a compelling election message and failed to leverage the optimism of Brexit to her advantage . Mrs May woke up on June 9 with fewer MPs and an ascendant Labour Party . Then came the harassment scandal . What has this generational verdict on workplace misogyny got to do with high politics ? The answer is that it appears to have been hijacked to serve other ends . The principal parties in the Cabinet all had some stake in a reshuffle or the debate over Brexit . Sir Michael Fallon , who resigned as defence secretary , was believed to be a critic of the so-called hard-Brexit position . Hard Brexiteer Andrea Leadsom , who was named as the person who denounced Sir Michael ( a claim contradicted by No 10 ) , was tipped to be sacked ; her decisive and timely actions in the harassment debate might win her a lot of support . And Gavin Williamson , the Remainer who fills Sir Michael 's shoes , has been named for high office since the conference when , in an unusual move , he gave a keynote speech . Although there is no suggestion that Mr Williamson knew of the existence of the MPs ' `` dirty dossier '' , there have been calls for an investigation to see if it was leaked from the whips ' office that Mr Williamson used to run . While the children of the revolution devour themselves , the Government faces a war on two fronts . How much energy is being drained from the negotiations with the EU ? While there are glimmers of inspiration - the promise of trade deals , Michael Gove 's reforms at Environment - it 's hard to see how reshuffling the whips ' office or Cabinet turf wars help , especially as polls show public confidence in the handling of negotiations has fallen . In December come the nuts and bolts of the divorce bill and , yes , this requires the kind of attention to detail for which the Prime Minister is famous . But 18 months after the referendum , we are still no closer to knowing what kind of Britain the Tories intend to build . To guide a revolution , one must have some sense of what it is for - something more positive than just controlling the borders . Brexit was about sovereignty and opportunity , taking power from the bureaucrats and giving it to the people . It would be terrible if it became tarred by association with the harassment scandal , another Tory idea undone by the incompetence of Tory politicians - and the smug elite of militant Remain could just sit back and watch it unravel , without lifting a finger . The other battle the Conservatives face is with the Left . Brexit broke the rules and created new possibilities in politics ; one of those is Jeremy Corbyn in No 10 . It would be deeply unjust if Labour benefited from the harassment scandal , given the accusations faced by its own MPs and officials . But Mr Corbyn can power through this chaos with one natural advantage : he believes the ends justify the means . He is a true radical . While his ideology is well beyond the centre of British politics - alien , in fact , to most of us - there is a risk that he wins simply because he offers a clear alternative to a regime in disarray . To stop him , the Tories have to regain their own sense of mission . They must do what it takes to clean up politics , yes , but also unite with conviction around the delivery of Brexit , lest the people boot them out and replace them with a leader of the revolutionary Left .
MPs warn Archbishop of Canterbury to stay out of EU discussions
DOWNING Street yesterday rejected the Archbishop of Canterbury 's claim that the chances of finalising a Brexit deal before March 2019 are `` infinitesimally small '' , as Tory MPs told him to stay out of the debate . The Most Rev Justin Welby suggested it was unlikely that the Government would be able to strike a complete deal before the official point of withdrawal in just over 18 months ' time . But his intervention received a swift rebuke from Theresa May , who said that she and her Government `` remain committed to the timetable of Brexit '' . The archbishop also angered Eurosceptic MPs , who said he should spend less time on Brexit and more on `` worrying about the size of congregations in churches across the country '' . He has previously called on Mrs May to set up a cross-party commission to advise her on Brexit to `` draw much of the poison '' from negotiations . Yesterday he suggested a commission would be needed for the UK to have any chance of reaching an agreement before time runs out and Britain leaves the bloc . He told Today on BBC Radio Four : `` You have got to remember that on Brexit there are literally thousands of separate agreements to come to . `` If each one of those has to be argued as a point of confidence on the floor of the House of Commons the chance of getting this done in what is now roughly 18 months is infinitesimally small . '' The archbishop argued that some issues should be `` off the political table '' and decided by an `` expert commission '' . But the Prime Minister 's official spokesman said Mrs May and her top team `` remain committed to the timetable of Brexit '' and that `` there are no plans for a commission '' . Philip Davies , a Conservative MP , said that while the archbishop was entitled to his opinion , he should be concentrating on other things . He said : `` To be perfectly frank , if he spent more time worrying about the size of congregations in churches across the country and less time worrying about the Brexit negotiations , he might get somewhere . '' Fellow Tory MP Andrew Bridgen added : `` I have got the greatest respect for Justin Welby and the work he does . `` However , I always think that when religious leaders get involved in politics and politicians get involved in religion it is nothing but trouble . Best to stick to what we do . '' The Archbishop of Canterbury , The Most Rev Justin Welby has been told by Tory MPs to stay out of the Brexit debate
Unelected Lords must not be allowed to undermine the Brexit vote ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - All believers in genuine democracy should be alarmed by what is going on in the House of Lords ( `` May facing double defeat on Brexit Bill as Lords gang up '' , report , February 26 ) . The determined opponents of Brexit in that unelected institution , cloaking themselves as upholders of parliamentary democracy , are concocting procedural poison pills and offering them as compromises . Theresa May must not allow herself to fall into such traps . If the Lords are arrogant enough to defy the British people , then she must use the Parliament Act.Terry Smith London NW11 SIR - Some 17.4 million Britons chose a bright future . The democratically elected Government is quite capable of fitting a light bulb and does not require 800 unelected peers to `` help '' and `` advise '' on how to do this . Gerald Heath Corsham , Wiltshire SIR - In their desire to protect the rights of EU citizens in Britain without demanding a reciprocal agreement from Brussels , the Lords are condemning British expats to an uncertain future . They are also undermining one of the Government 's negotiating points . Perhaps it is time to consider the reformation of this club , which appears to be out of touch with the general mood of the British public . Richard Ramsey Turners Hill , West Sussex SIR - Giving in to the Lords ' calls for a veto on the final Brexit deal would be a disaster . This would be taken to mean that we only consider a `` soft Brexit '' acceptable , and would give a winning advantage to the EU 's negotiating team . They would offer only a `` hard Brexit '' , which they would expect Parliament to reject . I am sure that all those lobbying for this amendment are fully aware of how it is likely to work out . They might claim that they respect the referendum vote , but really they have discovered a new way to reverse the people 's decision.Ken Shuttleworth St Albans , Hertfordshire SIR - It is sad to see Lord Heseltine trying to cause ructions over the Brexit Bill . Was he not involved in creating the rifts in the Tory party that led to the downfall of Margaret Thatcher ? He and others trying to go against the will of the majority should examine their consciences . Phyllis Jones Bedford SIR - On yesterday 's Andrew Marr Show , there was much discussion about how the Lords may influence the Brexit outcome - but not a word was uttered by Mr Marr as to why they and others had stood idly by over the past 40 years as the authority of the Commons was eroded.R G Hopgood Kirby-le-Soken , Essex
Scotland Scottish councils say they are ignored on Brexit ; Leaders reveal they have better talks on vital issues with the UK Government than with Edinburgh
SCOTLAND 'S council leaders have held a series of `` excellent '' talks with the UK Government over the implications of Brexit but have had only one meeting with SNP ministers , a Holyrood inquiry heard yesterday . Councillor David O'Neill , president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities ( Cosla ) , praised communications with the UK Government on Brexit but said there had been little engagement with the ruling SNP in Edinburgh . He told MSPs on the local government committee that councils had to be `` embedded '' in the negotiations but this had not happened in Scotland , despite local government offering up its experience and assistance . His intervention came as sources close to Nicola Sturgeon last night promised to allow MSPs to scrutinise her plans to keep Scotland in the EU single market when they are published next week , after no time was scheduled in Holyrood 's timetable . It is understood senior representatives of some opposition parties have been invited for a briefing on Monday with Mike Russell , Ms Sturgeon 's Brexit Minister , ahead of publication , which is expected the following day . The Scottish Parliament 's timetable for next week includes a ministerial statement on protecting Scotland 's livestock but not on the controversial proposals . It is the final week that parliament sits until the second week of January . Tavish Scott , a senior Liberal Democrat MSP , last night said Ms Sturgeon would have to bring the plans to Holyrood if she is to stick to her pledge to keep parliament informed on her response to Brexit . Scottish Government insiders said MSPs would get the chance to ask about the plans before they go on their Christmas holidays . It is understood time for a statement could be added to the timetable next week . Mr O'Neill told the committee : `` I think it would be fair to say that the level of engagement that Cosla is having , along with our other local government associations in the UK , with the UK Government has been excellent . `` The level of engagement that we 've had with the Scottish Government has been a meeting . '' He said David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , had ensured Cosla has access to UK civil servants and could arrange meetings with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . There has also been close cooperation with English councils , which he said were conducting a `` substantial body of work '' . Mr O'Neill claimed there was more knowledge within councils about Brexit than in the Scottish Government but `` there 's not really been any substantive contact '' apart from a single meeting .
Brexit memo suggests that Britain wants it all ; Senior Tory 's aide reveals details of Brexit 'strategy '
A BREXIT memo which suggests that Britain wants to `` have its cake and eat it '' last night sparked speculation over whether the Government had revealed details of its negotiating strategy for the first time . The note , which was carried by an aide to Mark Field , the Conservative Party vice-chairman , after a meeting at the office of David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , says it is `` unlikely '' that Britain will be given the chance to remain in the single market after it leaves the European Union . The note suggests that the Government is `` loath '' to introduce `` transitional '' controls after Britain leaves the EU which would give the City access to the single market for a limited period . Downing Street insisted that the memo was `` not a government document '' and said it `` does not represent the UK 's position in relation to Brexit negotiations '' . However , sources refused to say who had attended the meeting . Julia Dockerill , Mr Field 's chief of staff , was photographed carrying the note as she left the meeting in No 9 Downing Street . It states that the `` implementation '' of Article 50 , which will formally trigger Brexit negotiations , is likely to be `` difficult '' . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , `` wants to see what deal looks like first '' but the memo suggests Britain `` wo n't provide more detail '' . It says that a deal on manufacturing is `` relatively straightforward '' but an agreement on services , which includes the financial sector , is likely to be `` harder '' . It says that Britain is likely to pursue a `` Canada-plus '' trade deal with the EU , adding that being part of the European Economic Area would be `` not good '' . The memo states : `` Difficult on Article 50 implementation - Barnier wants to see what deal looks like first . `` Got to be done in parallel - 20 odd negotiations . Keep the two years . Wo n't provide more detail . We think it 's unlikely we 'll be offered single market . Manufacturing relatively straightfoward . Transitional - loath to do it . Whitehall will hold on to it . We need to bring an end to negotiations . '' The document appears to discuss the prospect of a Norway trade deal , which is a member of the European Economic Area , which extends the single market 's benefits to some non-EU members such as Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein . It says : `` Why no Norway - two elements - no ECJ intervention . Unlikely to do internal market . '' Whitehall sources said the memo was a note of comments made at a meeting between Conservative Party officials and representatives from the Dutch ruling VVD party . A source played down the significance of the meeting , saying : `` These are notes for an internal party meeting - a few sketched notes . '' Theresa May has refused to give any details of her strategy , amid concerns that it would give away Britain 's hand . The Prime Minister is aiming to trigger Article 50 and begin the two-year formal process of leaving the European Union by the end of March next year . Under the timetable Britain will leave the EU in April 2019 . Ms Dockerill , a Tory councillor , appeared unaware of the memo furore last night as she tweeted pictures from a Christmas party . It came as British Influence , a think tank backed by Lord Mandelson , announced a new legal challenge to give Parliament a vote on leaving the European Economic Area . However the head of the think tank was yesterday forced to issue an embarrassing `` clarification '' after he mistakenly said that Switzerland was a member of the EEA .
Scotland PM may delay Brexit to help firms avoid 'cliff edge ' ; May will seek transitional deal for City to ensure businesses are not left stranded by sudden change
THERESA MAY has told business leaders that she wants to avoid a `` cliff edge '' after Brexit , but insisted that she will not delay leaving the European Union . The Prime Minister indicated yesterday that she will try to get a `` transitional '' deal for the City in a move that could mean that the UK still has to pay EU contributions after Brexit . Downing Street insisted that Mrs May will not seek to `` extend '' the twoyear deadline for leaving the EU . She spoke after Paul Drechsler , president of the CBI , warned that businesses do not want a `` sudden and overnight transformation in trading conditions '' that could leave them `` stranded in a regulatory no man 's land '' . Mrs May told the CBI 's annual conference : `` I understand the point that Paul has made . Others have made this point , that people do n't want a cliff edge ; they want to know with some certainty how things are going to go forward . That will be part of the work that we do in terms of the negotiation that we are undertaking with the European Union . '' Mrs May has said that she wants to trigger Article 50 , which begins the formal two-year process of leaving the EU , by next March . However , Downing Street refused to rule out a transitional deal and pointed out that the deadline for Brexit could be extended with the agreement of other EU nations . Mrs May also sought to repair her relationship with business leaders by suggesting that corporation tax will be cut to a record low . In her speech the Prime Minister committed Britain to having the lowest corporation tax of the world 's 20 biggest economies . The comments suggest the Government will cut corporation tax further and faster than expected , potentially lower than the 15 per cent rate promised by Donald Trump , the US presidentelect . George Osborne , the former chancellor , seized on the comments and put pressure on Mrs May to deliver further cuts to corporation tax . He said that reducing it to 15 per cent would show that Britain is `` open for business '' . Downing Street yesterday played down the prospect of deeper cuts as `` speculation '' , highlighting the fact that the Government has already committed to cutting corporation tax to 17 per cent by 2020-21 . Mrs May also used her speech to warn that the behaviour of a `` small minority of businesses and business leaders '' is `` undermining the reputation of the corporate world '' . She said business must recognise those on modest incomes believe capitalism is `` working well for the privileged few , but not always for them '' . It came as Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , delivered a rebuke to David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union . Mr Davis travelled to Brussels yesterday to help `` lay the groundwork '' for negotiations before Britain formally triggers Brexit . However in the wake of the meeting Mr Barnier said : `` No negotiation without notification . My work is now focused on EU27 [ countries ] . '' Editorial Comment : Page 19 Business : Page 1 Easy does it Brexit and a `` transitional deal '' for business QWhat is a transitional deal ? A Business leaders have raised repeated concerns that they will be hit by a sudden `` cliff edge '' if Britain leaves the EU overnight in March 2019 . Paul Drechsler , president of the CBI , raised concerns that when the `` clock strikes midnight '' Britain could find itself `` stranded in a regulatory no man 's land '' . He said Britain 's ports , airports and logistics firms could find themselves deal with `` new and potentially complex paperwork '' . Business , he suggested , could effectively come to a halt . QWhat did Theresa May say ? A In her first keynote speech at the CBI 's annual conference , Mrs May directly addressed Mr Drechsler 's concerns . `` I understand the point that Paul has made , that people do not want a cliff edge , '' she said . `` That will be part of what we are undertaking with the European Union . '' The comments suggested that the PM is considering `` transitional '' arrangements for businesses in the immediate wake of Brexit . QWhat will that mean ? A In practice , Britain may have to pay a contribution to the EU in the immediate aftermath of Brexit to secure a `` transitional '' period for its businesses . The period would mean that they would potentially continue to enjoy tariff-free access to the Single Market for a limited period while alternative arrangements are in place . It could also mean that Britain has to agree to some concessions on freedom of movement in the short term . QWo n't that delay Brexit ? A Mrs May is emphatic that it will not . Downing Street clarified that Britain will not seek to extend the two-year deadline set out under Article 50 . The PM has said that she will trigger Brexit by March at the latest , meaning that we will leave the EU by 2019-20 . QAre Conservative Eurosceptics angry ? A No , on the most part they are satisfied . While some would prefer a `` quickie divorce '' , most are satisfied that `` Brexit means Brexit '' . Steve Baker , a Tory MP and Eurosceptic , said he was `` in favour of a transitional agreement '' . He added : `` It must come to an end when we move into a new bi-lateral free trade deal . It should be time limited . ''
Scotland Brexit ? Unequivocal , clear and unambiguous , it means Brexit
o what does Brexit mean ? SAccording to Theresa May , it `` means Brexit '' . Helpfully , to ensure that no one is left in the dark , she has repeated this explanation on numerous occasions . Yet there is perhaps a dawning sense among some of her ministers that not every voter is fully satisfied by Mrs May 's explanation . Without wishing to place the Prime Minister under unreasonable pressure , some members of the public fear her explanation to be a little sketchy , vis-àvis the finer details . They hunger for further knowledge . They thirst for elucidation . This desire was acknowledged yesterday by David Davis , making his first statement to the Commons since his appointment as Secretary for State for Exiting the European Union . `` Naturally , people will want to know what Brexit will mean , '' he conceded . On tenterhooks , MPs waited to find out . `` Simply , '' he revealed , `` it means leaving the European Union . '' So now we know . As for what Brexit will or even may mean in terms of international trade , immigration , jobs and security , however , Mr Davis was unable to be quite so enlightening . He spoke for a good 13 minutes , but MPs on the benches facing him sounded unconvinced that they had heard anything new . He informed them that negotiating with the EU `` will have to be got right '' , presumably in case any of them thought it would have to be got wrong . He disclosed that there would be `` challenges ahead '' , but added that he was `` confident '' of success . Meanwhile , to `` establish the priority issues '' for the negotiations , he could `` announce that we will hold round tables with stakeholders in a series of sectors '' . `` Waffle ! '' shouted Labour MPs . `` Is that it ? '' snorted the SNP 's Stephen Gethins . `` On the specifics of his statement ... '' began Iain Duncan Smith . Labour and the SNP laughed . Almost every Tory MP asked a question or offered advice . Peter Lilley ( Hitchin & Harpenden ) said there was no need to negotiate for two years before leaving ; after all , other countries in history had gained independence far more quickly . As an example , he cited India . Possibly not the ideal model of a smooth exit . A fresh-faced backbencher named Michael Gove triumphantly declared that the latest economic figures meant that `` the soi-disant experts '' who forecast disaster `` have oeuf on their faces '' . As I recall , the soi-disant experts were making predictions about what would happen after Britain left the EU , which I gather has n't strictly happened yet . Still , I 'm no expert . A Tory veteran offered Mr Davis his sympathy . `` Mr Speaker , I understand my right honourable friend 's difficulties , and I congratulate him on not rushing anything , '' said Ken Clarke , who just happens to be a staunch Europhile . `` I encourage him to take as long with his colleagues as he possibly can in working out a policy , and I look forward to hearing from him again when the Government have agreed what Brexit actually means . '' Brexit means Brexit . Which means leaving the European Union . Honestly , had n't he been listening ?
Tories ' fate hangs on the new conservatives ; The reshuffle was designed to repair relations with over-60s but appeal more to 30 and 40-somethings
What is Theresa May doing with this reshuffle ? The answer may lie with a Conservative electorate that has undergone profound change . Today , the Conservative Party 's following is far more pro-Brexit , more working-class than that which handed David Cameron a surprise majority back in 2015 . Making sense of this change is crucial to making sense of where the party should head next . It is no secret that British politics is in a process of realignment , yet many continue to underestimate the scale of this change . According to the British Election Study , between the elections of 2015 and 2017 alone , support for the Tories fell back among Remainers by around 8 points but increased among Leavers by the same margin . Tory support among liberals fell back by around 6 points but increased among conservatives by 14 points . It dropped among graduates by around 4 points but jumped by 16 points among those with no qualifications . Consequently , at the last election the Tories had one of their best results in modern times among workers , traditional social conservatives and non-graduates - all of whom are far more supportive of a hard Brexit than many Conservative donors , big business and Cabinet ministers . These voters are clear about where the Tories should head next and there is one big message - they really want the party to reform immigration . Between 2015 and 2017 , support for the Conservatives among voters who think that Britain should prioritise control of migration increased by 16 points - to a striking 61 per cent , well ahead of the figure for those who want single-market access prioritised . This is a position shared by around one in four Labour voters . All of which means that the Tories ' fate depends on their most conservative backers of recent times - whose loyalty depends on whether or not the party will , finally , reform Britain 's immigration system . How should the Conservatives deal with this dilemma ? They stand at a crossroads : down one path lies a Cameron-reboot aimed at tempting millennials , middle-class liberals and Remainers in London and the university towns with offers of a soft Brexit , tuition-fee reform or a new housing policy . The other path requires responding to their much larger army of fervently pro-Brexit working-class voters who are looking for a `` real '' Brexit and who , it should not be forgotten , have already shown their willingness to abandon the Tories when their concerns are not met . Ukip may no longer be a danger to the Tories in elections but apathy easily could be . Sandwiched between these two routes is a middle way , and this is where the reshuffle comes in , exemplified by the appointment of a new party chairman , Brandon Lewis , who comes from a very pro-Brexit and anti-immigration seat . This narrow path aims to repair the party 's relationship with over-60s while admitting that the focus must be on 30 and 40-somethings who , while remaining wary of Jeremy Corbyn 's Labour Party , swung hardest against the Tories last June . This means promoting a new generation of Conservatives to start a new conversation with these voters about how Brexit can be used to create a fairer society and far stronger public services . It means launching a genuine revolution in social mobility as well , to speak directly to those working-class voters , including many socially conservative Labour supporters , who agree with the Tories on Brexit and immigration but remain sceptical about their stance on the economy . The evidence shows that keeping Jeremy Corbyn out of Number 10 will require the Tories putting themselves in uncomfortable territory ; speaking far louder to workers who believe that the economy is not working for all ; to young families who worry intensely about housing , healthcare and the future for their baby-boomer parents ; and to the concerns of non-London England , including the pro-Brexit Labour heartlands . If they can walk this fine line successfully , the destination could be a landslide . But make no mistake , the tectonic plates of British politics are on the move and the Conservative Party needs to move quickly to ensure that it is not left behind . Matthew Goodwin is professor of politics at the University of Kent READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
We need a completely new Brexit hit squad - and we need it fast ; The current Whitehall set-up can not deliver the visionary deal we require . There must be a revolution
Brexit is Britain 's moonshot moment , and yet we have no John F Kennedy at the helm , no visionary who can galvanise our nation and government to reach the seemingly unreachable . We can , at least , still find solace and motivation in his words , delivered at the height of the Cold War , imploring Americans to back his vision for space exploration : they should by now have been adopted as the Brexiteers ' unofficial motto . `` We choose to go to the moon and do the other things , '' Kennedy said in 1962 , `` not because they are easy , but because they are hard ; because that goal will serve to organise and measure the best of our energies and skills , because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept , one we are unwilling to postpone , and one we intend to win ... '' Seven years later an American became the first man to walk on the moon . Brexit is in 18 months ' time , so we need to get cracking . Clarion calls , as Kennedy understood , are just half the story . Governments are shockingly useless beasts . Only rarely and fleetingly can they be strong-armed into delivering the likes of Kennedy 's rush to the moon or the Manhattan Project . A sales job is not enough ; success also requires total political focus , superb management , extreme dedication from all parts of the state , operational brilliance , the marshalling of extraordinary talent from across the economy , an almost superhuman mastery of detail and lots of money . Thanks to Boris Johnson 's brilliant article in this newspaper last week , we at least now have the Kennedy-style visionary peroration ; but if Theresa May is to save her prime ministership , she must urgently move to tackle the nitty-gritty , operational side following her Florence speech . The establishment made two major mistakes with its Brexit preparations . The first was for David Cameron , and then May , to agree to a plan by Jeremy Heywood , the Cabinet secretary , to divide responsibilities for Brexit by creating a Department for Exiting the EU ( Dexeu ) . The post-referendum tasks - working out the final vision for Brexit , understanding the legal and regulatory situation , beginning and conducting negotiations with the EU and delivering the Repeal Bill - would have taxed any experienced top-notch department . Combined with the Government 's political dithering and infighting , the daft decision to fight Gina Miller and the general election , they have proved far too much for a brand new one . Boris Johnson and Michael Gove had different ideas : they would have created a supercharged Prime Minister 's department , and drastically reformed the machinery of government . But they self-destructed in one of the most disastrous heroto-zero moments in British political history , and so we are stuck with the present dysfunctionality . The second major error was to allow the EU to dictate the timetable of withdrawal . There was strong pressure to trigger Article 50 when May did : Brexiteers were paranoid that she did n't really intend to leave the EU . Yet the Government 's failure to get anything meaningful done during its first six months in office means the UK is still woefully unprepared for a `` no deal '' outcome and is therefore increasingly enfeebled in the negotiations . It is now too late to undo the creation of Dexeu . Instead , all powers should be centralised around the Prime Minister , a process which appears to have started and a solution which has the merit of befitting her personality . A smallish Brexit Executive Committee ( or ExCo , in the jargon beloved of boardrooms ) should be created immediately . It would be made up of the best officials from Dexeu , the Foreign Office , the Treasury , the Bank of England and a few outsiders , such as Shanker Singham of the Legatum Institute . May would be in sole charge , ending all power struggles . All members should be moved to a single venue - ideally , in 10 Downing Street - and treated like a core executive and operational team , responsible for the negotiations . The PM would be imbued with absolute authority and bear full responsibility , which means that she would drive the committee 's members very hard indeed . In turn , this sense of urgency , of emergency even , would be cascaded down the ranks , dramatically accelerating Project Brexit . Once a week , or more frequently , officials would be subjected to a grilling by the Prime Minister , and forced to tell her exactly how everything is going , the state of the preparations for a `` no deal '' outcome , and how exactly the negotiations with the EU are unfolding . The aim would be not just to get things done but also to end the current habit of obfuscation and burying bad news ; these would be Cobra-style meetings . The first few would be grim : May would be told by ashenfaced officials about the parlous state of HMRC 's systems , or the fact that the Budget contains nothing at all to help smooth Brexit . But without some internal honesty - a commodity that is sorely lacking in Whitehall - nothing will ever change . The other immediate change should be to appoint Francis Maude to a new job tasked with reforming the Civil Service , with genuine changes starting before the end of the year . Maude delivered a devastating speech on the future of the Civil Service last week ; he understands that the system needs a revolution if it is to deliver a good Brexit . Dexeu would be primarily tasked with providing detailed legal and other briefings for the Brexit executive committee , working on longer-term policies and producing economic work that the institutionally biased Treasury can not handle . Crucially , running Brexit day to day would become May 's main preoccupation ; she would have to leave policies on matters such as modern slavery to Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary . The Prime Minister would have no bandwidth for anything other than Brexit , broadly defined . Will this work ? I do n't know , but it 's our best chance to make sure that we maximise the opportunities of Brexit , rather than stumble into a suboptimal , half-in , half-out arrangement that infuriates everybody . The Prime Minister can still just about pull it off , but only if she moves very fast indeed . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Brexit must be negotiated with one voice ; The Government has a mandate to secure control of our borders , laws and money
The clock is ticking , and as we settle how the Government will run and what arrangement the Conservatives will make with the DUP to navigate crucial parliamentary votes , one issue in particular hangs over us : the need to get on with the Brexit negotiations . The question of what kind of relationship we want with the EU has been dominated by some of the most facile commentary imaginable . As a result , we have lurched between talking of hard Brexits and soft Brexits with no real idea of what is meant . Some say a soft Brexit entails remaining in the single market , or the customs union or both . Now we have a new term , an open Brexit , although perhaps this is more about tone than substance . It all seems so vague as to leave anyone watching perplexed as to what the argument is really about . Hard or soft , even semi hard or semi soft or open , the Conservative manifesto was very clear . It stated that the purpose of the Government was to give effect to the referendum vote last year , defined as taking back control of our borders , our laws and our money . It was also clear that Britain would not remain a member of the single market or the customs union . `` Ah , '' I hear people say . `` But you did n't win an outright majority so it needs to be changed . '' Well , 13.6million British people voted for it , making the Conservatives the largest party , which is a pretty powerful mandate . Furthermore , the Labour manifesto was just as explicit and agreed with the Conservative manifesto on this issue . That means some 80 per cent plus voted to support a policy that has us negotiating to get the best possible frictionless access to the single market once we have left the EU . I note also that Messrs Corbyn and McDonnell reiterated at the weekend that Labour policy is to leave the single market and the customs union . Surely were either party to change their position now , it would be interpreted as a massive U-turn . Nevertheless , some MPs have called for a kind of cross-party group to negotiate a soft Brexit . Now , I am all for talking to members of other parties , which in fact goes on all the time . Whips talk to whips , backbench members do as well , and the Prime Minister often consults the Leader of the Opposition on matters of national importance . But I do not believe that a Government engaged in Brexit talks can possibly seek approval from such a group during those negotiations , for that would make it impossible to achieve clarity . Labour has also made it clear that it does not want to engage in such a formal way , for that would mean that its traditional ability to critique the Government 's final agreement would be lost . Anyway , the Government has already said that it will report back regularly . In that way it can inform but not get bogged down by negotiating in public , by `` committee '' . The reality , in any case , is that we should n't assume , as those calling for a soft Brexit do , that we can cherry pick what we want . The EU can not grant us continued membership of the single market after we have taken back control of our borders as that would breach one of their four freedoms . Remaining in the customs union would also be the worst of all worlds , for we would have left the EU but would still be subject to its external tariffs without any real chance of influencing them . More importantly , we would give up the right to set our own trade arrangements with enormous markets like the US or India . Attempting to modify existing EU arrangements would prolong the negotiations to no purpose . Surely what we should all agree on is that , as we leave , it is in the interests of the EU and the UK to achieve a trade deal that allows firms to continue to do business in the most benign circumstances possible . We should stop the pointless debate about what soft or hard Brexit looks like . Instead we should concern ourselves with what success looks like . As former US trade negotiator Shanker Singham has said , the biggest gains from Brexit will come as we develop an economic policy based on competition , take advantage of opportunities for trade deals and , of course , secure a good frictionless trade deal with the EU . This is surely what success looks like , enabling an upbeat Britain to lead the global battle for increased liberalisation and the lowering of trade barriers around the world .
Scotland 'There can be no turning back ' ; Theresa May prepares for parliamentary battle as opposition parties plot to thwart clean Brexit
JEREMY CORBYN and Nicola Sturgeon were last night plotting to undermine Theresa May 's plan for a clean Brexit as the Government insisted there was `` no going back '' on the vote to Leave . After the Supreme Court ruled that Parliament would have to pass a new law triggering Article 50 : ? Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , called for full access to the single market after Brexit and said he will table legislation demanding that the terms of any final deal are sent back to Brussels if Parliament rejects them ; ? The SNP said that it is prepared to table 50 amendments , including a proposal to block Brexit entirely , while the Liberal Democrats will seek a second referendum and oppose triggering Article 50 ; ? A dozen pro-European Conservative MPs are also prepared to join forces with Labour and the SNP in an attempt to force the Government formally to set out its negotiating strategy . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , is expected to publish the Article 50 legislation tomorrow and has warned MPs and peers against trying to `` thwart '' or `` delay '' Brexit . He yesterday insisted that there would be `` no going back '' on the result of the EU referendum and described attempts to block Brexit as `` patronising , undemocratic and improper '' . Sir Edward Leigh , a former Tory minister , said the Government should be prepared to call an `` immediate general election '' if its opponents try to undermine Brexit . However , the Prime Minister is confident that she will be able to face down parliamentary opposition and ministers believe they could trigger Brexit weeks earlier than her end of March deadline . The Government hopes to pass the legislation in the Commons within a fortnight , with potential all-night sittings and the first vote scheduled for next week . The Conservatives believe that will leave sufficient time for debate in the Lords , where the Government does not hold a majority . `` We will let the Lords talk until they wet themselves , '' one Government source said . Iain Duncan Smith , a former work and pensions secretary , said : `` This is an attempt to yet again try to tie the Government 's hands and delay Brexit . `` The Prime Minister must stick to her guns and get this Bill through as fast as possible . '' The Supreme Court yesterday ruled that the Government must table legislation before triggering Article 50 and beginning the process of exiting the European Union . However , ministers secured the support of three dissenting justices , with one of them warning that judicial intervention in political matters was `` fraught with risk '' and was not `` constitutionally appropriate '' . Judges also ruled that the Government does not need permission from Scotland and other devolved administrations before triggering Article 50 . The ruling brought a furious response from Ms Sturgeon , the Scottish First Minister , who claimed that the need for a second independence referendum was `` ever clearer '' . The SNP has promised to put forward 50 `` serious and substantive '' amendments to the Bill , including a proposal that the UK would stay in the EU under a `` revised '' membership if MPs reject the final deal . It also left Labour in disarray . A spokesman for Mr Corbyn initially suggested that Labour 's amendments to Article 50 legislation would `` seek to build in the principles of full , tariff-free access to the single market '' , only to remove the line from a second press release half an hour later . Labour is preparing to table at least four amendments , including one that would require the Government to take a final deal back to Brussels if Parliament votes against it . Mr Corbyn is ultimately expected to impose a three-line whip to support the Article 50 legislation , but dozens of Labour MPs - including shadow ministers - will rebel and vote against it . Kate Hoey , a Eurosceptic Labour MP , warns today in an article for The Daily Telegraph that it will be `` incredibly damaging '' for the party if it is seen to obstruct Brexit . `` This could be a real threat to our party 's future , '' she says . There were also growing signs of a rebellion among pro-European Conservative MPs . A dozen of them called on the Government to publish a White Paper to set out its broad strategy before Brexit . The scale of the potential rebellion and the small Tory majority means that ministers could be forced to back down and publish the paper or face a potential Commons defeat . Mr Davis yesterday told the Commons : `` I trust no one will seek to make it a vehicle for attempts to thwart the will of the people or frustrate or delay the process of exiting the European Union . '' Ministers are privately warning that the Government is prepared to flood the Lords with hundreds of Conservative peers if it tries to block Brexit . Lord Blunkett , a Labour peer and former home secretary , said it would be `` foolish in the extreme '' and `` unthinkable '' for Lords to block Brexit .
Siemens chief signals about turn on his Brexit warning
EUROPE 'S largest industrial and engineering company has vowed to press ahead with investment in Britain despite the vote to leave the EU , backing away from earlier suggestions that Brexit would cause a painful freeze on new activities . Joe Kaeser , the chief executive of Siemens , said the German conglomerate remains fully committed to the UK whatever happens , but called on Theresa May to clarify the post-Brexit trade vision as soon as possible and tell the world what kind of country Britain intends to become . `` We 're here for the long term and we do n't let ourselves get jerked up and down . We 're staying because the UK is a good place to do business , '' he said . Mr Kaeser said the company had been misunderstood in the heat of the Brexit campaign . `` We never said the UK is in bad shape if it leaves the EU : we said the EU would miss a massive opportunity . Without the UK , the EU may never be able to stand up against superpowers like China and the US , '' he said . The top management of the 350,000-strong company is converging on the Cotswolds for a retreat to thrash out its post-Brexit strategy . `` This is to show that the UK matters with or without it being a member of the EU , '' Mr Kaeser said . Siemens employs 14,000 people in Britain , mostly in highly-skilled jobs . It already plays a crucial role in Thameslink and Crossrail and is angling for a big share of the trains and signalling deals for HS2 , along with other prize contracts in the gift of the British government . Mr Kaeser said the company would step up investments in UK research and innovation regardless of whether there is any trade deal . 'We never said the UK is in bad shape if it leaves the EU : we said the EU would miss a massive opportunity '
Brexit fears rock global stock markets ; UK 's biggest firms lose £98bn in value in four days as Leave camp pulls ahead and FTSE 100 dives
LONDON 'S benchmark index fell through the 6,000 level yesterday as Brexit fears shook financial markets around the world . Investors offloaded risky equities in favour of safe-haven assets after the latest referendum polls showed the Leave camp pulling ahead . Anxiety about the UK 's possible exit from the European Union triggered the FTSE 100 's steepest daily fall since mid-February , with the blue chip index dropping 121.44 points , or 2.01pc , to 5,923.53 . In just four days the value of Britain 's biggest companies has fallen by more than £98bn . European bourses also floundered as volatility spiked ahead of next week 's referendum . Frankfurt 's DAX and the CAC in Paris both fell 1.4pc . Mike van Dulken , of Accendo Markets , said investors were fearful of the `` heightened prospect '' of a Brexit , which would `` worsen an already fragile global growth situation by delivering an economic and political blow to a struggling eurozone '' . As stock markets went into freefall , investors sought shelter from the Brexit storm in www.bonds.UK gilt yields fell to record lows yesterday , while Germany 's 10-year bund yield skidded into negative territory for the first time ever . The negative yield means that investors are effectively paying to lend money to the German government for a full decade . Ant Gillham of Old Mutual Global Investors said : `` In the short to medium term [ after Brexit ] , I think we 're likely to see concern in the market that some of the other European countries might follow suit and that puts break-up risk for the eurozone right back on the table . The natural reaction for investors who are pulling out of peripheral bonds will be to look for safe places to put their money , and we might see UK bond yields fall . '' However , he said that yields could increase if a vote to leave starts to further devalue the pound . `` Brexit is likely to put real pressure on sterling . Sterling has one of the biggest current account deficits in the developed world , and we are likely to see a lot of downward pressure on sterling , exerting inflation pressure . '' Yesterday , sterling slumped to a twomonth low against the dollar , dropping by as much as 1pc to $ 1.4097 , while the cost of insuring against volatility in the pound a month into the future soared to its highest level since the height of the 2008 financial crisis . The Brexit-induced panic selling was also confirmed by a Bank of America Merrill Lynch global fund managers survey which found that investors are sitting on the biggest pile of cash since November 2001 . Fund managers are now holding 5.7pc of their portfolio in cash it said . A new poll showed more than eight in ten investment professionals foresee a drop in the London stock market in the six months after a vote to leave the EU , with 39pc expecting a sharp decrease in the wake of a Brexit decision . In a survey of more than 1,750 investment staff by the industry body CFA UK , 71pc said they expected UK investment portfolios to suffer in the year after a vote for Brexit , against 8pc who felt the effect would be positive on portfolios and 17pc who thought there would be a minimal impact .
Hammond 's refusal to plan for a 'no deal ' Brexit is a dereliction of duty ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - The Chancellor , Philip Hammond , is publicly and clearly undermining the UK 's negotiating position on Brexit by refusing to sanction any spending on planning for a no-deal scenario until `` it is responsible to do so '' . The responsible thing was to sanction such spending at least 12 months ago . How can Theresa May support the position that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' unless detailed planning is being undertaken to prepare for a no-deal outcome ? I have always understood that there are contingency funds for emergencies . With less than 18 months to go before Britain leaves the EU , this is an emergency . Adrian Beasley-Suffolk Cropthorne , Worcestershire sir - Mrs May started her career at the Bank of England - possibly the most risk-averse institution on the planet . Therein lies the answer to why she is unable to function as a prime minister should . She will never do anything unless she has a copperbottomed guarantee that it 's going to work . Delivery of Brexit requires bold , brave and decisive action , which is clearly not her forte . Add that to her personal friendship with `` Spreadsheet Phil '' , and it is then clear why progress has not been made . Elaine McKie Appleby-in-Westmorland , Cumbria sir - I and many people I know are desperate for Mrs May to succeed and lead us away from the EU . Yet having heard her evading and prevaricating on LBC when asked which way she would vote on Brexit now , I decided that George Osborne was right . The sooner she goes , the better it will be for our country . Brian Farmer Chelmsford , Essex sir - I was perplexed by Mrs May 's answer to the question of how she would vote now on Brexit . The waffle that she came out with demonstrates why the Cabinet is such a mishmash of Remainers and Brexiteers . Sorry , but this is the decider - she has to go , and quickly . Geoff Norman Littledean , Surrey sir - It 's time that Mrs May moved towards making Brexit an `` all-party '' affair - excluding the Lib Dems . Why not create roles for people such as Frank Field or Kate Hoey - or even Nigel Farage , without whose work there would never have been a referendum ? Alan Ashton Bishop 's Stortford , Hertfordshire sir - Nigel Farage 's criticism of the Prime Minister 's refusal to confirm her support for Brexit is based on his assumption that it is not possible to deliver Brexit unless `` you truly believe in it '' . My wife and I do n't believe in Father Christmas , yet we manage to deliver our children 's presents from him without fail every year . Christian Froggatt Reigate , Surrey
The ball is in your court , 'optimistic ' May will tell Brussels ; Prime Minister to update MPs on Brexit progress , saying Britain will 'prove the doomsayers wrong '
THERESA MAY will today tell Brussels that `` the ball is in your court '' as she signals that she is not prepared to make any further concessions to break the deadlock in negotiations . Ahead of a European summit later this month , the Prime Minister will also say that Britain can `` prove the doomsayers wrong '' and that she is `` optimistic '' that Brexit negotiations will succeed . As Parliament returns , Mrs May will update MPs on the progress made since her speech in Florence in which she made a series of significant concessions . Britain is offering to pay the EU ( EURO ) 20billion during a two-year transition period after Brexit and has also given an unqualified commitment to defence and security cooperation . It raises the prospect that Brexit negotiations could remain deadlocked , increasing the chance of no deal . Negotiations are at a standstill because the EU is refusing to allow talks about future trade deals to take place before `` sufficient progress '' has been made on the Brexit divorce bill , rights of citizens and Northern Ireland . The Prime Minister will travel to Brussels in a fortnight 's time for a crucial meeting of the European Council . She will tell the Commons : `` As we look forward to the next stage , the ball is in their court . But I am optimistic we will receive a positive response . `` Because what we are seeking is not just the best possible deal for us - but also the best possible deal for our European friends too . `` So while , of course , progress will not always be smooth , by approaching these negotiations in a constructive way - in a spirit of friendship and cooperation and with our sights firmly set on the future - I believe we can prove the doomsayers wrong . `` And I believe we can seize the opportunities of this defining moment in the history of our nation . '' Her more positive language will draw comparisons with Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , in the wake of his 4,200-word article on Brexit in The Daily Telegraph last month . Mr Johnson has repeatedly hit out at the Brexit `` gloom-mongers '' . It comes after The Sunday Telegraph disclosed that Britain is prepared to release billions of pounds of investment to help the UK prepare in case there is no deal . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , is planning to release the money if no progress has been made on a transition deal by Christmas . Dominic Raab , a Eurosceptic Tory MP and justice minister , yesterday said that there could be significant advantages to leaving the EU without a deal . He said : `` There are advantages to it , countervailing advantages if there is n't a deal in terms of the early repatriation of the money '' in terms of `` things like the external EU tariffs '' - worth several billion pounds - `` that would come to the Chancellor 's coffers if we had those arrangements '' . It also emerged that the European Parliament is planning to host a string of speeches by European leaders in a bid to boost its profile . The Telegraph has seen leaked minutes of the parliament 's secretive Conference of Presidents , a behindclosed-doors meeting of leaders of EU political groups . It reveals that MEPs believe that their view on the future of the EU after Brexit is being overshadowed by major speeches by Emmanuel Macron , the French president , Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission and Mrs May . `` There was Macron in the Sorbonne and even May in Florence , '' one source said . `` The plan now is to make sure speeches like that by heads of state and governments are held in Brussels or Strasbourg . '' The parliament now plans to invite a string of EU heads of state and government to debate the EU 's future in the institution 's two seats of Brussels and Strasbourg in the run up to `` Brexit Day '' on March 29 2019 and the European Parliament elections in May . Labour yesterday said it is prepared to offer annual payments to Brussels indefinitely in order to keep access to the single market after Brexit . Jenny Chapman , the party 's Brexit minister , said Labour would leave the single market `` on the table '' . Ms Chapman told BBC Radio 5 Live 's Pienaar 's Politics : `` We would leave the single market on the table , and it may be that there 's an arrangement that 's in the UK 's best interests that involves some sort of payment for access . `` That is something that we would leave on the table , unlike the Government that 's decided 'we do n't want to be part of the customs union , we do n't want to be part of the single market ' . '' ( EURO ) 20bn The amount Britain is offering to pay the European Union during a two-year period after Brexit has been achieved
BBC negativity about Brexit is misleading ; established 1855 BODY : What is the condition of Britain today ? The facts suggest a country doing well . Economic growth is robust and employment is at record levels . Socially , Britain is perhaps the most harmonious and diverse nation in the developed world , largely untouched by the xenophobia and bigotry that stalk the politics of other nations . Politically , we have a popular government enacting a policy of Brexit that was endorsed by 17 million voters , the biggest democratic mandate for anything in our history . Yet anyone regarding Britain through the prism of its national broadcaster would see a nation in crisis , racked by doubt and division . The BBC never neglects any opportunity to highlight the challenges that might face Britain during and after its departure from the European Union . Far from describing the opportunities that await the country outside the EU - or merely describing the positive vision of Brexit that Theresa May has offered - the Corporation inevitably presents Brexit as a www.problem.No doubt much of this is a result of what is fashionably called `` unconscious bias '' . Most BBC journalists are young , university-educated citydwellers , the group most likely to have voted Remain . Try as they might to be objective , they will always struggle to understand the case for `` the other side '' . Some are said to feel a bizarre sense of guilt about Brexit , fretting that by trying to make their pre-referendum coverage more balanced , they failed to warn voters about the risks of leaving . Of course , the BBC is not the only media outlet in Britain , but it is , thanks to the vast resources it extracts from the public , the biggest and most dominant . For better or worse , the BBC 's worldview helps shape Britain 's idea of itself - and the idea others have of us . That is why Conservative MPs are right to confront the Corporation about its slanted Brexit coverage , which could easily have real and negative consequences . The UK economy relies on the confidence of consumers and international investors : what if they succumb to the BBC 's gloom ? And as Mrs May prepares to invoke Article 50 , consider the diplomatic risks : EU leaders might be persuaded by the BBC to mistakenly overestimate Britain 's regrets about Brexit , holding out hope we will change our minds , instead of seeking a mutually beneficial exit deal . The Corporation is used to brushing off Conservative complaints about its bias , but its chiefs must take this latest warning seriously . Brexit Britain deserves better from the BBC .
Sturgeon 's last-ditch bid to ruin Brexit ; Scottish leader ready to derail Article 50 vote with threat of new referendum date ; Sturgeon wants referendum in autumn 2018
NICOLA STURGEON will today threaten to derail Brexit by setting out plans for a second independence referendum unless Theresa May offers Scotland a special deal . The Scottish First Minister could name the date she intends to hold a new referendum as early as this week , The Daily Telegraph understands , if Mrs May does not bow to her will . Ms Sturgeon has previously hinted that autumn 2018 would be a suitable time to call a referendum . The ultimatum is expected to be delivered this morning with the intention of influencing a Commons vote tonight on MPs being given a `` meaningful '' say on the final deal offered to Britain by the EU . She also wants to pile pressure on Mrs May just 24 hours before the Prime Minister hopes to be in a position to formally trigger Article 50 . If the Article 50 Bill is passed tonight , it could receive royal assent as early as tomorrow , clearing the way for Mrs May to begin the two-year Brexit process by informing the EU of Britain 's decision to leave . But Ms Sturgeon wants the Prime Minister to include in her letter to the EU a series of demands for Scotland to be given special treatment in the Brexit negotiations . Downing Street has refused to bow to any such demands and is highly unlikely to alter its plans unless facing a parliamentary rebellion over the issue . It comes as : Boris Johnson insisted Britain would be `` perfectly OK '' without a deal on Brexit and should be prepared to walk away from EU talks without one ; A Tory rebellion on Article 50 that would have seen a Lords amendment enshrined in law appeared to be faltering ; MPs affected by rail strikes today on Southern , Merseyrail and Arriva Trains North were told to drive to Parliament so they do not miss the crucial vote ; Theresa May prepared to use Commonwealth Day today to stress the importance of the 52-nation organisation to the UK 's post-Brexit economy . Ms Sturgeon has called a press conference this morning at Bute House , her official residence in Edinburgh , but in a highly unusual move decided not to make an official announcement of it . Downing Street last night appeared unaware that the event was taking place , suggesting the SNP intended to spring a surprise for maximum impact . The First Minister is also likely to be hoping it will bolster support for the Article 50 amendment in tonight 's vote , by suggesting to MPs that they could help avoid the break-up of the Union by using a `` meaningful '' vote on the Brexit deal to give ground to the SNP . SHUTTERSTOCK Ms Sturgeon wants to keep Scotland in the EU single market even if the rest of the UK leaves , which would involve the devolution of nearly every policy area except defence and the macroeconomy . REX/ ROOKE/ With the UK Government highly Continued on Page 4 TIM Editorial Comment : Page 17 Continued from Page 1 likely to reject her proposals , it is thought the First Minister will attempt to blame Mrs May for pushing her towards a second referendum . The First Minister said last week that autumn 2018 is her preferred time for another vote , when the shape of the Brexit deal becomes known but before the UK leaves the EU . However , senior Tory sources have said Mrs May is unlikely to allow a vote to be staged until after Brexit takes place in March 2019 . They are also wary of holding a vote in the immediate aftermath as this would still allow an independence campaign to be conducted in parallel with the Brexit talks . Ms Sturgeon has been given a boost by opinion polls which show Scotland divided 50/50 on the question of independence , compared with the 2014 referendum result which favoured staying in the Union by 55 per cent to 45 . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour Party leader , made his own intervention in the debate by saying it would be `` absolutely fine '' for Scotland to hold a second poll . Ian Murray , Labour 's only MP north of the border , reacted by angrily accusing him of `` destroying the party '' . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , tried to reassure Tory MPs considering defying the whip on the vote that it is `` inconceivable '' they will not get a say on the outcome of the negotiations . In a final plea to the rebels , he said on the BBC 's Andrew Marr show : `` What I do n't want to do is take a simple Bill which is designed to do nothing more than put the result of the referendum into law ... please do n't tie the Prime Minister 's hands in the process of doing that for things which we expect to attain anyway . ''
Our path to the exit door remains clear ; The judges ' criticism of the last government over the referendum law has wider constitutional implications
The Supreme Court 's ruling that Parliament must pass legislation before Article 50 can be invoked has many implications , and not just for Brexit . In its lengthy judgment , the Supreme Court Justices chided the last government for not making it clearer , in law , if it meant for the EU Referendum Act 2015 ( which gave us last June 's vote ) to be strictly legally binding . That may complicate the holding of future referendums , where ostensibly straightforward `` Yes or No '' questions still leave the elected government a range of possible outcomes in implementing the result . In addition , the ruling could have far-reaching implications in other areas of foreign policy . If Parliament must authorise the beginning of negotiations to exit an international organisation or treaty , it 's only a short step to requiring Parliament to approve the start of negotiations to join one in the first place . That may be no bad thing , but it risks complicating Britain 's multilateral diplomacy . All sides should recognise the thorny issues our highest court had to deal with in their ruling on Article 50 . The Justices were themselves divided - by eight to three - with Lord Reed leading a thoughtful dissent , explaining why the Government should be free , at least to begin its Brexit diplomacy , without Parliament 's legislative blessing . Equally , the Supreme Court usefully cleared up some issues around Brexit.It narrowed the scope of what was a rather nebulous High Court judgment . That should put paid to the wrecking tactics of those trying to frustrate Brexit - and enable the Government to begin negotiations on time . The Supreme Court dismissed suggestions that the devolved settlements with Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland precluded Brexit - or required the consent of their legislatures . The justices also ruled that the question of where precisely UK jurisdiction ends , and Scottish jurisdiction starts , is a matter for political resolution according to convention - not for the courts . In time , this will strengthen the UK Government 's hand in other areas , such as enacting a British Bill of Rights to replace the Human Rights Act . Crucially , the Supreme Court made clear that Parliament can pass a short , sharp Bill to approve the start of Brexit negotiations . This should allow the Government to keep the scope of its legislation tight , avoiding wrecking amendments from the diminishing ranks of Labour and Liberal Democrat saboteurs in the House of Commons and House of Lords . That alone vindicates the Government 's decision to appeal the ruling of the High Court . Beyond the Inns of Court and the Westminster bubble , there is a growing feeling among the public that we need to get on with Brexit . We had the forecasts of doom , and our economy confounded the pessimists . We 've had the flouncing resignation of our ambassador to the EU . That did n't stop the Prime Minister setting out strong , detailed plans for negotiations . And we 've had these legal shenanigans designed to frustrate proceedings . Yet still the path remains clear for negotiations to begin . It 's now the duty of every democrat in both Houses of Parliament to pass the Government 's simple Bill to respect the will of the people . It 's time to end the political wrangling and get behind the Government 's post-Brexit vision for Britain as a self-governing democracy , a good European neighbour , and a global leader in free trade . The vigour of our economy and trade with the EU mean Britain 's negotiating leverage is strong . Theresa May 's plan commands the support of the public , as a recent YouGov poll demonstrates . And EU leaders recognise the economic damage that a vindictive response would do to European companies and jobs . That 's why key figures such as Wolfgang Schäuble , the German finance minister , have vowed to `` minimise any risk of damage for both of us '' . The Brexit process will soon be underway and the work of taking Britain out of the EU can begin in earnest . We can and should enter these negotiations with confidence and a generosity of spirit towards our European friends . It 's time to end the phoney political war at home , and start the serious diplomacy abroad . Dominic Raab is the Conservative MP for Esher & Walton READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
May goes into battle for Brexit ; Prime Minister tackles rebels by challenging MPs to vote in favour of triggering Article 50 before end of March
THERESA MAY last night dramatically announced that MPs will today be given the opportunity to vote on her timetable for triggering Article 50 and formally beginning Brexit . Just over 24 hours after the Supreme Court began considering whether Parliament should be allowed a vote on Article 50 , the Prime Minister formally amended a backbench motion on Brexit . MPs will be asked to back the Government 's plan to formally serve Article 50 by the end of March 2017 . Mrs May also committed to revealing the official plan for Brexit before the process begins . The unexpected announcement came after months of the Government refusing to give a `` running commentary '' on Brexit , or formally to allow Parliament a vote on the process . Today 's vote was welcomed by both Leave and Remain campaigners , with Brexiteers backing the Prime Minister 's de-cision to finally tackle the issue headon . Downing Street sources said that it was now time to `` see if those who say they accept the result really do '' . MPs and Remain campaigners have spent months plotting how to undermine the result of the referendum - while saying they support the will of the people - and will now have to reveal their intentions . Conservative MPs will be forced to support the amendment although a small number are expected to either abstain or vote against the Government . Labour also said last night that it would back the amendment , although it was unclear whether its MPs would support the position . The Liberal Democrats and SNP are expected to vote in defiance of the referendum result in an attempt to block Brexit . The Supreme Court is to continue sitting today and tomorrow and may refuse to accept the result of the parliamentary vote , which is non-binding . Judges may demand that Parliament goes further and passes a piece of legislation which details exactly how Brexit will be negotiated . Although Mrs May is expected to win today 's vote , which is only being held in the House of Commons , passing full legislation through both the lower and upper houses of Parliament would prove far more problematic . Steve Baker , a leading Eurosceptic Conservative MP , said : `` Since 2010 many of us have been scolded for trying to give the people their say on the referendum . Now is a great opportunity for all those who have said they respect the result to do so by supporting the Government . It 's time to put up or shut up . '' The Prime Minister intervened after Labour tabled a motion in the Commons in an attempt to force her into `` publishing the Government 's plans for leaving the European Union '' . Anna Soubry , a former employment minister who is campaigning for the UK to stay in the Single Market , had said she and up to 40 other Tory MPs could rebel and back the Labour motion because it `` transcended party politics '' . The Government yesterday responded by largely accepting the motion , which says there `` should be no disclosure of material that could be reasonably judged to damage the UK in any negotiations '' . However , the Government added an amendment `` recognising that this House will respect the wishes of the United Kingdom '' in the Brexit vote and saying negotiations should be triggered by the end of March . Tory rebels indicated yesterday that they would support the amendment with Ms Soubry hailing it as a `` victory '' . Mrs May made the announcement as Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , caused a row with Downing Street after saying that Britain would have just 18 months to strike a deal before it leaves the European Union . Downing Street said that it would not be `` nailed to '' a deadline , although Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said 18 months was `` ample time '' in which to conclude a deal . In the Supreme Court yesterday the country 's foremost judges said ministers could have avoided legal action over Brexit if they had made sure the EU referendum was legally binding . Lord Neuberger , the President of the Supreme Court , was among the judges who questioned why the Government had failed explicitly to state in legislation that the result of the vote had legal effect . James Eadie QC , who is representing the Government , told the judges that they risked `` stepping over the line '' and imposing `` serious '' controls on Parliament if they ruled against the Government . Mrs May intends to trigger Article 50 by March 31 , but Remain campaigners have demanded that the Prime Minister must announce her plans and MPs should be given a vote . She had resisted , arguing that laying her plans before a parliamentary vote would weaken her negotiating position as she attempts to secure a deal on the terms of Britain 's relationship with the remaining EU nations ahead of Brexit . Both Labour and Conservative MPs have claimed they do not want to stop Brexit , but merely want details of the plan first . The amendment by Mrs May will flush out whether that is the case . The Prime Minister said yesterday during a visit to the Gulf that she was planning for a patriotic `` red , white and blue '' Brexit . It follows reports that she wants a `` grey '' Brexit with controls on migration but payments for access to the Single Market . Ministers have privately conceded they are unlikely to win the Supreme Court case . The Government argues that Mrs May has the power to invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty , which gives notice of Britain 's intent to leave the EU , using a royal prerogative , without the need for a specific Act of Parliament . However , Lord Neuberger said the 2015 legislation that provided for the referendum was `` very carefully silent '' on what the effect of the referendum should be . Reports : Pages 4-5 'Now we will see if those who say they accept the result really do ' Downing Street
Delaying Britain 's exit raises the risk of violence , ministers warn peers ; Brexit turmoil ; Anger from Conservative MPs at prospect of Lords attempting to delay and water down terms
PEERS and MPs who are planning to delay Brexit are `` anti-democratic '' and trying to `` thwart the decision '' made by Britons to leave the European Union on June 23 , ministers have warned . Other Conservative MPs said that should opposition parties go through with their threat there would be a risk of `` protests that could lead to violence '' . Ministers privately admit that they are likely to lose a Supreme Court appeal next month following this week 's High Court decision that MPs and peers must have a say over the timing of Brexit . The Government is bracing itself to have to push legislation quickly through both the Commons and Lords to trigger the start of formal talks about leaving the EU at the end of March . However , Nick Clegg , the former deputy prime minister , said MPs and peers could use the opportunity to force the Government to water down the terms of Brexit . The Liberal Democrat MP said : `` We will seek , with other parties , in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords , to amend the legislation such that Parliament would say to Government that it should pursue a soft Brexit not a hard Brexit , and that there should be some means by which the British people can have a say on the final deal when the negotiations with the EU are finally completed in the years ahead . '' Mr Clegg added : `` If we were to be able to marshal opinion behind that approach then people will vote in favour of Article 50 triggered on that basis . '' Although the Lib Dems have just eight MPs , they have more than 100 peers who could frustrate efforts to get the legislation through the Upper Chamber . There was also speculation that in the House of Lords - where the Conservatives are in a minority - the Lib Dems could be joined by hundreds of Labour and cross-bench peers . The peers are emboldened because by convention they are allowed to block or reject legislation which was not in the ruling Government 's general election manifesto . They argue that leaving the EU was not a Conservative policy at the time of last year 's election . One senior cross-bencher said that the Lords `` might well '' try to amend the legislation , adding : `` That remains to be seen . '' The comments prompted a furious response from the Government , which will set out the next steps after the ruling in a statement to MPs on Monday . David Jones MP , a minister in the Exiting the European Union department , said : `` It is profoundly antidemocratic . People are sick and tired of seeing certain politicians trying to thwart the decision they made on June 23 . '' Sajid Javid , the Local Government Secretary , suggested the Government would win a vote on implementing Article 50 in Parliament next week , but warned the legal ruling could have serious consequences . Asked on BBC One 's Question Time if he was `` fearful '' that Parliament would vote against triggering Article 50 next week , he said : `` That is what I am not fearful about - what I am concerned is that process would lead to a much worse deal for the British people . '' Sir Gerald Howarth , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP , said that any attempt to delay Britain leaving the EU would be `` the most unconscionable betrayal of the people '' . `` This is a direct challenge to the unequivocal verdict of the British people and a naked attempt to thwart them . There will be real anger across the country if unelected peers seek to do that . The risk is very angry protests that could lead to violence . ''
Ireland Brexit will be a tragedy if it undermines the UK 's role in helping to defend democracy ; Commentary
As we enter 2018 , Europe continues to face threats and instability , from an increasingly autocratic Russia , which is waging a multi-faceted , hybrid war against the West , to continued instability in the Middle East , an Islamist terror threat and a refugee crisis . These threats and challenges know no borders and will not relent because Brexit . As we have seen with the terrorist attacks perpetrated in both Belgium and the UK , the security of the EU and the UK are interlinked . We now know that Mohamed Abrini , a Brussels airport bomber , went to the UK to raise funds for his network 's terrorist activities in Belgium and France . Youssef Zaghba , the London Bridge attacker , travelled in Europe and was on a European database . The terrorists who seek to harm us know no borders . A post- Brexit approach to cooperation must reflect this . The EU needs British security and intelligence capabilities , but the door to defeating terrorism swings both www.ways.UK authorities will continue to rely on the assistance and resources of their European counterparts to keep Britain 's streets safe . It is imperative that EU-UK cooperation does not become a casualty of the negotiations . Theresa May , as David Cameron 's Home Secretary , is well remembered in Brussels for negotiating an opt-out of EU judicial and home affairs instruments , only to then opt back into the European Arrest Warrant , Europol and other programmes vital to the fight against international crime and terrorism . In her Florence speech last year , Mrs May told the EU : `` Our determination to defend the stability , security and prosperity of our European neighbours and friends remains steadfast . '' It is regrettable that Britain has recently treated EU countries ' efforts to enhance joint defence capabilities as a threat , rather than an opportunity . As Boris Johnson hinted , Brexit may yet reverse this . Likewise , it is important we find a way to ensure that the UK can continue to participate in the development and delivery of EU sanctions regimes , on a 27 + 1 basis . Britain 's commitment to European stability , however , is likely to be tested even before Brexit . With the support of the European Parliament and a clear majority of EU member states , the European Commission recently triggered legal proceedings against Poland for undermining the democratic functioning of its judiciary . The adherence to democratic governance is rightly one of the key criteria for EU membership and I hope it will remain a priority for the UK , too . Ignoring the rise of `` mini-Trumps '' , as Francis Fukuyama has coined them , in Central and Eastern Europe would be incompatible with the commitments made by the Prime Minister in Florence and could lead many in European capitals to question Britain 's commitment to a future new security and defence partnership . The actions taken by Warsaw are not compatible with decades of British foreign policy and the principles of EU membership . Britain rightly led calls for the accession of post-Soviet countries to the European Union . It would be a tragedy if the outcome of Brexit undermines its role as a defender of liberal democracy . Polls consistently show voters ' main concerns are illegal immigration and security . These must be addressed and Brexit can not disrupt our efforts to keep Europeans safe , which is why it is important that ideological grandstand-ing and red lines announced in haste at party conferences do not stand in the way of a cast-iron security and defence partnership . It 's clear the only way we can respond to the challenges we face is if European nations come together and defend the international , values-based order we have built post-war . Brexit will weaken the UK and the EU economically and geopolitically . It must not be allowed to undermine our security , nor dilute our shared values . Guy Verhofstadt is the European Parliament 's chief negotiator for Brexit and a former prime minister of Belgium 'The terrorists who seek to harm us know no borders . A post-Brexit approach to cooperation must reflect this '
Adonis says May 'is voice of Ukip ' as he quits as tsar
LORD ADONIS , the Europhile Labour peer , has resigned as the Government 's infrastructure tsar , accusing Theresa May of becoming `` the voice of Ukip '' in her Brexit policy . He used his resignation letter to tell Mrs May she was putting Europe 's peace and security at risk , comparing the `` isolation '' of Brexit to the policy that preceded the First World War - something he removed from the version he later published . It is understood he was planning to resign in the new year but brought it ahead when The Daily Telegraph obtained a draft of his letter to Mrs May . Although as a peer Lord Adonis is unelected , he lectures Mrs May about pursuing a Brexit policy for which she has `` no mandate '' , while saying he will `` relentlessly '' oppose the EU Withdrawal Bill in the House of Lords . Lord Adonis was made chairman of the National Infrastructure Commission by Mrs May in April , with the task of drawing together policy on roads , rail , HS2 and broadband . But he has attracted more attention for his stance on Brexit . He described it as `` self-mutilation '' and in October was accused of trying to thwart Brexit . In his letter , Lord Adonis said he was stepping down because of `` fundamental policy differences which simply ca n't be bridged '' . He said : `` The European Union Withdrawal Bill is the worst legislation of my lifetime , '' adding : `` After the narrow referendum vote for an undefined proposition to 'leave the EU ' , it could have been attempted without rupturing our essential European trade and political relations . `` However , by becoming the voice of Ukip and the extreme nationalist Rightwing of your party , you have taken a different course , for which you have no parliamentary or popular mandate . '' He predicted that Britain returning to the EU would become `` the mission of our children 's generation , who will marvel at your wanton destruction '' . He told The Times last night that he also resigned in protest at an `` indefensible '' rail franchise `` bail-out '' of the Stagecoach and Virgin east coast main lines . He told the paper : `` This will potentially cost the taxpayer billions , threatening investment and pushing rail fares higher . I doubt Mr [ Chris ] Grayling [ the Transport Secretary ] can survive in his post when the full facts about his bail-out of Stagecoach and Virgin become clear to state auditors and the media . '' In his draft letter , he also claimed that Russian aggression , the rise of nationalism in Poland and Hungary , and British isolationism was creating conditions similar to those that came before the First World War . He warned : `` No one can doubt the resonances with the past or the dangers ahead . ''
Economy 'will grow without deal ' ; The path to Brexit
THE economy will continue to grow next year even if the UK remains on a path to leave the European Union without a deal , an influential think tank said yesterday despite comparing Brexit to the Blitz . The OECD , an organisation partfunded by Britain , yesterday warned that Brexit could `` stifle growth for years to come '' and suggested a second referendum would have a `` significant '' positive impact on the economy . However , the organisation 's own forecast suggested that even in the `` least favourable scenario '' of the UK leaving without a deal in 2019 the economy will grow by 1 per cent next year . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , faced a furious response from Eurosceptic Tory MPs yesterday for helping launch the report in the Treasury . Mr Hammond tried to distance himself from the findings , insisting that the UK will leave the EU in 2019 and ruling out a second referendum . However , one Tory MP said : `` He 's associating himself with Project Fear all over again , it 's shocking behaviour . He has to go . '' Government sources suggested that Mr Hammond had been `` ambushed '' by the OECD and was unaware of the contents of the report until shortly before the launch . The OECD said there was a risk of a `` disorderly '' Brexit , in which the UK leaves without a deal , causing an `` adverse reaction '' in financial markets and pushing exchange rates to new lows . It goes on to say : `` In case Brexit gets reversed by political decision ( change of majority , new referendum , etc ) , the positive impact on growth would be significant . '' Angel Gurria , the secretary-general of the OECD , said : `` What was it Churchill said ? Keep calm and carry on . It 's like in the Blitz . Except without the bombs . '' The OECD admitted that Brexit negotiations were difficult to forecast , and could `` prove more favourable '' than assumed - boosting trade , investment and growth - but stressed that this would require `` an ambitious EUUK agreement and a transition period to allow for adjustment '' . Gisela Stuart , a leading Leave campaigner , said : `` It is laughable that the EU-funded OECD has the gall to intervene in our negotiations and call for Brexit to be reversed . Instead of trying to hijack Brexit talks , the OECD should urge its financial backers in the European Commission to negotiate in good faith and stop trying to bully the UK into submission . ''
Scotland EU official : Brexit vote 'was stupid and it could be reversed '
PEOPLE who voted for Brexit made a `` stupid '' decision which could still be reversed by the British public , one of the EU 's most powerful officials said yesterday . Martin Selmayr , chief of staff to Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission President , said it was `` legally '' possible for the UK to reverse its decision to leave . His comments were described as `` pig headed '' and he was accused of trying to meddle in the parliamentary process ahead of a week in which MPs will begin debating the EU Withdrawal Bill . The Bill will come before Parliament for its second reading on Thursday ahead of a crucial vote next week at which Labour could attempt to derail the Brexit process . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , yesterday told Tory rebels who might be considering voting with Labour to amend or delay the Bill that `` now is not the time '' to disrupt proceedings . Meanwhile Downing Street said it wanted Brexit talks to `` intensify '' to ensure a deal can be reached by the time Britain leaves the EU in March 2019 . Mr Selmayr , speaking at a conference in Brussels yesterday , said : `` Brexit is bad , and it 's a stupid decision . The only people who can reverse it would be the British people and I am not a dreamer , I am a realist . Brexit will happen on March 29 2019 . '' He said that while it was `` legally '' possible for the UK to reverse its decision , `` it would be arrogant of us '' to say the EU could force it to happen . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , said : `` His comments amount to a pig-headed denial in Brussels that Brexit is happening and a desire to be uncooperative at every step of the way . '' Mr Farage suggested that Mr Selmayr was trying to interfere in the forthcoming parliamentary vote , adding : `` He is directly appealing to the Tory rebels and the Labour Party and doing his best to upset the parliamentary process . '' Anna Soubry , a leading Tory Remainer , said suggestions that rebel Conservative MPs would try to vote down the Bill were `` absolute nonsense '' . But she said she would put her name to `` sensible '' amendments to the legislation at a later stage . She is unhappy that the Bill will give ministers so-called `` Henry VIII powers '' to alter legislation without further votes in Parliament . Mr Hammond told the BBC : `` I 'd say to backbenchers who are thinking about seeking to amend or delay the Withdrawal Bill , that now is not the time to disrupt this vitally important piece of enabling legislation . We are making progress in our discussions with the European Union . We are mapping out a course for Britain 's future . '' The next round of Brexit talks are scheduled for late September , and a spokesman for the Prime Minister said : `` We 're ready to intensify negotiations . Nothing has been formally agreed , but that is something we can discuss . Typically in negotiations as time goes on you 'll see the pace pick up , but certainly we would n't rule that out . '' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief negotiator , suggested that the talks could be delayed because Theresa May will make a major speech on Britain 's relationship with the EU in the third or fourth week of this month , but Downing Street denied there would be a delay . Mrs May will make her most important Brexit speech since January when she sets out her vision of Britain 's future dealings with the EU .
Cable holds talks with Tory MPs to frustrate Brexit ; The man likely to lead the Lib Dems says concern over negotiations has ended 'tribal differences '
THE front-runner to be the next Liberal Democrat leader has admitted he is in secret talks with Conservative MPs about frustrating Brexit . Sir Vince Cable said that he was holding informal negotiations with Tory MPs who backed Remain at the referendum about working together to soften the impact of leaving the European Union in 2019 . That came as the Lib Dems were expected to table an amendment to the Queen 's Speech to keep Britain in the single market and the customs union , and require ministers to commit to spending £350million a week on the NHS after Brexit . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has been in talks with the Democratic Unionist Party for 10 days now about its 10 MPs propping up the minority Tory Government . However , even with the backing of the DUP , it would take only seven Tory MPs to switch sides during a vote in the House of Commons to defeat the Government . Sir Vince , whose opponent for the party leadership , Ed Davey , is likely to declare today , said Tory MPs were being `` sounded out '' to see if they could work with the Lib Dems on voting against the Government on some Brexit measures . He said that the `` tribal differences between the parties have broken down '' and he wanted MPs from all parties `` to be encouraged to work together '' . Speaking to Chopper 's Brexit Podcast on The Telegraph 's website , Sir Vince said that `` informally all kinds of networks are being established and I have been sounded out by several of them '' . He said : `` There are a lot of Conservative MPs who may not have put up a flag called Remain but are very , very worried about the more extreme options on the table and would like to keep either the customs union or the single market or both . '' Sir Vince praised Ken Clarke , the veteran Tory MP who has long argued against leaving the EU . He said : `` We have to work with like-minded people across the spectrum trying to get a softer , more sensible version of Brexit . '' David Jones , the former Brexit minister who lost his job in last week 's Cab-inet reshuffle , said `` the arithmetic is challenging but I think deliverable '' in the Commons . But he said there could be `` all sorts of alliances the other way '' and the Tories could try to persuade Eurosceptic Labour MPs such as Kate Hoey or Kelvin Hopkins to vote with the Government on Brexit measures . Mr Jones told The Daily Telegraph : `` MPs from all sides should now be working to ensure a smooth and successful Brexit . Voters will not forgive politicians who are indulging in shabby games rather than supporting the Government in delivering on the referendum result . '' That came as the LibDems tabled an amendment to the Queen 's Speech designed to appeal to Tory Remain MPs to keep Britain in the single market and the customs union . But David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , indicated the UK Government will call the SNP 's bluff over threats to withhold consent for the Repeal Bill . The Scottish Secretary said it would be `` incredible '' for the Nationalists to refuse to pass a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) as this would create extraordinary `` uncertainty '' in Scotland alone . LCMs allow Westminster to pass laws that cover devolved responsibilities . He said he was `` very relaxed '' about the Scottish Parliament giving its approval to the Bill and pointed out that trying to frustrate Brexit would mean turning down extra powers repatriated from Brussels . Nicola Sturgeon later urged MSPs at First Minister 's Questions to unite behind her demand that the Scottish Parliament be formally consulted about powers repatriated from Brussels and `` this Scottish government , democratically elected , has a seat at the negotiating table so that we can properly defend Scotland 's interests '' .
Germans accused of campaign to influence election ; The Telegraph Election 2017 ; Tories believe leaks and briefings are aimed at undermining May and weakening her mandate
GERMANY has been accused by allies of Theresa May of trying to influence the General Election by undermining the Prime Minister over Brexit talks . Allies of Mrs May believe Germany , in tandem with the EU , is embarking on a new `` project fear '' by repeatedly briefing against her . Last night senior figures in Brussels even claimed that she would be barred from negotiating the terms of Brexit with her fellow EU leaders . Senior officials in the German government and in Brussels have openly mocked Mrs May or leaked sensitive information about private meetings in what is being seen as an attempt to undermine the Prime Minister . Last week Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , also suggested Britain had `` illusions '' over what it could hope to achieve from Brexit . Weakening Mrs May 's mandate with the electorate would tilt the balance in favour of the EU negotiators , and Conservative sources have suggested she is the victim of a co-ordinated plot before next month 's election . One close ally of Mrs May said : `` There is a long-standing tradition that countries do not involve themselves in the elections of other countries , and they seem to be breaking that . '' Martin Selmayr , the German chief of staff to Jean-Claude Juncker and a personal friend of Angela Merkel 's righthand man , is believed to be behind a leak that claimed Mrs May was `` deluded '' over her Brexit demands . Michael Roth , Germany 's finance minister , also sought to undermine Mrs May , using Twitter to say : `` The British government must abandon [ the ] myth that all British will be better off post-Brexit . '' And Guy Verhofstadt , the lead Brexit negotiator for the European Parliament , has openly mocked Theresa May 's negotiating skills . Picking up on her slogan of `` strong and stable leadership '' , he said : `` Any Brexit deal requires a strong & stable understanding of the complex issues involved . The clock is ticking -it 's time to get real . '' Tory MP Sir Bill Cash , chairman of the Commons European scrutiny committee , said he was `` certain '' Germany and the EU were trying to influence the election by undermining Mrs May . He said : `` What they are doing is trying to exploit a new kind of 'project fear ' and that is not going to work on the British people . They are also trying to use negotiations as a means of influencing the German general election later this year . They are playing an unwise and dangerous game and I think they have been working towards this for a long time . '' EC spokesman Margaritis Schinas said he would not comment on leaks , but added : `` I have the impression sometimes that our British friends - not all of them - do underestimate the technical difficulties we have to face ... there are issues that clearly are not understood the same way . '' Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , insisted the Government would not enter into a `` briefing war '' with Brussels . She said : `` I 'm not surprised that there is briefing coming out from different sides of a negotiation . But what we will always do is make sure that we conduct our negotiations more discreetly , shall we say , so that really we can have a freer negotiating hand . '' Yanis Varoufakis , the former Greek finance minister and an outspoken critic of the EU , told BBC Radio 4 's World At One : `` Nothing was more predictable than this kind of clash , the substantial policy and tactic of the Brussels politicians and bureaucrats of effectively stalling and constantly shifting the goalposts in any such negotiations . '' He said any attempt to negotiate a mutually beneficial deal `` is going to be defeated by the reality in Brussels '' . The EU has raised Britain 's exit bill from the bloc to ( EURO ) 100billion ( £85billion ) , according to the Financial Times . The figure , which comprises an upfront gross payment rather than the final net bill , is derived from new demands by the 27 member states , in particular France and Germany , as the EU takes a more stringent approach to UK obligations . Philip Johnston : Page 14 Editorial Comment : Page 15 'They are playing an unwise and dangerous game and they have been working towards this for a long time ' 'What they are doing is trying to exploit a new kind of 'project fear ' ... that is not going to work on Britons '
Scotland Davis admits he has no plan for Brexit without a deal
THE EU is not `` intimidated '' by the threat of no deal with the UK , Donald Tusk has warned , as the Brexit Secretary admitted that the Government has not planned for the possibility of walking away without a settlement . Mr Tusk , president of the European Council , told MEPs the outcome would be worse for Britain and the EU if an agreement for trade after Brexit was not reached . Meanwhile , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , told a committee of MPs that ministers had not assessed the implications of leaving the union without a deal . A Number 10 source was forced to stress that there was `` rigorous work going on across Government about the implications '' . Mr Davis told the Brexit select committee that it would not make sense to forecast such an outcome because ministers believed some agreement could be reached . He confirmed that leaving under World Trade Organisation rules would mean tariffs of 30-40 per cent on agricultural exports and 10 per cent on cars , the loss of European health insurance cards for travellers and passporting rights for financial firms . Asked whether he thought leaving without a deal would be bad for the UK , Mr Davis told the committee : `` I think it is not as good an outcome as a free trade , friction-free , open agreement , which is why we are trying for that . ''
Scotland Ministers to argue that Article 50 can be stopped ; Government hopes to avoid Parliamentary vote by convincing Supreme Court that Brexit is reversible
THE Government will argue that Brexit can be stopped in its Supreme Court battle over whether Parliament must be given a vote on triggering Article 50 . Senior ministerial sources have told The Daily Telegraph that lawyers will make the case that Article 50 , which formally begins the Brexit process , is in fact reversible . It would undermine a High Court ruling last week which said that Theresa May has no right to trigger Article 50 without the agreement of Parliament . The concession is embarrassing for the Government , which has until now argued that Article 50 is an unstoppable process once it is triggered . In their High Court ruling , the judges decided that because Brexit is `` irreversible '' , triggering Article 50 without first consulting Parliament would mean voters losing rights granted to them through the 1972 European Communities Act . However , if Government lawyers argue that at any point in the Brexit process MPs could vote to stop - or pause - the negotiation , then Parliament has not lost its sovereignty . `` The Government said in its argument that once you trigger Article 50 it was irreversible , '' the source said . `` Now , I personally think I do n't think that is right . I think you probably can stop Article 50 . `` Let 's say there was a massive financial crisis in Europe and the euro collapsed , you could say we are far too busy sorting that out and push the pause button on Article 50 . '' The source added : `` Let 's imagine there was a force majeure like an invasion by Russia of the Baltics or a collapse of the euro . `` The European institutions could say , 'Look , we have not got the capacity or the time to deal with this at the moment . You can either have a messy Brexit with no completed negotiation or you can pause it - there would be a lively debate in the UK about that , but I can see it as a political possibility that the whole thing could be paused if there was a crisis of that nature . '' It came as ministers and MPs reacted angrily to a Europhile plot to vote in Parliament for a second Brexit referendum . More than 80 MPs , led by Tim Farron , the Lib Dem leader , want to vote for a second referendum on the terms of Britain 's exit from the EU . Labour MPs and peers will not support the Remain supporters ' motion in Parliament , meaning it will not pass . However , it will be debated in the Commons and could prove embarrassing for the Government , particularly if Conservative rebels support Mr Farron 's plan . The SNP are believed to be preparing to support calls for a second referendum alongside 20 Labour MPs and a handful of Conservatives . David Jones , a minister in the Brexit department , said : `` Parliament voted by a margin of six to one to put the decision on whether to remain in or leave the EU in the hands of the British people . Now , because they did n't like the first answer , Liberal Democrat and Labour MPs seek to put the question all over again in hope of a different answer . '' Jacob Rees-Mogg , said : `` The problem with the Lib Dems is that they are neither liberal nor democratic . Their position is democratically and politically immature . '' Remain 's rearguard action Why Europhile MPs are ready to cause trouble Q What are Europhile MPs trying to do ? A Following the High Court ruling stating that Theresa May must consult Parliament before triggering Article 50 , a group of backbenchers promised to delay any legislation by laying down a series of amendments to any forthcoming Bill . The Prime Minister wants to trigger Article 50 by March next year and by laying down scores of amendments , Remain-supporting MPs believe that they can delay her timetable . Q Why are they calling for a second referendum ? A Until now , MPs have stopped short of demanding a second referendum , fearing a backlash from voters who backed Brexit in June 's referendum . But a group of more than 80 MPs have said they will vote in Parliament to hold a second referendum on the terms of Britain 's eventual exit from the EU . The Prime Minister has repeatedly said that any attempt to delay , stall or vote again on Brexit is an attempt to thwart the will of the British people . Can Europhile MPs derail Brexit ? A No , the Remain supporters preparing to demand a second referendum do not have the numbers in Parliament to do any lasting damage to Mrs May 's plans . Although Labour is deeply divided on Brexit , the party has said it has no intention of blocking Article 50 . That means that even with Liberal Democrats , SNP and a few Labour rebels backing their plan for a second referendum , it will never be backed by Parliament . However , the Government is facing a difficult negotiation with Brussels and knows that nearly 100 MPs openly calling for a second referendum in Parliament is damaging . Peter Dominiczak
British Jews who fled Nazis seek German papers after Brexit vote
HUNDREDS of British Jews and their descendants , who were stripped of German citizenship by the Nazis , have inquired about obtaining German passports in the wake of Britain 's vote for Brexit , figures from the German embassy in London have shown . Applications for German citizenship from dispossessed British émigré Jews and their families - which normally run at just 20 per year - have jumped sharply after the June 23 vote which cast a pall of uncertainty over Britain 's future relations with Europe . Thomas Harding , a Jewish writer whose latest work The House by the Lake tells the story of his ancestral summer home outside Berlin that was vacated after his family fled the Nazis in the 1930s , was among the first to stake his claim . `` I heard about Brexit around 6am and by 9am I had emailed the German embassy in London asking how I could go about requesting citizenship , '' he said . Under Article 116 of Germany 's Basic Law , any Jew whose citizenship was revoked by Nazi-era ordinances passed between January 1933 and May 1945 is entitled to have it restored . The rule also applies to their descendants . The German Embassy in London confirmed yesterday that it had received more than 400 inquiries in the seven weeks since the Brexit vote , at least 100 of which have already been converted into firm applications for citizenship . And there may be many more applications to come when the details of Britain 's post-Brexit relationship with Europe become clear , according to Michael Newman , the chief executive of the Association of Jewish Refugees ( AJR ) . `` Immediately after Brexit a couple of AJR members called to ask about the process but , more anecdotally , when speaking to members , there is a lot of interest in doing it , particularly if living and working in Europe post-Brexit becomes more complicated for Britons , '' he said . Mr Newman added that he had investigated seeking German citizenship himself , but his claim was complicated by the fact that his grandmother had lived in Germany but had fled for Britain using a Polish passport . The AJR estimates that about 70,000 refugees came to Britain because of Nazi oppression , many of whom made great contributions to British life , like Sir Rudolf Bing , the founder of the Edinburgh Festival , who will be honoured at a ceremony at Glyndebourne today . The AJR said it estimated that some 5,000 former victims of the Nazi era were still living in Britain , meaning that - counting their descendants - several thousand Britons would be eligible to apply for German citizenship . For many Jewish refugees and their descendants the idea of taking up German citizenship is still `` a deeply difficult dilemma '' , Mr Newman added , but the Brexit vote had opened minds to the idea .
Scotland May rules out Sturgeon 's 'veto ' over quitting EU ; New leadership ; New Prime Minister rejects First Minister 's suggestion as she issues challenge to MPs to make most of Brexit
THERESA MAY has ruled out claims by Nicola Sturgeon that Scotland will have a veto over when Britain leaves the European Union . The Prime Minister told Scotland 's First Minister on Friday that she would not start the Brexit process until she had agreed a `` UK approach '' . Ms Sturgeon later said her comments put the Scottish Government in a `` very , very strong position '' over when Britain begins the formal process of leaving the EU . Asked if Mrs May had given her a veto over triggering Article 50 , she said : `` That certainly appeared to be an interpretation that some put on the Prime Minister 's remarks after the meeting . `` And certainly from what she said after the meeting , I think that puts Scotland in now in a very , very strong position . That 's a position I am going to use as well as I can . '' But Downing Street made clear yesterday that Mrs May will have the final say on when Britain leaves the EU . The Prime Minister 's official spokeswoman said : `` The point I would make is that the Prime Minister has been clear that leaving the EU is what the British people voted for . '' She added that Mrs May 's comments on Friday `` should not be interpreted that she was suggesting Scotland had some kind of block on this [ Brexit negotiations ] '' . It came as Mrs May said Britain must not be `` defined by Brexit '' and everyone should prosper from the `` opportunities '' of leaving the EU , speaking before the first meeting of her Cabinet . The Prime Minister will today tell ministers that it is their `` duty '' to improve education and skills and ensure that social mobility is `` at the heart of my Government '' . She says that ministers must `` deliver success on behalf of everyone in the UK '' after a Brexit and not just for the `` privileged few '' . Mrs May will tomorrow travel to Berlin for her first face-to-face meeting as Prime Minister with Angela Merkel , the German chancellor . Downing Street confirmed that they will discuss Brexit despite the insistence of European leaders that no negotiations should take place until the formal process of leaving the EU has begun . She will use the meeting to insist that Britain will not turn its back on the Europe after Brexit , but instead build stronger partnerships with EU nations . Mrs May yesterday made her first visit to Wales as Prime Minister and said that she wants the Welsh Government to be `` involved and engaged '' in Brexit negotiations . She made the comments after meeting First Minister Carwyn Jones for talks in Cardiff . The new Tory leader said she recognised concerns on EU funding , and said she wanted Welsh steelmaking to continue . Ms Sturgeon has warned that a second independence referendum is `` highly likely '' following the Brexit vote after Scotland voted by 62 per cent to 38 per cent to remain in the EU . She says she is examining ways to keep Scotland in the EU while it remains part of the UK , although the idea has been dismissed as `` fanciful '' by David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary . She insists that the UK is now in `` uncharted territory '' and therefore it may be possible to find a way of Scotland retaining its status in the EU while being part of the Union . The First Minister said on Sunday that a snap second referendum was possible as early as the first half of next year if the UK Government started Brexit negotiations in December without Scotland 's position being protected . She has instructed Scottish Government officials to draft legislation for Holyrood in preparation for a second vote . Meanwhile , a former SNP leader has called for the official campaign for Scottish independence to be resurrected immediately because of the possibility of another referendum . Gordon Wilson said the revival of the Yes Scotland campaign group would enable the party to build a stronger support base for any future vote , and put pressure on the UK Government . Yes Scotland lost the 2014 referendum , after 55 per cent of Scots opted to stay in the UK . 'The Prime Minister has been clear that leaving the EU is what the British people voted for '
Brexit could drive UK into recession , warns Carney ; House prices will plunge and pound will suffer , states Bank of England in dramatic EU intervention
BRITAIN could fall into recession if it votes to leave the European Union , the Governor of the Bank of England has warned in his biggest intervention yet in the referendum debate . Mark Carney said Brexit could have a `` material economic impact '' resulting in falling house prices , rising mortgage costs and lower living standards . The Bank 's Monetary Policy Committee unanimously voted to keep interest rates at a record low of 0.5pc yesterday . The Bank cut its growth forecasts over the next three years and said household spending was likely to slow regardless of the outcome of the June referendum . Its quarterly Inflation Report said the pound , which has already fallen by 9pc against a basket of other currencies since last November , could drop `` sharply '' in the aftermath of a Brexit vote , raising import costs and pushing up prices . Mr Carney said the economy faced a `` material '' slowdown that could even push the UK into a `` technical recession '' - two consecutive quarters of falling economic output . Policymakers would face a `` challenging trade-off `` between `` stabilising inflation on the one hand '' by raising interest rates , and `` stabilising output and employment on the other '' by easing monetary policy . While Mr Carney stressed that the Bank would take `` whatever action is needed '' to stabilise the economy , he added its ability to control the fallout would be limited , adding : `` Monetary policy can not immediately offset all the effects of a shock . '' The Bank also suggested that a Brexit vote could spark violent market movements in an environment of evaporating liquidity that could lead to a credit crunch . George Osborne described Mr Carney 's intervention as `` a very big moment '' . He said Brexit was a `` lose-lose situation '' that would either reduce real incomes or `` hit the economy and jobs '' . However , Lord Lamont , a former chancellor , accused Mr Carney of talking down the economy and warned his words could trigger a crisis . While supporters of Brexit have argued that a big depreciation in sterling would help to boost the competitiveness of exporters , the Bank said the benefits of a weaker pound were `` unlikely to offset '' the drag on activity from increased uncertainty . The turbulence in financial markets would drive up funding costs for banks that would be passed on to households , pushing up consumer costs and driving down house prices . The Bank said there were further signs that uncertainty before the Brexit vote is weighing on UK output as it cut its forecasts for growth in the second quarter to 0.3pc , down from 0.5pc . It now expects the UK economy to grow by 2pc this year , from a previous forecast of 2.2pc . The Bank also said the Government 's renewed austerity drive would reduce households ' desire to dip into their savings to fund purchases , reducing the Bank 's growth forecasts to 2.3pc in both 2017 and 2018 from previous forecasts of 2.4pc and 2.5pc , respectively . Andrew Goodwin , an economist at Oxford Economics , said he expected the Bank to cut interest rates if Britain voted to leave the EU . `` The mention of the importance of growth and employment suggests that rate cuts would be squarely on the table in the event of Brexit , '' he said . `` In our short-term Brexit scenario we assumed that they would be cut to zero by the end of 2016 and we would interpret today 's commentary as being supportive of that . '' Analysis : Page 5
MPs raise no-deal border fears ; Turmoil in Europe
THE Government 's approach to preparing the UK 's borders in the event of a no-deal Brexit is `` reckless '' and based on `` wishful thinking '' , an influential committee of MPs has said . The public accounts committee ( PAC ) is warning the Government to do more or the border could be exposed from day one of the UK 's departure . In a report , the committee fears officials are working on the assumption of a post-Brexit transition period after March 2019 , which would allow time to put in place border infrastructure . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , announced in the Budget last month that he was setting aside £3billion to prepare for Brexit on top of the £700million already invested . But Meg Hillier , PAC chairman , said the Government 's approach was `` not fit for purpose '' . She said : `` Government preparations for Brexit assume that leaving the EU will present no additional border risks from freight or passengers . It has acted - or rather , not acted - on this basis . This approach ... might generously be described as cautious . But against the hard deadline of Brexit it is borderline reckless - an over-reliance on wishful thinking that risks immediately exposing the UK . '' In 2016 , 300million people and 500million tons of goods crossed the border , she added . `` After Brexit , the number of decisions required about people or goods crossing could more than treble and more than quadruple respectively . `` These figures should concern all in Government and in our view its current approach is not fit for purpose . ''
EU is secretly preparing for no deal , admits Barnier aide
THE European Union has secretly begun preparing for Britain to leave without a deal , a senior adviser to Michel Barnier has admitted . Donald Tusk , the President of the European Council , said earlier this month that EU leaders are not working on a `` no-deal '' scenario and are negotiating in `` good faith '' . Emmanuel Macron , the French President , last week accused Britain of `` bluffing '' by threatening to leave the EU without a deal . However , Stefaan de Rynck , an adviser to Mr Barnier - the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator - yesterday conceded that preparations are under way . Speaking at the Institute for Government think tank , he said : `` On advertising no deal , it is not something we want to advertise , oversell . There is a clear negative impact from no deal , I think that is clear , for both sides ... especially for the UK economy , but it is not a scenario that we want to work towards . `` We are preparing for it , that is for sure , the 27 , but it is not something we in the negotiation room want to bring in that negotiation room . '' Ministers yesterday suggested that separate Brexit legislation will be needed to cover a transition period after the UK has left the EU . Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , said that the EU withdrawal bill currently going through the Commons does not cover the transition . It means that there could be another opportunity for pro-European rebels to table amendments in a bid to frustrate the Government 's plans for Brexit . It came as Nicky Morgan , a former Cabinet minister , said that she and other pro-European Tory MPs are `` deadly serious '' about rebelling in a bid to force the Government to give Parliament a vote on the final deal before the UK leaves the EU . The European Union is expected to offer Mrs May a transition period after Brexit lasting just 20 months , it was reported yesterday . The prime minister has previously said that she wants a transition period lasting `` about '' two years , leaving open the option of it taking significantly longer . However , senior EU officials are said to have stipulated that any transition period must come to an end by Dec 31 2020 . The news is likely to be welcomed by Eurosceptics including Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , who has argued for a `` speedy '' transition . At the Exiting the European Union Committee , Mr Baker was yesterday accused of having not fully read reports about the impact of leaving the European Union on different sectors of the UK economy , but he insisted that he was kept up to date with the findings but had not read all as he had to `` ruthlessly prioritise our time '' . The prime minister has also been challenged over whether she has read the documents , which have not been made public because of official concerns they could damage the Government 's negotiating position .
Scotland UK will refuse to discuss Brexit bill as stalemate set to continue ; Tory conference fallout
BRITAIN will refuse to tell Europe how much it is prepared to pay to settle the so-called `` Brexit bill '' when negotiations re-open in Brussels next week , The Daily Telegraph can reveal , in a move that risks plunging the Brexit talks into fresh crisis . The British move comes as doubts emerged across Europe that Theresa May has the political clout to seal a Brexit deal following her disastrous party conference speech and public disagreements with Boris Johnson . Senior Whitehall sources said that negotiators will refuse to say which financial `` commitments '' Britain will honour , setting up a fresh showdown with Brussels . The UK stance was taken after it became clear EU negotiators would not open talks on a transitional deal and trade talks at this month 's European Council summit , despite Mrs May 's recent offer to pay ( EURO ) 20bn during a transition deal . `` There wo n't be any political movement from the British side on the bill until the EU broadens its package to discuss transition and the future relationship , '' said a high-placed Whitehall source , adding that the UK would seek to hold `` technical talks '' on the bill . The renewed stand-off over the EU 's demand for ( EURO ) 60bn to ( EURO ) 100bn risks shattering the fragile détente established in September 's fourth-round negotiations after Mrs May 's speech in Florence , which contained key concessions on money and citizens ' rights . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Michel Barnier , the EU chief negotiator , both described the talks as `` constructive last month , but acknowledged that major differences remained on money and the role of EU courts in policing the divorce deal . It is now clear that EU expectations that Britain would flesh out those `` commitments '' without reference to a future trade deal were misplaced . Whitehall officials now privately concede that the fundamental impasse will not be broken next week and the UK will not open the door to trade talks when Mrs May meets fellow EU leaders at the summit on Oct 19 and 20 . In the absence of a substantial discussion on money , the UK will instead field a slimmed-down team of negotiators from its usual cast of 100 Whitehall officials , The Daily Telegraph understands . The rump team will focus on a securing a handful of successes on EU citizens ' rights in order to avoid a com-plete breakdown in negotiations . `` It is damage limitation , '' said a second a Whitehall source , `` but we want as much progress as possible . '' Sources said Oliver Robbins , the UK 's senior Brexit official , will present further ideas on how to give the European Court of Justice what Mr Barnier called an `` indispensable role '' in enforcing the Brexit deal , without crossing the UK 's red lines on sovereignty . However , EU sources said that Mr Barnier would not be satisfied by the UK 's piecemeal approach , and would demand `` sufficient progress '' on all three areas - the financial settlement , citizens ' rights and Northern Ireland - before talking trade and transition . `` Two out of the three files is not acceptable . It is three out of three or nothing . You can expect him to be quite tough on that at the beginning of next week , '' one EU source said . The decision on sufficient progress will be made on the morning of Oct 20 by EU leaders , who do not expect the hurdle to be cleared and will reaffirm their support for Mr Barnier . Senior EU diplomats told The Daily Telegraph the decision to drop plans to talk about an early transition came after Mr Johnson 's public interventions on Brexit undermined EU confidence that Mrs May had the authority to make good on her own promises . `` The longer the unravelling continues in London , the less likely it is that Michel Barnier will ask for a relaxing of his mandate so he can talk about transition , '' said one diplomat . `` No one can be sure if May can keep the promises she appeared to make in Florence . '' Senior sources in the European Parliament working on Brexit added that the Tory party conference had sapped confidence in Mrs May and whether her cabinet would ever be able to decide which version of Brexit it wanted . `` The Tories have to decide what they want , now it remains undecided , so now the unrest will continue . It is not good for the negotiations , '' the source said . `` In Brussels we want clarity on what the UK and especially the Tories want . '' Mrs May 's travails in Manchester led the Confederation of German Industry to warn business to `` prepare for a very hard Brexit '' . Joachim Lang , the head of the influential group , said the UK Government `` talks plenty '' but has `` no clear plan '' , and it would be `` naive '' for German businesses not to start planning for a hard Brexit . He also criticised the UK 's proposals on future customs agreements as `` unreasonably bureaucratic '' and `` not practical for businesses on a daily basis '' . Theresa Griffin , a Labour MEP , said that Mrs May 's inability to control her team had left the EU `` bewildered and frustrated '' with the impasse in London . `` Conservative infighting has left the EU confused and unclear about the UK 's position , '' she said . Andrew Duff , a former liberal MEP now at the European Policy Centre think-tank , said that the European Commission was positive that Mrs May had not resiled from the promises made in her Florence speech , and was still looking to her to survive . `` Desperate as they find the UK team of May and Davis to be , the alternative , in the form of Boris Johnson , is worse . '' he said . `` But it will need a stunning performance by David Davis next week to rescue her . '' 'The Tories have to decide what they want . In Brussels we want clarity on what the UK and especially the Tories want '
Juncker snubs Britain as he pushes for greater EU integration
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER will today use a flagship speech to snub Britain and insist that , despite Brexit , the European Union will move towards greater integration . The Daily Telegraph can reveal that Mr Juncker 's top aide Martin Selmayr told a meeting of EU diplomats that European Union countries that wish to remain at the `` core '' of the European project after Brexit will have to join the euro . The president of the European Commission is expected barely to mention Brexit in his State of the Union address in the European Parliament in Strasbourg , with the focus overwhelmingly on the future of the EU without Britain . Theresa May was mocked yesterday by European Parliament leaders after she refused to face all 751 MEPs in a debate on Brexit . She will instead address the behind-closed-doors conference of the chiefs of EU political groups . Philippe Lamberts , the Belgian copresident of the European Greens , said that Mrs May was right to avoid the plenary session , because she was `` a lady out of her depth '' . It emerged yesterday that the planned fourth round of Brexit negotiations next week were to be postponed until Sept 25 . During a meeting of EU deputy-ambassadors at a private dinner last week , Mr Selmayr said that `` 85 per cent of EU citizens '' would be living in eurozone countries after Brexit and that these would probably become the core of the new Union . He promised there would be `` more Schengen , more banking union , more eurozone and the prospect of enlargement in 2025 for the Balkans , '' said sources reporting on the dinner . According to a confidential diplomatic readout of the meeting , both the Czech Republic and Hungary challenged the idea that the eurozone countries should form the new core of the EU after Brexit , arguing instead for a more inclusive approach .
Scotland May warned of looming Brexit constitutional crisis ; Labour and Liberal Democrats threaten to derail Government 's EU exit plan in the Lords ; Labour and LibDems will move to bring down the Government
THERESA MAY is facing a constitutional crisis after Labour and the Liberal Democrats threatened to use the House of Lords to water down Brexit . The Prime Minister is facing a battle to get the crucial legislation through the upper chamber after it emerged that peers may seek to ignore a 72-year convention and block new laws paving the way for Britain leaving the single market and EU customs union . The Salisbury Convention states that manifesto commitments made by a governing party should not be blocked or significantly altered by the Lords . However , within hours of yesterday 's Queen Speech , which set out the various Brexit bills to be presented before Parliament in the coming months - opposition parties began to argue that the convention does not apply as Mrs May did not win a majority and has not agreed to govern in coalition . The legitimacy of the convention is set to spark a major constitutional row between legal experts . Meanwhile , the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) is demanding that a separate vote be held in Scotland to determine whether Mrs May can repeal EU laws - a crucial step in the Brexit process . Downing Street said last night that the legal role of the Scottish Parliament was also still being considered . The growing constitutional row over Brexit has added to the pressure on the Prime Minister to secure a formal deal with the Democratic Unionist Party ( DUP ) that would add to the legitimacy of her Government . Yesterday , as the talks continued to drag on , it emerged that the DUP was demanding a £2 billion payment to Northern Ireland , and a guarantee to end austerity , as the price of the deal . Mrs May put Brexit at the heart of her agenda as she set out her plans for the next two years , but the Prime Minister was forced to abandon flagship policies including new grammar schools and plans to pay for social care . The Queen delivered yesterday 's speech with the Prince of Wales by her side after the Duke of Edinburgh was taken to hospital on Tuesday night suffering from an infection caused by a pre-existing condition . Addressing the House of Commons , the Prime Minister acknowledged that she now faced a divided country but said she was determined to `` see Brexit through '' . `` The election showed that , as it faces the big challenges of our future , our country is divided - red versus blue , young versus old , Leave versus Remain , '' she said . `` The test for all of us is whether we choose to reflect divisions or help the country overcome them . With humility and resolve , this Government will seek to do the latter . `` We will do what is in the national interest and we will work with anyone in any party that is prepared to do the same . '' She also pledged to `` seek to build a wide consensus '' on the Brexit negotiations amid calls for her to soften her plans . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , Continued on Page 4 INSIDE Reports Pages 4-7 David Owen Page 16 Editorial Comment Page 17 Juliet Samuel Page 17 Continued from Page 1 backs the Prime Minister 's agenda and questions whether Labour would try to block the result of the referendum . `` Will they try to frustrate the will of the people , and block the Brexit bills ? '' he says . `` The Tories got 56 more seats than Labour . We will ... govern the country with drive and determination , and these measures deserve support . '' Last night , Mr Johnson ruled out running for the Tory leadership until Brexit is delivered in 2019 . He said he would not run while negotiations were ongoing , telling Channel 4 News `` we have to get on and deliver on the priorities of the people '' . The Prime Minister flies to Brussels today for what EU officials have warned could be a `` humiliating '' encounter when she holds talks on Brexit with EU leaders for the first time since losing her majority . She will set out plans to give EU citizens legal rights in this country after Brexit to help curry favour with her European counterparts . Mrs May will be given a short slot at a summit dinner before being escorted from the room while Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council , updates the other 27 leaders on last Monday 's opening day of Brexit talks . A formal paper setting out the UK plan is expected on Monday . EU diplomats warned Mrs May could expect a muted reception at the dinner , in part as a signal that she will not be allowed to circumvent the multilateral negotiating process led by Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator . `` The election has thrown the entire process back up in the air , and no one thanks Mrs May for that , '' a senior EU diplomat who will attend the talks told the Telegraph . `` The reality is that no one knows where Britain stands - or indeed will stand - on the key issues . We want to get on with it . '' Mrs May now faces a series of potential roadblocks before her key Brexit policies can be enshrined in law , in a move which will further weaken her negotiating hand in Brussels . The biggest hurdle in her path appears to be a row over whether peers are duty-bound to back new laws that were promised in the Tory manifesto . Downing Street 's own legal advice on the Salisbury Convention was that it still applied , but a joint Commons and Lords commission in 2006 failed to reach any conclusion in the case of minority governments . Liberal Democrat peers insisted yesterday that they were not bound by the convention , and a Labour source in the Lords said that while its policy was that `` the will of the Commons must be respected '' , individual Labour peers could decide to follow the example of the Liberal Democrats . The Conservatives have only 254 of the 808 members of the Lords , meaning the upper chamber could hold up legislation by repeatedly amending it and sending it back to the Commons . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , made clear his own plans to exploit Mrs May 's weak position as he told the Commons : `` We will use every opportunity to vote down government policies that failed to win public support ... we are ready to offer real strong and stable leadership in the interests of the many not the few . And we will test this Government 's Brexit strategy , and what legislation comes forward , against that standard . '' In the Commons , the LibDems and Labour will try to bring down the Government within the week by tabling amendments they hope will defeat the Queen 's Speech . In Scotland , Nicola Sturgeon is to demand the right for a vote in Holyrood on the Repeal Bill and other legislation in the Queen 's Speech . 'We will use every opportunity to vote down government policies that failed to win public support '
Britain on the threshold of Brexit as MPs vote down Lords ' amendments ; Brexit : Parliament
BRITAIN stands on the threshold of the `` most important negotiation for a generation '' after Parliament gave Theresa May the power to trigger Brexit , the Secretary of State for Exiting the EU , David Davis , has said Last night the Government 's Brexit Bill cleared though both Houses of Parliament , paving the way for the Prime Minister to trigger Article 50 . Peers in the House of Lords backed down and accepted the supremacy of elected MPs after the Commons rejected amendments on the issue of giving MPs a `` meaningful vote '' on the final Brexit deal and guaranteeing the rights of EU citizens . Speaking after the result , Mr Davis said : `` Parliament has today backed the Government in its determination to get on with the job of leaving the EU and negotiating a positive new partnership with its remaining member states . `` We have a plan to build a Global Britain , and take advantage of its new place in the world by forging new trading links . `` So we will trigger Article 50 by the end of this month , as planned , and deliver an outcome that works in the interests of the whole of the UK . '' Earlier Mrs May had quashed a rebellion by pro-European Conservatives as MPs voted overwhelmingly to reject the House of Lords amendments . Up to a dozen Conservative MPs had threatened to rebel and back the `` meaningful vote '' amendment . However , Mrs May enjoyed a significant boost after not a single Conservative MP voted against the Government on the issue and just 11 abstained . The Government defeated the meaningful vote amendment by 331 to 286 and the migrant rights amendments by 335 to 287 . It came after Mr Davis warned MPs that committing to a meaningful vote would hinder the Government 's ability to `` walk away '' from a deal that seeks to `` punish '' the UK . He said that the Government would not block a parliamentary vote on Brexit if the UK left without a deal . However , his comments were not enough to persuade Tory rebels . Dominic Grieve , the former Attorney General , said that trying to stop Parliament from having a vote on leaving the EU without a deal would be `` deranged '' . He said it was `` inevitable '' that the Government would have to present its Brexit deal to Parliament , adding that he found the refusal to commit to a vote `` a bit odd '' . On the subject of the rights of EU citizens living in the UK and Britons living in Europe , Mr Davis said Britain has a `` moral responsibility '' to protect them both . He warned that the House of Lords amendment to force the UK to `` unilaterally '' guarantee the rights of EU migrants living here would undermine Britain 's negotiating hand and jeopardise the rights of British citizens living in the EU . However , Mr Davis said that he was determined there would be a `` swift '' agreement on migrant rights once Article 50 is triggered and Britain begins the formal process of exiting the EU . Around 3.2 million EU citizens live in the UK , while more than a million British expats reside in other EU member states . Mr Davis said : `` That is why we must pass this straightforward Bill without further delay so the Prime Minister can get to work on the negotiations and we can secure a quick deal that secures the status of both European Union citizens in the UK and also UK nationals living in the EU , of which there are around one million . `` We take very seriously , I take very seriously our moral responsibility to all four million United Kingdom and European Union citizens . '' Two Tory MPs openly rebelled against the Government while around a dozen abstained on the amendment .
King : MPs ' attitude made Brexit inevitable ; Politicians and elites treated public as 'British equivalent of deplorables ' , says former bank governor
BRITISH politicians have `` lost touch '' with their voters and attempts by the London elite to suppress the EU debate made the referendum on membership that led to the Brexit vote `` inevitable '' , Mervyn King has said . The former governor of the Bank of England said he `` resent [ ed ] '' suggestions by friends and acquaintances that Britons who `` even contemplated '' voting for Brexit were `` ignorant '' or `` racist '' . He described the backlash as `` the British equivalent of the deplorables '' - the term used by US presidential candidate Hillary Clinton to describe half of Donald Trump 's supporters Lord King said the `` striking '' difference between voting patterns in London , Scotland and Northern Ireland compared with the rest of the UK in the June vote highlighted a stark divide between the capital and the majority of English regions in the debate . `` That gap between London and the rest of the country was something that I , living outside , noticed but all my friends in London did n't really appreciate , '' he told an audience at the London School of Economics last night . `` I [ was ] told , but if you even contemplate voting for Brexit , you must be either ignorant , uneducated , stupid or racist . [ My ] response was : I 'm none of those , and I resent being described in those terms . `` It was the British equivalent of the deplorables . And I think the reaction against it did play some role [ in the Brexit vote ] . '' Lord King , who retired from the Bank of England in 2013 after a decade as governor , has said the vote to leave the EU represents `` real opportunities '' for economic reform and has also called for a hard Brexit where the UK leaves the single market of goods and services . Theresa May , the prime minister said last month that the UK `` can not possibly '' remain in the single market . Lord King has also signalled that the country would be better off outside the customs union . He said the Brexit vote and the election of Mr Trump as US president `` raised questions '' over whether `` the [ political ] parties we have at present - in the US or the UK - actually have lost touch '' . He added : `` Why they were created in the first place no longer seems relevant , and it 's more difficult to see what each party stands for , hence the rise of people who could represent one party or another but see themselves as the individual who can save the country . '' Lord King said he believed pressure for the EU referendum stemmed from an existing political party system that `` does not give people a chance to vote on issues they really care about '' . The main parties ' failure to address public concern about aspects of EU membership saw `` demands for a referendum grow and grow '' and led to the rise of Ukip , which received 3.9 million votes in the 2015 general election , he added . `` Where you 've seen that in the UK is exactly on those issues where parties in a sense suppressed the debate ... And in the end it may well have been inevitable either that there was a referendum or that one of the parties would have had to represent in a very clear way their position on the EU and give people a chance to vote on it . '' He described the election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader by the party 's members amid a backlash by his own MPs as `` odd '' . `` I think this could be a sign of the future - that people become very nervous about the idea that so-called direct democracy may not be the best way of giving the country a choice between both parties and leaders . So rather than turn it into a personality contest [ there could be attempts ] to try to give greater weight to the professional party politicians in helping to choose a leader . ''
Scotland Souter dismisses SNP fears over Brexit ; Souter says Brexit can be positive 'if we have guts '
THE SNP 's most prominent business supporter yesterday undermined Nicola Sturgeon 's warnings that Brexit will inflict economic devastation on Scotland and the UK by stating it is `` not as big a deal as people are making out . '' Sir Brian Souter , the Stagecoach transport tycoon , said critics of the EU referendum decision are `` overestimating the damage '' and Britain could be in a `` positive place '' if there is a deal for the financial services sector . The entrepreneur told an audience of business leaders in Edinburgh than Brexit will not have as large an impact as the financial crash and that voters backed the Leave campaign because they `` did not want to be part of a European superstate '' . Although he denied being a `` Brexiteer '' and said he could not make up his mind how to vote in the referendum , Sir Brian said the UK could make a success of Brexit if `` we have the guts to make our own way in the world '' . The Scottish Conservatives welcomed the intervention of the longstanding SNP donor , who is estimated to be worth around £1 billion , as `` a much needed dose of reality '' in contrast to the SNP 's `` doom-mongering '' . It follows a series of pessimistic predictions by Ms Sturgeon about the impact of the vote and a threat to call a second independence referendum if Scotland is not kept in the EU single market . The First Minister has warned that she will not `` stand back and see Scotland being driven off a hard Brexit cliff edge '' and her government has published an analysis claiming Scottish GDP could be £11 billion lower by 2030 than it would have been without the Leave vote . However , she has so far refused to order an analysis on the impact of leaving the UK single market , which is worth more than four times as much to Scottish exporters . Addressing a Virgin Start-Up meeting in Edinburgh , Sir Brian said there were other trade links open to Britain but he questioned whether the country 's political leaders were up to the task of delivering them . Sir Brian , the co-founder and chairman of Stagecoach , said : `` I am not so negative on Brexit as others seem to be . `` There will be some challenges , but our currency has adjusted ... I just think we are overestimating the damage . Provided we get a settlement for our financial services sector we could be in a positive place . '' He added : `` It [ Brexit ] is not as big a deal as people think . It will not have the impact that the financial crash , or a war in the Middle East will have on us . '' Sir Brian accused both sides of the referendum campaign of being `` hysterical and polarised '' and said the Leave side had emerged victorious because voters were suspicious of politicians and the EU . `` They wanted the project revisited and changed . They did not necessarily Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 want to pull out . But it may prove to be good for Europe . We may end up with a sensible agreement , '' the Daily Business website reported him as saying . `` There is a whole world of trade relationships out there . The question is whether we have the guts to make our own way in the world now we are out of this club . '' As well as donating £2.5 million to the SNP , Sir Brian gave £1 million to the Yes side in the 2014 independence referendum campaign . Murdo Fraser , the Scottish Tories ' Shadow Finance Minister , said : `` The SNP has been doom-mongering about Brexit since day one , all in the hope that they can use our decision to leave the EU to push up support for independence . `` Sir Brian 's intervention is therefore very welcome and adds a much needed dose of reality to the debate . '' A SNP spokesman said : `` Brexit is far and away the biggest threat to Scotland 's economy , jobs and long-term prosperity , with a potential cost of up to £11.2 billion per year by 2030 and up to 80,000 lost jobs over the next decade . ''
Welfare bill will ensure Brexit works for animals too , says Gove
BREXIT will help Britain improve animal welfare standards and combat problems such as puppy smuggling , Michael Gove has said . The Environment Secretary said it was `` good news '' that an agreement had been reached in the first stage of negotiations over Britain 's departure from the European Union , adding that the focus could now turn to trade and the positive outcomes of leaving . His comments came as a draft bill , enshrining animal sentience into UK law post- Brexit and introducing jail sentences of up to five years for animal abusers , was published . The plans are part of Government efforts to ensure that Brexit works `` not just for citizens but for the animals we love and cherish too '' , Mr Gove said . Speaking during a visit to Battersea Dogs and Cats Home in London on Monday , he told the Press Association : `` I think it 's good news that we 've got an agreement to move to the next stage of the Brexit negotiations , where we can talk about trade and talk about some of the changes that will work in Britain 's interest . `` I 'm glad that we 're now at this stage because actually Britain outside the EU can have higher standards on the environment and on animal welfare . `` One of the reasons why people voted to leave is to make sure that we have the rules which ensure there is appropriate welfare and protection for animals and for humans . '' The draft bill says the Government `` must have regard to the welfare needs of animals as sentient beings in formulating and implementing government policy '' . It also increases the maximum prison sentence for animal cruelty from six months to five years in England and Wales . PA
Scotland Davis refuses to back May as 'writer of Brexit final chapter '
DAVID DAVIS has said he does not expect another election within the next five years but he declined to confirm that Theresa May would `` write the final chapter in Brexit '' . At a speech in Washington , the Brexit Secretary also admitted that the latest round of Brussels talks had been `` tense '' and added that he expected more `` turbulent '' times ahead . Asked how long the current Government will remain in power and whether the Prime Minister would write the final chapter as the UK leaves the EU , Mr Davis said it is his `` expectation '' that there will not be another snap election . He told the US Chamber of Commerce : `` We have changed our structure recently . It used to be prime ministers would call the election whenever they like . Now we have a five-year [ term ] which makes it actually quite difficult . '' But in response to the second part of the question the Brexit Secretary gave a garbled response . `` The real issue on Brexit is mostly practical . What deal we need , what can we sell to the other European countries , what 's in the mutual best interest of all of us ? And that 's the driver . It 's the same driver within the parliamentary ... there is a majority to carry through Brexit in the UK Parliament and it will get done , '' he said . The response will prompt questions about whether Mrs May can , as she announced in Japan this week , lead the Conservatives into the next election . Mr Davis also revealed he was `` proud '' of being called a `` charming b -- -- -- '' after a confrontational press conference with the EU 's chief negotiator Michel Barnier . `` I have said from the beginning it will be turbulent . ''
Boris : EU can 'go whistle ' over £50bn Brexit demand ; 'Extortionate ' divorce bill comments laughed off by David Davis who will go through claim line by line
BORIS JOHNSON has said that the European Union can `` go whistle '' over its `` extortionate '' demands for a £50billion Brexit divorce bill . The Foreign Secretary was asked by a Eurosceptic Conservative MP to tell Brussels that the UK does not owe a `` penny piece more '' after decades of contributions to the EU 's budget . Mr Johnson replied : `` I 'm sure that your words will have broken like a thunderclap over Brussels and they will pay attention to what you have said . `` He makes a very valid point and I think that the sums that I have seen that they propose to demand from this country seem to me to be extortionate and I think 'to go whistle ' is an entirely appropriate expression . '' Mr Johnson has previously suggested that Brussels could end up having to pay a bill to Britain because the UK has contributed to so many EU assets . The Foreign Secretary also said yesterday that Britain was not making contingency plans for Brexit negotiations breaking down without a deal because `` we are going to get a great deal '' . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , claimed that Mr Johnson 's `` silly '' language risked jeopardising negotiations with the EU . However , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , laughed off the comments and said the UK was already challenging whether it was legally obliged to pay a divorce bill at all . Mr Davis said the strategy was `` not to pay more than we need to '' and that Britain would not accept the EU 's `` first claim '' without going through it line by line . He told the House of Lords European Union select committee : `` There will be a process of challenge going on here , and that will happen and has started already in the negotiated process to establish whether or not we believe they have made a legally defensible argument or not . '' Asked about Mr Johnson 's comments , the Brexit Secretary laughed before telling peers : `` Bluntly , I would n't worry . I mean you will have to get the Foreign Secretary here to explain his views if you really wanted to . '' Mr Davis told the committee that all of the British newspapers were read in Brussels and they `` take them , if anything , too seriously '' . Mr Davis said Michel Barnier , the European Union 's chief Brexit negotiator , was a principled man who was `` very French , very logical , tough but not wholly inflexible '' . He suggested that Emmanuel Macron , the French president , who is considered one of the most difficult figures in Brexit negotiations , in fact wants to prioritise a deal . He said that there was unlikely to be a `` domino '' effect for other EU nations in the wake of Britain 's vote to leave the European Union . Mr Davis also rejected claims that the Government had softened its stance on Brexit since the election , and suggested that European residents will still be able to take complaints about Britain 's use of the European Arrest Warrant to the European Court of Justice after the withdrawal . Despite a series of Cabinet rows , Mr Davis insisted that there was not `` a cigarette paper '' in difference between him and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , over Brexit . 'I 'm sure that your words will have broken like a thunderclap over Brussels and they will pay attention '
Labour 's Remain MPs say they wo n't back Corbyn ; Rebels fear they will be unelectable in the next election if they go against constituents ' wishes
JEREMY CORBYN was facing an increasingly divided Labour Party last night after Remain-supporting MPs warned they can not back his position on Brexit because their constituents do not support it . MPs in pro-Remain constituencies said they can not vote in favour of the leader 's position on leaving the European Union - which is seen as increasingly hardline - for fear of losing their seats in another general election . Their admission means the deep split is likely to widen in the coming weeks unless Labour can reconcile the two opposing viewpoints . It follows a rebellion by 49 Labour MPs over an amendment calling for the Government to retain access to the single market after Brexit which weakened Mr Corbyn 's ability to oppose Theresa May 's plans . It was led by a group of Remain-supporting Labour MPs , many of whom have already received letters and emails calling on them to support Liberal Democrat efforts to soften the UK 's exit , sources told The Daily Telegraph . They warned of growing frustration and a determination to act as a backstop against dropping out of the single market , putting Labour MPs on a collision course with Mr Corbyn who has said the UK should leave the market . The rift highlights a growing chasm within the party , which is yet to reconcile the fact that it won swathes of seats in the general election with the backing of pro-remain constituents who do not support the party 's official line . Earlier this week the leader was forced to sack three members of his shadow cabinet after the MPs voted in favour of the amendment put forward by Chuka Umunna . Ruth Cadbury , Catherine West and Andy Slaughter all left the front-bench team after backing the call for Britain to remain inside the single market and customs union after Brexit , despite the party 's official position being that the UK must leave these institutions . A party source revealed there is a growing split between Labour MPs who represent Remain-leaning constituencies and those whose electorate are staunchly behind Brexit . They fear that backing the official line will make them unelectable at the next ballot . Another source claimed the leader 's office is `` not receptive '' to concern among Labour MPs who are unable to support the hard-line position on Brexit because of the pressure they are under in their constituencies . It is failing to address the issue , MPs said . Staying inside the single market is known as a soft Brexit position but it is widely thought to be untenable because it would also force the UK to retain freedom of movement rights for EU nationals . Pro-Leave MPs claim voters backed Brexit in order to control the UK 's borders . A Labour MP said Mr Corbyn 's amendment to the Queen 's Speech on Brexit , which did not pass , was `` too weak '' and that many in the party are frustrated at the lack of opposition to Theresa May 's plans . It came as Tom Watson , the party 's deputy leader , said Mr Umunna 's amendment , which also failed to pass a House of Commons vote , was `` unnecessary '' and `` unhelpful '' . He told Channel 4 that he was `` very disappointed '' at Mr Umunna 's decision , adding : `` To break away like that is politically unhelpful at a time when the entire Labour Party is buzzing because we did far better in the General Election . I just hope we can come back together very quickly . '' Last night the shadow Brexit secretary said Labour would pay for access to the European single market and appeared to question the merits of leaving the customs union amid a fresh bout of party infighting over Brexit . Sir Keir Starmer said a Labour government would cut the amount of money the UK sends to the EU , but stressed it was `` inevitable '' the country would have to pay for access to the single market after leaving it . Editorial Comment : Page 19
Ministers must listen to the business community ; Discussions on how , when and - even if - we Brexit should not be left to politicians alone who have only proved they ca n't be trusted
By the end of last year 's bitter European Union referendum campaign , Lord Rose of Monewden was nowhere to be seen . The leader of the cross-party `` Britain Stronger In Europe '' group , which led the cheerleading to stay in the continental bloc , was missing in action in the weeks that immediately led up to June 23 2016 . So calamitous had his unveiling been back in October 2015 - alongside one-time TV presenter June Sarpong and Green Party leader Caroline Lucas - that come the culmination of the months of claim and counter-claim , the Remain campaign felt it wiser to roll out Home Secretary Amber Rudd and even then Prime Minister David Cameron to make their case , than leave it in the hands of the former Marks & Spencer boss . And they were probably right to do so . By late January , before the Referendum date had even been set , he could n't even remember what his campaign was called . He told a Sky News interviewer he was representing the `` Stay in Britain , Better in Britain campaign , '' before correcting himself twice , and opting for the `` Better Stay in Britain '' campaign . It did n't get any better as the vote drew closer , telling the Commons Treasury select committee that wages would rise were Britain to leave the EU , while later confusing Sweden for Switzerland at a public event when discussing countries that had a bad deal outside the bloc . Funny then that in the wake of last week 's uncertain election result , which suggests to some that a softer Brexit is on the cards , Lord Rose appeared on our airwaves discussing which way now for our impending EU exit . Slightly more on message one year on , he said it was `` too simplistic '' to say the result of the general election was a vote for softer Brexit , but said that the slowing economy had perhaps led parts of the electorate to question their referendum ballot . His latest intervention , unremarkable as it is in that he did n't say anything that others have not already , is a reminder that since the referendum , the voice of business has been largely ignored . As I wrote a fortnight ago in this column , the sevenweek election campaign was the first in living memory in which neither of the main political parties cozied up to the business fraternity . Partly the result of the ethos of the two main leaders , partly the result of the public 's continuing mistrust of all things corporate , there was perceived to be no votes in offering olive branches to any parts of the business world . But just as the election result put paid to the work of the majority of pollsters , so it also , in my opinion , marked the end of suggestions that business must be beaten with a sharp stick . If the lobby rumour mill is to be believed , what will be left of the Conservatives ' Queen 's Speech - should we get that far - will not contain the mooted price cap on energy companies nor the corporate bashing with which Theresa May seemed to want to become involved in her much-maligned manifesto . And in much the same way , the Government 's approach to the upcoming Brexit negotiations must now soften . Whether a hard , medium or soft Brexit is on the cards , the election result - which delivered no real winner - suggests that the economy as a whole would benefit from a conversation around how we exit the European Union , rather than a diktat from No 10 . As well as being cross-party , as Lord Hague suggested in this newspaper earlier this week , that conversation must now include the business community . For having been thrust into uncertainty in the wake of the referendum result and the prolonged seven-month wait until Mrs May confirmed exactly what Brexit meant in January , spare a thought - go on , I dare you - for how business executives must now be feeling . What seemed a certainty - a UK out of the single market , out of the customs union - now is not quite that . Chancellor Philip Hammond is said to be minded to push the Prime Minister to keep the UK in the customs union . So where does that leave those planning for Brexit ? The answer is that , despite the rhetoric , and despite the suggestion from European politicians of a year extension to the negotiations , little has changed . Large , particularly foreign , companies planning to gain licences in EU nations or move portions of staff further afield are likely still to do so . The added uncertainty caused by the general election - and the sense that our continental neighbours are stronger ( economically ) and more stable ( politically ) will only accelerate such decisions . Smaller companies with less time and less resource to ponder the impossible will simply be left in limbo , and be just as unclear on where they will be to export to and operate in come April 2019 as they were before last week 's vote . That does not mean that the voice of business should not be heard in the ensuing discussions on how we Brexit and when we Brexit - dare I even say , if we Brexit ? Clearly Lord Rose should n't be at the front of the queue when any Brexit business liaison committee - please do n't let it be called that - is formed . But , given our politicians clearly ca n't be trusted , we need grown ups . And we need them soon . james.quinn @ telegraph.co.uk 'The approach to the upcoming Brexit negotiations must soften '
Best Brexit deal 'worthless ' unless politicians focus on economy
A LEADING UK business group has warned that the best Brexit deal `` wo n't be worth the paper it 's written on '' if politicians fail to address the country 's chronic skills shortage and create a globally competitive business environment . The British Chambers of Commerce ( BCC ) warned politicians not to lose sight of the economy as the UK prepares to enter Brexit negotiations . It urged parties across the political spectrum to focus on five key areas - Brexit , devolution , the business environment , infrastructure and trade - to support economic growth and boost living standards across the UK . The BCC said it was vital that MPs `` deliver the third runway at Heathrow '' as well as maximise the economic potential of other airports across the UK so that the country can `` compete effectively on the world stage , encouraging inward investment , attracting tourists and increasing employment . '' The BCC said a positive Brexit deal would be underpinned by `` frictionless future trade arrangements with the EU '' and continued access to talent . It urged the Government to work with the business community to ensure the smooth implementation of future customs procedures and rules of origin and `` guarantee the UK 's position as a global distribution hub '' . Upgrading Britain 's physical and digital infrastructure and a focus on devolution deals that empowered regions were also key , the BCC said . It urged policymakers to foster a `` globally competitive business environment '' with a stable tax system and no new upfront taxes on businesses for the next five years . Speeding up the planning process to address the housing crisis while ensuring enough office space for fast growing companies was also a priority , it said . Adam Marshall , director general of the BCC , said : `` While businesses all across the UK want a good Brexit deal , they are very clear that decisions taken here at home matter as much - if not more - to our future growth prospects . 'The best possible Brexit deal wo n't be worth the paper it 's written on if firms can not recruit and train the right people ' , get decent digital connectivity , or get their goods to their market . '' Green levies should be kept at a `` minimum '' , the business group warned , as it said adding to the burden already imposed on industry would harm its competitiveness . `` The next government should incentivise energy efficiency measures , whilst keeping environment taxes and costs to a minimum to ensure our energy-intensive industries remain internationally competitive . '' 'The best possible Brexit deal wo n't be worth the paper it 's written on if firms can not recruit and train the right people '
The airlines flying into turbulence over Brexit ; Shareholder nationality could become crucial to avoid disruption , writes
UK-based airlines are clamouring to be at the front of the queue when negotiations over Brexit begin earnest . Meetings have been taking place between European Union officials and airlines in recent weeks in an attempt to flesh out the issues that need to be tackled for the travel sector . There has been mounting concern from the airline industry that it could be hobbled if discussions between the UK and the EU turn acrimonious . The issue of Brexit is particularly acute for the airline industry given existing agreements allow companies to fly between the UK and EU - as well as between mainland European countries - and these will need be renegotiated before the UK formally exits the bloc . A key sticking point is that the agreement , known in the industry as EU Open Skies , is overseen by the European Court of Justice , but Theresa May , the Prime Minister , wants Britain to be unencumbered by ECJ rulings . Most airlines have some form of contingency planning in place , and in many cases this is now being acted upon . EasyJet The Luton-based company could be viewed as the most exposed to a hard Brexit because it is based in the UK and has only a UK and a Swiss air operator certificate , or AOC . The UK AOC , as things stand , allows the company to fly between the UK and EU countries ( and vice versa ) as well as between EU states . To fly between EU states post-Brexit , it is likely to need another AOC , because Switzerland is not a member of the EU . Just weeks after the EU referendum in June easyJet said it was in the process of applying for an EU AOC , which should be enough to allow it to operate intra-European flights after March 2019 . Currently only EU-owned airlines can operate flights within the EU - this means that 50.1pc of shareholders must be based in Europe . There is some flexibility to this geographic limit : for example Norwegian Air is based in Norway , which is outside the EU . However it should be noted that Norway sits within what is known as the European Economic Area , which includes all EU countries as well as Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway , allowing the three latter nations to be part of the EU 's single market . It is increasingly unlikely that the UK will be a member of single market after Brexit . Liberum transport analyst Gerald Khoo said the ownership and control structure that easyJet would be using - having multiple AOCs and operating companies - would be the same as that of Air France-KLM . Therefore , `` if easyJet 's arrangements are challenged successfully [ by the EU ] , Air France-KLM would have to be broken up too '' . A spokesman for easyJet said the company 's headquarters would remain in the UK post-Brexit and that it was 49pc owned by European shareholders at present , so crossing the 50.1pc threshold under European ownership rules should be simple enough to do . Ryanair The low-cost giant is already based in Dublin and will therefore remain an EU company even once Brexit is done and dusted . This means the Irish carrier will not have any problems with its flights between EU states . However the UK is an important market for the airline and so it will be hoping for the existing regulations to be replicated to ensure barrier-free flying between Britain and the EU . If this does not happen and the existing EU Open Skies policy is not replicated , it might need to apply for a domestic UK AOC to fly its intra-UK routes . A potential issue for the company is the make-up of its shareholders , over half of which must be in the EU for it to operate as before . Once the UK leaves the EU , the percentage of EU-based owners on the Ryanair register could drop , as much of its shareholder base consists of UK-based institutions . To get around this , any fund managers holding the stock could simply switch ownership from one of their UK-domiciled retail funds , sometimes known as Oeics or uni trusts , into either Irish- or Luxembourg-based equivalents , often known as Sicavs . IAG British Airways , owned by International Airlines Group , does not fly any intra-continental routes and so would not be hit if the EU prevented UK airlines flying within the confines of the bloc after March 2019 . Furthermore , IAG 's other airlines include Spanish-based Iberia and Vueling , as well as Ireland-based Aer Lingus , meaning the wider group already possesses permission to fly within Europe . As for ownership , IAG is the listed entity and trades on both the London Stock Exchange and Madrid bourse thanks to its Spanish registered office . The company declined to provide a breakdown by nationality of its shareholders but it said it would comply with EU regulations . Qatar Airways owns 20pc of IAG , but it does so via its Luxembourgbased company , something that is likely to help it maintain the necessary 50.1pc ownership by EU-based investors to continue its operations . Uncertain flightpath Industry wants contingencies for worst-case scenario It 's important to note the mutual benefits of barrier-free travel between the UK and Europe post-Brexit - and this is something that is acknowledged by various parties on either side of the Channel . Brussels-based ACI Europe , an arm of industry group Airports Council International , has expressed concern about the uncertainty created for the aviation industry by the Brexit . Olivier Jankovec , director general of ACI Europe , told its annual London conference this week : `` As responsible businesses , at this stage we simply can not rule out a cliff-edged scenario for Brexit and aviation . The potential impact of this on air connectivity , consumers and the wider economy needs to be addressed by Brexit negotiators - on both sides . `` This means that adequate contingencies need to be established ... in case the UK would exit the EU without any agreement on its future relationship with the bloc . '' He noted 53.5pc of passengers handled by UK airports were flying to or from the 27 EU member states while more than one in 10 passengers handled by its EU airports are flying to or from the UK . Nearly 40pc of Ireland 's air traffic comes from the UK while the figure is 33pc for the Slovak Republic , 31pc for Malta 20pc for Poland and 17pc for Spain . 'Most airlines have contingency planning in place , and in many cases this is being acted upon '
Leighton : After Brexit nobody can ignore the public again
THE saga over the vote to leave the European Union should teach British businesses how not to communicate , Co-operative Group chairman Allan Leighton said yesterday . Mr Leighton , who was Asda chief executive before embarking on a `` plural '' career of non-executive posts , made the comments in the opening address of the 2016 Telegraph Festival of Business . `` Brexit was totally about people talking at people , telling them what was good and bad for them and what the consequences would be , '' he said . `` Brexit was all about listening to respond , not listening to hear . When people said , 'I hear what you say ' , that meant that they did n't hear what you said . It meant the opposite , so there was no listening ; there was no talking with . '' Mr Leighton , who also chairs Danish jewellery company Pandora and media business Entertainment One , believes the Brexit vote will mark a shift in the way individuals expect to be treated as voters , employees and customers . `` Nobody is going to get away with that [ listening to respond ] any more , '' he said . `` Brexit was a revolution ; a democratic revolution , and it 's about people saying that they have got their own thoughts and are not going to be talked at . `` They want to be listened to and treated with respect . They do n't want things stuffed down their throat . That 's the world we now live in . '' Mr Leighton has written a book about leadership and told the conference that he uses the concept of `` followship '' to explain how businesses need to adapt . He said it is about embracing diversity and equality in the workforce to use the brainpower of all individuals regardless of their gender or colour . Mr Leighton added that `` followship '' is also about accepting that respect is something given , not earned , and that the new Britain has to be built `` community up '' - not `` Government and business down '' . `` Brexit is fantastic because it 's going to refresh all the ways we think about things . `` We can say that we do n't know what 's going to happen ; we 've got all this uncertainty and it 's really difficult . All of those things are true , but when has business ever been easy ? `` Let 's think about how we can turn this into a competitive advantage for us because we 're thinking about it differently . The certainty is that Brexit is done . Therefore , in this world where we want change and where we can turn this into a catalyst , the process of followship becomes the most important thing . '' 'People want to be listened to and treated with respect . They do n't want things shoved down their throat '
Jeremy Hunt , the Remainer who 'has been prepared to say he was wrong ' on Brexit ; Profile
On the day Boris Johnson was whipping up the Tory conference crowd with his `` let the lion roar '' Brexit speech in October , Jeremy Hunt was quietly going about his business talking Brexit on LBC Radio . As a leading member of the Remain campaign , the Health Secretary was asked , had he changed his mind at all about Brexit since the EU referendum vote ? Mr Hunt disclosed that indeed he had , and now considered leaving the EU to be a positive move , blaming the `` arrogance '' of the European Commission for turning him against the bloc . It may not have been obvious at the time , but his sudden conversion from Remoaner to Brexiteer cleared the final hurdle for his expected promotion to the role of de facto deputy prime minister later to be vacated by Damian Green . By having a foot in both camps , Mr Hunt is now ideally placed to bring the opposing sides of the Cabinet together , and chair the nine Cabinet subcommittees - three of them Brexitrelated - that were adeptly headed by Mr Green before his downfall . Mr Green , of course , was still very much in post when Mr Hunt made his comments about Brexit to LBC 's Iain www.Dale.No one could have foreseen the Westminster sexual harassment scandal that brought down Mr Green ; even the Harvey Weinstein scandal was yet to break at the time . But Mr Hunt has been tipped for promotion ever since Theresa May kept him as Health Secretary in her first Cabinet in 2016 . On that occasion he entered Downing Street without his customary NHS lapel badge ? interpreted as a sign that he thought his time as Health Secretary was over ? but left with the badge returned to his buttonhole . He has rewarded Mrs May 's patronage by loyally pushing on with a series of reforms , and has become one of the Government 's most dependable media performers . Having led the Department of Health for more than five years ( he would be the longestserving Health Secretary if he carried on until June ) Mr Hunt may be a hate figure for much of the NHS , but he has earned the respect of colleagues for toughing out such a difficult job for so long . He also served as culture secretary for two years , encompassing the London 2012 Olympics , and with five years as a shadow minister before that , Mr Hunt is one of the most experienced ministers in the Cabinet . `` He has earned his spurs , '' one Government minister said yesterday . `` To keep the lid on health for nearly six years deserves reward , and he does n't really have any enemies in the Cabinet . `` Unlike Damian Green , he can also appear on the radio and television defending Brexit , because he has been prepared to say he was wrong when he campaigned for Remain . That 's something neither Damian nor Theresa May has been able to bring themselves to do . '' As well as defending Brexit , he has also defended Theresa May to the hilt while others were briefing against her . Last month he memorably warned Tory rebels that if they did not get in line behind their leader they risked scuppering Brexit altogether . In an interview on ITV 's Peston on Sunday programme , Mr Hunt warned those considering voting against the Government on the progress of the EU Withdrawal Bill : `` If we do n't back Theresa May we will have no Brexit - and she is doing an unbelievably challenging job amazingly well . '' At the age of 51 , Mr Hunt still has the energy and ambition to take on fresh challenges , without Mrs May having to look over her shoulder to check he is not about to stab her in the back . Like Damian Green , Mr Hunt has never harboured serious ambitions of succeeding Mrs May as Prime Minister or Conservative Party leader - which can not be said for many other senior members of the Cabinet . `` He is a likeable chap , '' one Cabinet source said yesterday . `` He will have plenty of support from the Cabinet if he takes on Damian 's old role , and that 's not something you could say about many ministers . `` The Prime Minister needs someone who can go into bat for her when she 's not there , someone who can take on the workload of the Cabinet committees and make progress without threatening her authority , and Jeremy is the person who ticks all those boxes . ''
May urged to stick with 'clean ' Brexit
MORE than 40 Eurosceptic Tory MPs have warned Theresa May that she must end payments to Brussels after Brexit and resist attempts to keep the UK in the EU by `` stealth '' during a transition period . A letter , organised by Chance Britain , the Brexit-supporting lobby group , says that it would be a `` historic mistake '' to stay in the Single Market in March 2019 and states that the UK must leave the Customs Union so it is free to negotiate and sign trade deals . It will be seen as part of a move to put pressure on the Prime Minister to resist calls by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and other ministers to try to water down her plans for a `` clean '' Brexit . The letter was circulated by Suella Fernandes , a Tory MP and leader of a Eurosceptic group of MPs , who also serves as Parliamentary Private Secretary to Treasury ministers . Last night there were questions about whether the letter represents a breach of `` collective responsibility '' because she is a member of the Government . The intervention prompted a furious response from pro-European Tories , who said that the letter was trying to `` tie the Government 's hands '' during a transitional period . Brexit reports : Page 12
Hard Brexit given force of law as May commits to end of free movement ; State Opening of Parliament A future outside Europe dominates legislation in the making as PM adamant she will get the job done
THE Prime Minister has enshrined her commitment to a hard Brexit in law as she used the Queen 's Speech to unveil legislation that will end free movement and enable the UK to strike new trade deals . Theresa May announced plans for nine new laws on Brexit - equivalent to a third of the legislation in the Queen 's Speech - as she staked her future in Downing Street on successfully negotiating Britain 's departure from the European Union . She unveiled relatively little domestic legislation after being forced to abandon unpopular policies in a bid to ensure that the Queen 's Speech passes into law and she can form a minority Government . Mrs May said : `` We need to get Brexit right . That means getting a deal which delivers the result of last year 's referendum and does so in a way that commands maximum public support . `` While we will be a Government that consults and listens , we are clear that we are going to see Brexit through , working with Parliament , business , the devolved administrations and others to ensure a smooth and orderly withdrawal . '' Repeal Bill In one of the biggest legislative exercises in history , the Government will formally revoke the European Communities Act of 1972 on the day that Britain leaves the European Union . The Government will transfer up to 19,000 European laws and regulations into British law in one of the biggest shake-ups of Britain 's statute books in history . The Bill creates powers for Parliament to make what are expected to be a huge number of technical amendments to EU rules and regulations to ensure they are appropriate . It will pave the way for Parliament to repeal or amend unwanted EU laws after Brexit , with Tory MPs calling for a reduction of EU red tape . The legislation was previously referred to as the Great Repeal Bill but the prefix has been dropped , apparently on the orders of parliamentary draftsmen . Erskine May , the bible on parliamentary procedure , says a Government bill must not use an `` argumentative title or slogan '' . Customs and trade In a significant win for senior Eurosceptics in the Government , Mrs May announced two new laws that will enable Britain to strike new trade deals after it leaves the European Union . A Customs Bill will enable the UK to create its own `` standalone '' customs regime - meaning that it will be able to set its own taxes on imported goods and have greater controls over its borders . It will enable Britain to leave the EU 's customs union and develop its own trade policy . Mrs May said that the Bill would help `` create a country that is stronger , fairer , more united and more outwardlooking than ever before '' . The end of free movement The Prime Minister unveiled plans for a new Immigration Bill that will formally bring an end to the free movement of EU nationals - one of the key demands of those who voted for Brexit . While pledging to ensure that Britain can still attract the `` brightest and the best '' , the legislation will make `` EU nationals and their family members subject to the relevant UK law once the UK has left the EU '' . The Government is expected to introduce a quota system for low-skilled workers while allowing the continued free movement of high-skilled workers . Downing Street said that the Government still remains `` absolutely '' committed to reducing net migration to less than 100,000 , although the pledge was not included in the speech . Farming and fisheries Farmers are increasingly concerned that they will lose billions of pounds ' worth of EU subsidies after Brexit . Ministers have committed to an Agriculture Bill which will help support `` a thriving and more self-reliant farming sector that is more competitive , proeventually ductive and profitable '' . The Government has pledged to match agricultural subsidies until 2022 - what happens afterwards is one of the most contentious aspects of Brexit . A new Fisheries Bill will enable Britain to control access to its waters and set fishing quotas , likely to become a key aspect of Brexit negotiations . Other Brexit legislation Ministers have also announced a Nuclear Safeguards Bill that will ensure Britain meets international obligations after leaving the EU . An international sanctions law will be introduced to ensure that Britain can impose sanctions on Russia and other nations . Grenfell In the wake of the Grenfell Tower disaster , a new Independent Public Advocate will be appointed to represent victims and their families . Ministers will also consider plans for a new Civil Disaster Reaction Taskforce to help at times of emergency following criticism of the lack of support given to victims of the fire last week . Transport Ministers have announced a package of policies that will help Britain become a `` global leader '' in driverless and electric cars . Motorway services and petrol stations will be forced to install electric charging points under the Automated and Electric Charges Bill , while car insurance will be extended to self-driving cars . VEYSEY JAMES The Government also unveiled new powers that will license a new generation of space flights from the UK , including vertically launched rockets and satellites . The legislation will also pave the way for Britain 's first spaceport . JACKSON/ CHRIS MELVILLE.TOBY The new High Speed Rail Bill will enable the development of the next phase of the line from the West Midlands to Crewe . The line is expected to open in 2027 and the new law will enable the compulsory purchase of land . Holidaymakers who book online will also be given greater protections under the Atol scheme , which was devised before the explosion of travel websites . Law and order Victims of domestic violence will no longer face direct cross-examination by their alleged abusers in family courts . Under the Courts Bill they will also be allowed to give evidence by video so they do not have to meet their attackers face to face . Ministers have also announced plans to relieve pressure on courts by allowing those charged with less serious criminal offences to opt to plead guilty and pay a fixed penalty fine online . The Government has also announced plans for a new Domestic and Violence Abuse Commissioner to `` stand up for victims and survivors '' and raise public awareness . There will also be a crackdown on whiplash claims under the Civil Liability Bill , which will stop claims being settled by insurers without medical evidence . Armed Forces The Government will try to address the Armed Forces ' current recruitment crisis with a series of policies designed to improve their appeal to those with young families . The legislation will enable servicemen and women to work part-time and to avoid being deployed far from home unless there are significant operational reasons . Mothers returning from maternity leave will also be given more support to help them return to work . Mental health A new Mental Health Act will ensure those suffering from mental illness are treated fairly and protected from discrimination . It is expected to consider whether too many people are being detained on mental health grounds , especially black and ethnic minorities . Right to be forgotten A new Data Protection Bill will give people a `` right to be forgotten '' , giving Facebook users a new legal right to wipe clean all photos , messages and information that they put online before turning 18 . There are concerns that people 's career prospects are being damaged by comments they made as teenagers . Tenants ' Fees Bill Landlords and estate agents will be barred from charging their tenants letting fees amid concerns that millions of people who rent are being ripped off . However landlords have warned that they are prepared to increase rents . Patient safety Amid mounting concerns about the scale of claims against the NHS , the-Government has announced a new Health Service Safety Investigation Body to carry out independent investigations into patient risks . It will also ban the disclosure of information held by the new body , `` enabling participants to be as candid as possible '' . Royal progress The Imperial State Crown is driven to the House of Lords yesterday for the State Opening of Parliament . The pomp for this year 's Queen 's Speech was scaled down as the monarch arrived by car rather than carriage and dispensed with the usual heavy Robes of State . The Queen later made a dash to Berkshire for the second day of racing at Royal Ascot .
French banks may quit City after Brexit , warns minister
MAJOR French banks are likely to shift some of their activities away from the City of London in the event of a vote for Brexit on June 23 , the French finance minister has warned . Michel Sapin said that France would respect the will of the British people , but predicted that a vote to leave the EU would provide a negative shock to Europe 's nascent economic recovery as well as boosting the nationalist ambitions of populist political parties all across the continent . While conceding that the City would retain many of its traditional advantages even in the event of a Brexit , Mr Sapin said that Britain could not expect that a Brexit vote would be `` without effect '' for London as a global financial centre . `` We would have to wait and see which way the red carpet would be rolled out , '' he said while at David Cameron 's anti-corruption summit . `` French banks have told me it would have consequences for them , and some activities which were the rule for French banks would not continue the way that they were ; that is what the French banks have told me , '' he said . Mr Sapin did not name names , but France has a growing footprint in the City , both from the number of French expat bankers working on trading floors and exchanges and the presence of major players like Societe Generale , BNP Paribas and Credit Agricole . The impact of Brexit may also not be confined to French banks , with Stuart Gulliver , the HSBC chief executive , warning last month that his bank could move up to 1,000 staff to Paris from its global banking and markets business in the event of a Leave vote . More broadly , Mr Sapin said that a Brexit vote would have political and economic consequences at a time when Europe was facing its most prolonged period of economic stagnation and political upheaval since 1945 . On a positive note , Mr Sapin said that a medium-term `` solution was on the table '' to enable Greece to access its latest bailout funds while retaining IMF support . While reiterating France 's position that the Eurozone must rapidly adopt move towards deeper fiscal and political union , Mr Sapin said that France was determined to ensure that non-Eurozone countries `` found their space '' in a more tightly integrated EU . Asked if he believed Brexit would cause a domino effect , Mr Sapin said that a Brexit would give a boost to populist political movements that have gathered force since the Eurozone crisis . `` Populist movements would be likely to say 'we want to do the same ' as the UK ' , '' Mr Sapin predicted , adding that the forces of nationalism were urging a `` retreat '' behind national borders that would `` impede the movement of capital and the movement of people '' . 'It would have consequences . Some activities which were the rule would not continue the way that they were '
UK in talks over longer transition for Brexit ; EU relaxed about longer transition for UK
BRITISH officials are in discussions with Brussels about extending the Brexit transition period to almost three years , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . The official target for transition is `` around two years '' but many senior Whitehall officials remain concerned about the practicality of such a short exit period , given the potentially massive changes that would be required by a `` hard '' Brexit . This newspaper understands that although it is not formally government policy , Britain has discreetly begun sounding out senior EU figures over whether transition could be extended amid growing disarray within the Cabinet over the ultimate terms of a long-term deal with the EU . Theresa May has faced a series of challenges from senior government figures in recent days and is braced for another testy Cabinet session on Monday over the Brexit strategy , with some Tory MPs demanding that Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , is moved . Any push to extend the transition period , which will begin when Britain formally leaves the EU in March next year , is likely to lead to a fierce backlash from Brexiteers . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the leader of a 60-strong group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs , told The Telegraph yesterday that Britain is heading for `` Brino '' - Brexit in name only - rather than the clean break for which the country voted . HARRIS Talks on the transition are about to begin in earnest , and yesterday David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , said he was `` confident '' an agreement could be reached at the March meeting of the European Council . Making a speech in Middlesbrough , Mr Davis said Britain would agree `` a strictly time-limited implementation period '' but did not make any mention of its length . RICHARD However , last night Mr Davis , Mr Hammond and Greg Clark , the Business Secretary , sent a letter to business leaders setting out the plans for transition in which they said it would last for `` around two years '' . The EU has set a date of Dec 31 2020 for the end of the transition period , leaving just 21 months after Brexit for preparations for new customs and trade arrangements , which have yet to be even discussed . One EU source said the issue of extending transition hadbeen discussed , but without specifying a preferred end date . A second source said the British side had raised the possibility of transition continuing until Dec 31 2021 . One EU source with knowledge of the talks said : `` What difference would a year make , honestly ? '' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's Brexit chief , said this week that the EU 's current cut-off date of Dec 31 2020 was not `` a question of religion '' and that the Parliament could accept a period of up to three years . The British side says it remains determined to seal a deal on transition by the European Council summit on March 22-23 , amid warnings from businesses groups that failure to deliver a deal by March will force them to activate Brexit contingency plans . A Government spokesman said the suggestion of a longer transition period was a `` categoric lie '' . The spokesman said : `` The time-limited period should be determined by the length of time it takes to put in place new arrangements and we believe that should be around two years . '' The UK is still fighting to soften the terms of the transition agreement , after the EU agreed a toughened set of guidelines that , if turned into legal agreement , would mean EU citizens who arrived in the UK right up until the end of the transition period would be eligible to apply for full settled status . The Telegraph understands that the UK is seeking up to eight concessions , including assurances over implementation of EU rules , EU citizens ' rights and British representation on important EU committees . The EU has signalled that it is in no mood to grant such requests .
Dublin holds the keys to Britain 's post-Brexit future , says Tusk
DONALD TUSK , the President of the European Council , last night warned Britain that the keys to its future were held by Dublin , as he heaped pressure on Theresa May to prevent a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic after Brexit . Speaking in Dublin alongside Leo Varadkar , Ireland 's prime minister , Mr Tusk said that talks over a future UKEU trade deal or a transition agreement would not happen without Irish backing . `` If the UK offer is unacceptable for Ireland , it will also be unacceptable for the EU , '' said Mr Tusk , who chairs meetings of EU leaders in the Council . `` I realise that for some British politicians this may be hard to understand , '' Mr Tusk said yesterday . `` But such is the logic behind the fact that Ireland is the EU member while the UK is leaving . '' After speaking in Irish and before sharing a warm handshake with Mr Varadkar , Mr Tusk added : `` This is why the key to the UK 's future lies , in some way in Dublin , at least as long as the Brexit negotiations continue . '' The stark reminder was issued just days before Mr Tusk 's deadline - which was set last Friday after meeting Theresa May in Brussels for Britain to make `` sufficient progress '' on the three issues of the Brexit bill , Ireland and citizens ' rights - expires on Monday . When Britain leaves the EU on March 29 2019 , the invisible border between Ireland and Northern Ireland will become an external border with the EU . Without an agreement in place , Brexit risks disrupting vital and frequent cross-border trade with customs controls that could inflame dormant tensions quelled by the peace process . On Monday , Mrs May will meet Jean-Claude Juncker , the President of the European Commission , in Brussels for a `` working lunch '' in a bid to work through `` sufficient progress '' before a crunch Dec 14 European Council summit . The EU is refusing to talk trade until the sufficient progress hurdle is cleared on all three issues . The Daily Telegraph exclusively revealed this week that agreement in principle had been reached over the EU 's demand for a ( EURO ) 60billion ( £53billion ) reckoning for Brexit . EU diplomats also believe that a `` landing zone '' will be found on citizens ' rights despite the EU 's contentious insistence that the European Court of Justice remains the final arbiter of the rights of the three million EU expats living in Britain . However , Dublin has been firm that Britain must provide workable and credible ways to guarantee that the currently frictionless border between Ireland and Northern Ireland is preserved no matter the result of the Brexit negotiations . If the EU decides that sufficient progress has not been made , vital trade talks will be delayed , for a second time , until March 2018 . That date is a year after Mrs May triggered the Brexit process and a year before the two year negotiation period for the UK-EU divorce elapses . `` The border , '' said Mr Tusk last night , `` is no longer a symbol of division , it is a symbol of cooperation and we can not allow Brexit to destroy this achievement of the Good Friday Agreement . '' He added : `` The UK decision to leave the EU has created uncertainty for millions of people in Europe , perhaps nowhere is this more visible than here . '' Mr Varadkar told reporters : `` Irish concerns are very much Europe 's concerns . The EU is a family and a family sticks together . '' The Irish prime minister said the simplest solution would be for the UK to remain in the single market and customs union , which would avoid the need for a hard border . Charles Moore : Page 18
Spaniards take swipe at May for 'forgetting about Gibraltar ' ; Road to Brexit
THERESA MAY 'S Government appears to have `` more important things '' to worry about than the fate of 28,000 Gibraltarians , according to Spanish sources , who claimed that Gibraltar would crash out of the single market without the cushion of a Brexit transition deal . After Mrs May triggered the Brexit negotiations in March , the EU blindsided the British government by insisting that any Brexit deal could only apply to Gibraltar if Spain agreed . The EU-27 negotiating mandate effectively takes Madrid 's side in the centuries-old territorial dispute over the rock . Senior Spanish government sources are reported to have said the British government had made no proposals at all to it regarding the future of Gibraltar . In a thinly veiled swipe as Mrs May 's struggles since she lost the Conservative majority at the general election , the source said : `` I honestly believe they have other more important issues . '' They insisted that the effective Spanish veto over a Brexit deal for Gibraltar also applied to any UK-EU transition deal designed to soften the blow of leaving the single market and customs union . The Daily Telegraph asked the European Commission , which is handling negotiations on behalf of the EU-27 , if it agreed with the Spanish analysis . Officials pointed to the negotiating mandate , which reads : `` After the United Kingdom leaves the Union , no agreement between the EU and the United Kingdom may apply to the territory of Gibraltar without the agreement between the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom . '' Mrs May 's spokesman has said : `` The [ Brexit ] deal must work for Gibraltar , too . '' A spokesman for the government of Gibraltar refused to comment . However , Fabian Picardo , Gibraltar 's prime minister , has previously said that a hard Brexit would pose an `` existential threat '' to the island . 'I honestly believe the British have more important issues to worry about '
'Brexit may make it easier to prevent slavery ' ; Head of UK commission into human trafficking says enhanced border controls could help stop criminals
BREXIT could make it easier for Britain to help prevent human trafficking , the independent anti-slavery commissioner has said . Kevin Hyland OBE , a former police officer of 30 years experience , told The Daily Telegraph the UK was leading the fight against modern slavery and would do so `` before or after Brexit '' . And he suggested enhanced border controls after the country leaves the UK could even improve the country 's ability to keep tabs on people . He also said that Brexit should have no impact `` whatsoever '' on its partnership with Europol , the EU 's law enforcement agency . It comes after campaigners claimed that leaving the EU would make it `` impossible '' to tackle slavery and human trafficking due to a loss of regulations and funding from Brussels . `` If you look at the real facts and figures , there 's nothing at the moment that suggests any change , [ with ] the presence of Brexit looming , '' said Mr Hyland . `` For the UK fighting modern slavery , we have created legislation . We 've created an anti-slavery commissioner , we 've got life imprisonment sentences for human traffickers . The legislation is still new and I want it to be more effective , but this is a piece of UK legislation and it will remain before or after Brexit . '' `` I know the relationship [ with Europol ] has to change , for a number of reasons . But I 've worked with , in my past role , countries like the US , Thailand and India . When an offence happens , with those countries we have mutual legal assistance treaties . We will still have a relationship with Europol . '' On the issue of free movement , Mr Hyland suggested enhanced border controls could help keep tabs on people who were vulnerable to people trafficking , but added it was `` too early to say what effect it will have . '' `` We do n't know what the terms and conditions are and how it is going to be managed . If that is all managed well , and governed well , it could actually create a process whereby we know who 's coming in and where they 're working , '' he said . Mr Hyland , the former head of the Metropolitan Police 's anti-human trafficking unit , said the UK police force already had strong links with other forces worldwide . In terms of the EU he said : `` A lot of the victims that will arrive in the UK will have gone through several European countries before they arrive . So it 's also important we have those relationships and there 's no reason whatsoever why that does n't remain . We have to step outside of whether it 's an EU or non-EU issue . It 's a global crime . '' An estimated 45million people worldwide live in slavery . There are around 13,000 potential victims in the UK . It affects thousands , lured to Britain and forced to work long hours in horrific conditions with little or no pay . The independent anti-slavery commission , the first of its kind worldwide , was set up by Theresa May , who appointed Mr Hyland to hold the Government to account .
EU 's dire warnings over regulation do n't match the economic realities
Shortly before he was sacked in 2015 , a colleague and I interviewed Martin Wheatley , then-head of the Financial Conduct Authority , for The Wall Street Journal . The City was debating Brexit and we wanted to know what he thought about the risks , as a regulator . Expecting dire warnings , we were surprised when he declared : `` In the short term , not as much would change as you might think ... We 've operated reasonably successfully , as a number of countries have , outside of the eurozone , so it 's not to say that there is n't a model that can work but it 's a different model . '' Shortly afterwards , he was fired by George Osborne . He would have been sacked anyway , but his rather honest assessment of Brexit 's impact probably did n't help . Yesterday , two years after that interview , Andrew Bailey , the current FCA chief , made his own contribution to the Brexit debate . His view ? Brexit requires an institutional rearrangement , but should not fundamentally threaten the UK or EU 's ability to cooperate on financial regulation and keep markets open . `` Does [ Brexit ] require membership of the single market to get the benefits of free trade with the EU ? No , '' he said . Protectionism and closing off markets `` is not a necessary response to the choice of Brexit '' , he added . In order to understand why Mr Bailey is right , it 's helpful to know the current arrangements . At the moment , the framework for international financial regulation is agreed at forums like the Financial Stability Board and Iosco , which are nothing to do with the EU . It was the FSB 's Basel committee that came up with the Basel capital rules , a major regulatory response to the financial crisis . Within the FSB , the UK is a heavyweight and respected contributor in its own right . The FSB rules are then passed down to the EU and regulators everywhere else . In Brussels , member states thrash out important details of how to implement the frameworks . And then , national supervisors like the FCA ensure that the rules are implemented and followed . This deep level of cooperation within the EU has helped to build a consensus for opening up financial markets and trying to keep them open . They remain much less open than the EU likes to claim , but are freer than they have ever been in the past . The UK has accepted both this and some US involvement in supervising firms in London as a quid pro quo for opening markets . It is easy to see how , post-Brexit , these arrangements could be adjusted to ensure that the EU and UK continue to cooperate on financial services regulation . The UK will still be intimately involved in the FSB , Iosco and other forums . Thereafter , the difference is that Britain will decide for itself how to implement those frameworks and will negotiate cross-border arrangements with the EU from the outside , rather than inside . As both Mr Wheatley and Mr Bailey have pointed out , the UK is unlikely to embark on a regulatory bonfire and , indeed , often makes rules much tougher than the international frameworks require . It should therefore be possible for Brussels and London to agree that their financial regimes are both highly rigorous , to set up a mechanism for how to resolve any future divergences or disputes , and to allow EU-UK trade to continue unimpeded . At the same time as Mr Bailey was delivering his speech in Canary Wharf , however , Michel Barnier , the EU Brexit negotiator , was giving his own oration across the Channel in Brussels . Mr Barnier 's message was very different from Mr Bailey 's . `` You can not leave the single market and then opt in to those sectors you like most - say , the automobile industry and financial services , '' he said . `` [ Some ] argue that one can leave the single market and keep all of its benefits - that is not possible . '' As far as financial services are concerned , Mr Bailey disagrees . He argues it is possible to keep markets open without being inside the single market , providing the UK and EU are prepared to cooperate on regulation . The UK , Mr Bailey has indicated , certainly is . The EU began to recognise the importance of cooperating with non-EU countries several years ago , in an initiative that Mr Barnier himself led . It started with the need for EU clients to use derivatives trading platforms provided by US firms , for which they needed EU regulatory authorisation . The EU therefore built something called the `` equivalence '' regime . Its regulators would assess whether or not US rules governing its derivatives platforms were as rigorous as the EU 's . This was an arduous process but , eventually , the US was indeed deemed equivalent in this area , freeing up derivatives markets . What the UK now faces is a long , tortuous tussle over equivalence . It wo n't always be easy and Britain will have to argue its case constantly against protectionist or destructive demands , but the basis for cooperating to keep markets open already exists . The alternative is that the EU decides to single out Britain for particularly punishing treatment . Proponents of this approach claim that London can not use the `` equivalence '' regime and needs special , disadvantageous treatment because the eurozone is so reliant on its markets . But freezing out London while cooperating with New York will simply push activity to the US , over which the EU has very little influence . The EU faced the same choice over clearing . We were told over and over by naysayers that clearing would be `` stripped '' from London if Britain voted Leave . But when the new rules came out last month , Brussels had blinked . After all the rhetoric , it settled just for giving its regulators the potential power to force euro clearing houses to move into the EU - a power that is unlikely to actually be used because it will impose huge costs on European firms . So Mr Barnier can issue `` wake-up calls '' and warnings , if he likes . But the economic reality is that EU and UK financial regulators need to work together for our mutual benefit . It wo n't always be a harmonious working relationship , but it will work . The only alternative is for the EU to shoot itself in the foot by cutting its firms off from the world 's biggest financial centre . 'The economic reality is that EU and UK financial regulators need to work together for our mutual benefit '
Health care pledge for UK tourists ; Britons guaranteed free treatment in Europe as Davis sets out negotiating position on migrant rights ; Pensioners offered Brexit guarantee
BRITISH tourists will be guaranteed free health cover when they are on holiday in the EU , David Davis has disclosed , as the Government prepared to publish its detailed Brexit negotiating position on migrants ' rights . The Brexit Secretary will ask the EU to continue with the current European Health Insurance Card ( EHIC ) scheme , and said that if Brussels refuses , the Government will foot the £155million a year bill . Mr Davis gave fresh details of what will be in a 12-page document sent to the EU today setting out Britain 's position on migrant rights , which will form the basis for tough head-to-head negotiations over the coming weeks . He said EU citizens will have to undergo criminal record checks when they apply for `` settled status '' that will allow them to remain in Britain for life and promised to deport anyone who is considered undesirable . After Brexit , the Home Secretary will only have to prove that removing EU citizens would be `` conducive to the public good '' in order to deport them rather than proving that they are a serious threat to the `` fundamental interests '' of society as the current EU directives require . Mr Davis also reiterated the Government 's so-called red line on judicial oversight of migrants ' rights , saying the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) would have no jurisdiction over EU citizens living in the UK after Brexit . A week after Brexit negotiations officially got under way , the Government will today publish its negotiating position on the rights of three million EU citizens living in the UK and one million Britons living in the EU - the first detailed paper on any aspect of its Brexit stance . Last week Theresa May set out the broad outlines of the deal she is offering migrants , saying EU citizens already living here would be given the same rights as Britons but without any oversight from the ECJ . Mr Davis put meat on the bones yesterday as he was interviewed on BBC One 's The Andrew Marr Show , saying : `` We 're looking to see if we can get a continuation of the EHIC scheme as it now exists and , of course , if we ca n't get one then we would provide one unilaterally . '' Whitehall sources confirmed that if the EHIC scheme was scrapped , a new arrangement would begin on the day Britain leaves the EU so that travellers `` wo n't notice any difference '' . Critics suggested that Mr Davis had damaged his negotiating hand by admitting that Britain would pay for travellers ' health insurance if the EU did not keep the EHIC scheme . Tom Brake , the Liberal Democrat MP , said : `` This shows how desperate the Government is . They have failed to plan properly for Brexit and are now willing to let British taxpayers pick up the pieces . `` David Davis inspires about as much confidence as a drunken trapeze artist , Continued on Page 7 Editorial Comment : Page 15 Continued from Page 1 but it is the country as a whole that will suffer when he comes crashing to the floor . '' Mr Davis also said the Government would `` unilaterally '' guarantee that British citizens living in the EU would continue to receive index-linked state pensions . The Brexit Secretary admitted he could not be `` 100 per cent sure '' a deal would be agreed , saying : `` At the end of the day the key in any negotiation , it 's not about sort of macho clashing of antlers , it 's about finding the place that suits both sides and that is what we are about . '' He said he believed European leaders would come under pressure from `` the German car industry , Bavarian farmers , French farmers , Italian white goods manufacturers , you name it '' to strike a trade deal because the EU has a £60billion trade surplus with the UK . Although there is no way the Government will allow the ECJ to have any say over citizens ' rights , Mr Davis said , it was possible there would be an `` arbitration arrangement '' as part of transitional arrangements . Baroness Chakrabarti , the shadow attorney general , said Labour might not have `` complete control '' over migration if it got into power , and even suggested some form of free movement might continue . She said : `` It may be called something else but what it is called does n't matter . What is important is that jobs come first , the economy comes first and that means getting tariff-free access to the single market and the formalities we will negotiate . '' Meanwhile , the Archbishop of Canterbury urged Theresa May to set up a cross-party commission to advise her to `` draw much of the poison '' from the debate . Writing in the Mail on Sunday , the Rt Rev Justin Welby warned that it would be a `` disaster '' if Britain 's negotiators went into bat against the `` united determination of the EU '' without knowing they had the full confidence of the people . But Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary , rejected the Archbishop 's argument , telling BBC Radio Five Live : `` This is n't about commissions ... our job as government now is obviously securing the right deal for the country and not rerunning those arguments of Remain and Leave from last year . ''
A positive attitude and united front will make a big difference to Brexit ; As the popular mood turns towards making a success of our departure , the sniping should be stopped
As Winston Churchill observed , `` attitude is a little thing that makes a big difference '' . It 's time , on all sides of the Brexit debate , to stop carping and unite to deliver the best deal for Britain . Sure , a vocal but dwindling minority of diehard Remain MPs and unelected peers will continue to predict doom and try to trip Brexit up . But they are pitting themselves squarely against the popular mood . According to YouGov , the public is now committed by three to one to respecting the referendum , however they voted , and making Brexit work . In Scotland , that view holds , too , by two to one - with an even larger proportion of Remain voters resolved to seeing Brexit through than across the rest of Britain . Just 30 per cent of Scots back Nicola Sturgeon 's SNP in seeking to frustrate the process . During the roller-coaster of Brexit negotiations , this growing moderate majority need to be guardians of the nation 's blood pressure , avoiding over-reacting to every bump along the way . Take the economic good news last week . Somehow , record employment data , dipping inflation and Google 's announcement of £1 billion of fresh investment in the UK was eclipsed by media furore over a fake memo by Deloitte , dressed up as a critical review of the Government 's Brexit preparations . It was a classic triumph of tittle-tattle over what really matters . Similarly , we risk missing positive political developments . For all the understandable concerns around the US election , President Trump will offer Britain the opportunity of a free-trade deal shunned by Barack Obama , as well as presenting ( more regrettably ) a key role in shoring up our European allies within Nato . And last week the German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , publicly signalled her flexibility on free movement , a significant diplomatic move before formal Brexit talks - or German elections - have even begun . As more and more Remainers make their peace with the referendum result , we Brexiteers need to avoid sounding miserly . At home and on the Continent , we 've left people in little doubt as to what we 're against . They are less clear about what we 're for . I support the 60 Conservative MPs who have said publicly that Britain should leave the customs union , because we ca n't deliver on the Prime Minister 's ambition to end free movement and the jurisdiction of the European Court , or make Britain a global leader in free trade , without doing so . But we also need to set out a positive and optimistic vision of the UK 's relationship with the EU after Brexit - for the British people , and our European friends . Britain 's ambition should be to prove we can be an even better European neighbour , freed from the fetters of the flawed political club . Let 's start talking the language of friendship with a greater generosity of spirit . For its part , the Government is wise to avoid dripfeeding its negotiating stance into the public domain , which would just offer critics - at home and on the Continent - a target for their daily sniping . Equally , the Prime Minister has committed to spelling out the high-level principles guiding our negotiating strategy by the new year . That will be crucial to communicating a compelling , positive offer we can take to Brussels . What should that package include ? Our top negotiating priority should be to avoid new barriers to trade - based on rational , economic and mutual selfinterest . We should n't just be taking this message to European www.governments.UK politicians and business leaders should be permanently touring Europe , speaking to industry , business groups and unions , making the case for maintaining our current trading ties , and avoiding the harm that protectionist measures would inflict on UK and - disproportionately - European profits and jobs . We need to be equally clear , with diplomatic brows duly furrowed , that we take no solace from the fact that applying the EU 's external tariff would bring in £8 billion more to the UK than the EU in tariff revenue . It 's not what we want . Brussels would have to force us into such a retrograde move . Second , as a net contributor to EU justice and home affairs cooperation , Britain should offer to maintain - and enhance - our commitment to collaborate on security matters . From data-sharing to joint policing investigations at Europol , departing from the EU is no bar to operational law-enforcement cooperation . We must leave our fellow Europeans in no doubt that Britain is loath to abandon them in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks in Brussels and Paris . Likewise , we stand shoulder to shoulder in solidarity with our Baltic and Eastern European allies in the face of the increasingly bellicose Russian president , Vladimir Putin - whatever President Trump does . Third , ruling out acceptance of EU free movement hardly precludes sensible reciprocal arrangements on immigration . We can offer visa waivers for tourism and business trips , flexible terms to allow recruitment of top European talent by UK companies and a permit system for skilled labour . Between open-door immigration and pulling up the drawbridge , there is ample scope for a deal that preserves UK national control over the volume of immigration , as well as the sensitive rules on skills eligibility , welfare entitlements , residence conditions and security checks . The public has seen with its own eyes that Remain 's referendum forecasts of economic Armageddon post-Brexit were partisan propaganda . They now yearn for some unity of purpose to make the best of Brexit , and mitigate the real risks and genuine uncertainty that are inherent in the process . According to ComRes , two thirds of Britons feel positive about Britain 's post-Brexit future . Meanwhile , a survey this month by US consultancy Synechron found that 72 per cent of UK bankers believe London will still be the financial centre of Europe in five years ' time . Forget the media froth , there is quiet but growing confidence that the UK will thrive outside the EU . Britain is strong enough to withstand the economic buffeting of Brexit , and we should be confident enough to make a generous overture to our European friends . Now , we need a positive attitude and a united front , reaching out across the overwhelming majority who want to make Brexit work , however they voted back in June . With a Churchillian dose of stubborn optimism , we can grasp the kind of deal most people want - and see Britain go from strength to strength . Dominic Raab is the Conservative MP for Esher & Walton READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Government in turmoil over ECJ influence ; Prime Minister at odds with Whitehall over ending of foreign judicial supremacy when Britain leaves the EU
THERESA MAY has been contradicted by her own officials over the future status of the European Court of Justice after they said it could still hold sway over British courts after Brexit . As the Brexit department published a key negotiating paper on the role of the Luxembourg-based court , the Prime Minister insisted that `` when we leave the EU we will be leaving the jurisdiction of the ECJ '' . But in an official briefing to journalists at almost the same time , Whitehall officials said the ECJ could still have supremacy over Britain 's courts during the transition period following Brexit in March 2019 . They said an independent body that will arbitrate over post-Brexit disputes between the EU and the UK must be in place before the ECJ 's jurisdiction in the UK can be ended . There was no guarantee that the arbitration service would be ready by the withdrawal date . Labour said it amounted to an admission that Mrs May 's `` red line '' on ending the ECJ 's authority was `` completely untenable '' , while the Liberal Democrats described it as a `` climbdown '' by the Government . It comes after The Daily Telegraph disclosed that Britain could be bound by future decisions of the ECJ in perpetuity , despite Brexit , if it adopts arbitration arrangements outlined in the same document . The ECJ is the highest legal authority over laws that are generated by the EU , and can overrule Britain 's Supreme Court on matters of EU law . Ending its influence was one of the key planks of the Leave campaign . On a visit to a bus factory in Guildford , Surrey , Mrs May said : `` When we leave the EU we will be leaving the jurisdiction of the ECJ . We will be able to make our own laws . It will be British judges who interpret those laws and the Supreme Court that is the ultimate arbiter of those laws . '' However , officials from the Brexit department were rather more equivocal during an official briefing for journalists . They referred to a section of the position paper that said : `` The UK will work with the EU on the design of the interim period , including the arrangements for judicial supervision , enforcement and dispute resolution . '' Earlier , Dominic Raab , the justice minister , said that the UK will keep `` half an eye '' on the rulings of the ECJ after Brexit . He told the BBC : `` Ultimately we may need some form of international arbitration . Typically widespread practice is that the UK would appoint an arbitrator , the EU an arbitrator , both sides might appoint a third . That 's the balanced way you make sure both sides have confidence in the process. `` Dominic Grieve , the pro-European former attorney general , said the ECJ will continue to have a `` profound influence '' after Brexit . He said it was `` pie in the sky '' to think Britain can escape its influence . But Jacob Rees-Mogg , the Conservative MP , said there was `` no legal basis '' for the ECJ to have any powers in the UK after Brexit . Editorial Comment : Page 15
Labour in a muddle over free movement ; Shadow Brexit secretary flip-flops within hours of saying EU migrants ' unfettered entry must end
A FLAGSHIP Labour pledge to end free movement immediately unravelled yesterday after the party stated that European Union migrants should be able to come to Britain as long as they have a job offer . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , appeared to be at odds with Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , by announcing `` free movement has to go '' . However , the pledge crumbled within hours as he subsequently said there should be `` free movement of labour '' , adding that `` we must have immigration '' for the economy . Labour 's commitment to Brexit was further questioned after one shadow minister said the party could keep Britain in the EU if Brussels offered `` significant reform '' . Theresa May said that Labour 's position on leaving the EU was `` nonsensical '' and ridiculed Sir Keir 's announcement as the party 's `` seventh Brexit plan '' . Sir Keir attempted to harden the party line on Brexit and immigration , with polls suggesting Mrs May is poised to make huge inroads into Labour 's northern heartlands . `` The Labour Party can not spend all its time trying to rub out yesterday and not accept the result . We accept it , we respect it . '' He added : `` We recognise that immigration rules will have to change as we exit the EU , but we do not believe that immigration should be the overarching priority . '' In a subsequent interview , Sir Keir said that businesses will go bankrupt without free movement of labour . He told the BBC 's John Pienaar : `` We must have immigration that works for our communities and for our economy . And that means that there has to be a movement of people to come and work in this country . '' The party 's commitment to Brexit was questioned after shadow Brexit minister Paul Blomfield said Britain may not leave the EU if Brussels addresses the concerns of voters . `` That 's a whole new ball game , '' he said . Labour also vowed to retain and `` fully protect '' all EU laws and red tape after Brexit , including keeping the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which has been heavily criticised for helping criminals avoid deportation.. Sir Keir also said Labour would `` unilaterally '' guarantee the rights of EU migrants living in the UK on `` day one '' . He said he wants to give MPs the power to veto any Brexit deal and send negotiators `` back to the table '' but conceded there will have to be an `` end point '' at which Britain leaves . It came as a leaked General Election script for Labour MPs showed that the party will direct its campaign focus on schools , social care and the NHS rather than immigration , defence and Brexit . Immigration is not mentioned , while MPs are told to say the election is not a `` rerun of the EU referendum '' . Labour will today unveil plans to give nurses and NHS staff a pay rise costing more than £1billion - without saying how it will fund the policy . It will also announce the return of collective bargaining for public sector unions . Mr Corbyn yesterday met Jeremy Heywood , the Cabinet Secretary , to discuss the transition to Government in the event of a Labour victory . Editorial Comment : Page 17 Rights EU nationals told not to apply for residency EU nationals are being discouraged by the Home Office from applying for permanent residence in the UK after more than 90,000 applications were received last year . The decision not to guarantee the rights of EU citizens living in the UK until reciprocal arrangements are agreed for Britons living in Europe has led to fears that there could be a surge in applications . Guidance posted on the Home Office website urges people not to apply and to instead sign up to receive an email alert which will inform them of any changes to their circumstances . The guidance states : `` There will be no change to the rights and status of EU nationals living in the UK while the UK remains in the EU . Under EU law you do n't need a document to confirm your residence status in the UK . '' Theresa May has said she wants the rights of EU citizens in the UK and Britons living on the continent to be resolved early on during Brexit talks . But she faced considerable pressure to act unilaterally and guarantee their futures .
Scotland Jamie 's Italian nightmare ( and Brexit 's to blame )
JAMIE OLIVER has been ridiculed after blaming Brexit for ruining his business , in a week that has seen the economy booming as the FTSE 100 hit new highs . Yesterday the chef announced that six of his 42 Jamie 's Italian restaurants in Britain will close , in a move affecting 120 staff . His company , Jamie Oliver Restaurant Group , said a `` tough '' market and uncertainty after the Brexit vote had raised pressures . His claims come as the economy is beating off gloomy forecasts , with the FTSE 100 , the index of Britain 's biggest companies , seeing its longest streak of records since 1997 , closing at 7,210 points yesterday . Last night influential figures in politics and the restaurant industry cast doubt over whether Brexit was the reason behind Oliver 's decision , suggesting failings within his own business may be to blame . Aldo Zilli , a chef and Italian restaurant chain owner , told The Daily Telegraph : `` How can you blame Brexit for closing restaurants ? Ours have been 10 per cent up since the vote . `` His service is not as great as other Italian restaurants and they are not as authentic as others , which believe in importing food from the right regions in Italy . '' Andrew Bridgen , the Conservative MP , said Oliver , who has a history of restaurant closures , was using Brexit as an `` easy scapegoat '' and that he `` may have to look closer to home '' . Business : Page 31
Hammond : I 'm here to stay ; Putting off runway decision for a year will cost millions , say MPs
PHILIP HAMMOND has told Theresa May that he will continue to make clear the `` economic realities '' of Brexit and will not quit the Cabinet . The Chancellor has told the Prime Minister directly that he will not stand down after Cabinet colleagues accused him of `` undermining Brexit '' . He will defend his warnings about the potential risks today during an appearance before MPs on the Treasury select committee . An ally of Mr Hammond told The Daily Telegraph that he has made it `` absolutely clear '' to the Prime Minister that he will not stand down as Chancellor . The source said that Mr Hammond believes he is the `` right man for difficult times '' and will not be `` pushed about '' by Brexit ministers . He will not formally rule out any options for post-Brexit Britain until after long-standing views that are already a matter of public record and to pass on the views of your constituents if they are directly affected . '' Grant Shapps , former chairman of the Conservative Party , said the fact a final decision would not be made for at least a year was `` very disappointing '' and would cost businesses `` millions '' . He said : `` We are going to have another year or more of fudge . It means that in this post-Brexit world , we are not able to get out and sell Britain to the world . '' The decision to put off the final decision surprised critics of Heathrow , who had been expecting the Government to hold a snap vote in Parliament . It comes after decades of delays over airport expansion . Mr Cameron , the former prime minister , provoked anger from business leaders earlier this year when he delayed the decision oamid concerns it would jeopardise Tory chances of winning the London mayorality . Downing Street sources denied there had been a delay in building the runway and insisted there was always going to be a consultation before the matter was put to Parliament . Mrs May 's comments suggest she will refuse to hold a free vote on expanding Heathrow in the Commons , raising the prospect that ministers could take a leave of absence rather than vote against their will . She adds in her letter : `` I do not want ministers with a long record of opposing whichever scheme is chosen , or whose constituency is directly affected , to be put in an uncomfortable position . '' The Prime Minister made clear the choice on the Government 's preferred option would be made not by the full Cabinet but by the airports sub-committee - on which neither Mr Johnson nor Ms Greening nor any other London MPs sit . A Downing Street source said : `` As the Prime Minister said in her letter the sub-committee meeting will decide the preferred scheme later this month . '' It comes as the Government faces a rebellion from Conservative MPs in the South East if it pushes ahead with a third runway at Heathrow . Zac Goldsmith , the Conservative MP for Richmond Park , has said he will resign his seat and run as an independent if Heathrow is expanded . He is supported by Tania Mathias , the Conservative MP for Twickenham . Airport capacity Where the leading players stand Justine Greening The Education Secretary has been a staunch opponent of Heathrow . Asked if she would continue to block expansion while in the Cabinet she said earlier this year : `` It 's a debate that I 'm still aiming to win . '' Her Putney constituency is near the airport . Boris Johnson The Foreign Secretary , a west London MP , has been explicit in his desire to see Heathrow expansion blocked , once promising to lie down in front of bulldozers . Last month he said the project was a fantasy and should be `` consigned to the dustbin '' . Philip Hammond The Chancellor and former transport secretary backed Gatwick in 2013 , adding : `` The need for more capacity at London 's airport system is undeniable , but the idea that this has to mean four-runway airports needs to be challenged . ''
Confused rhetoric is rattling the City again
As far as the City of London is concerned , this has n't been a good week . Bankers , fund managers and big , international companies listed on the stock exchange have become increasingly bad at deciphering politics at the best of time , but the garbled nature of the messages they 've been receiving from Birmingham has n't helped . It 's not just that the pound is down again as there are pros and cons to this ( though it would be stupidity to deny that too much turmoil on the markets is bad ) . The biggest problem is that the mood music has deteriorated again . This should n't be exaggerated : in the UK as a whole , business confidence has shot up again . All of the surveys are far more positive and while a bad month for oil and gas hit industrial production in August , manufacturing crept up . The National Institute of Economic and Social Research believes that GDP rose by 0.4pc in the third quarter . The economy is fine - but the City is n't . It 's scared and nervous . so what is going on ? Brexit means Brexit , as Theresa May has been saying for weeks.But for some reason many in the City did n't quite believe her . The confirmation that she would indeed be triggering Article 50 by March was interpreted as significant news by some . Brexit , as astonishing as this may seem , was n't fully priced in until now . Next , the frenzy of claims and counterclaims about what Brexit may or may not mean has reached a new paroxysm , fuelled by an information vacuum and a misunderstanding as to how the May Government actually works . There have been endless stories about `` hard '' versus `` soft '' Brexit , and interventions from various Cabinet ministers apparently contradicting one another . Everybody is hearing what they want to hear . The truth is that , apart from the fact that there will be controls on immigration ( details unknown ) and that the European Court of Justice will no longer be our supreme court ( the implications of which we still do n't know ) , we are completely in the dark about what the Government wants to achieve . We do n't even know whether the Government wants to quit the customs union , with some claiming that a hybrid model could work . Even the ECJ rejection does n't really rule out an `` European Economic Area minus '' model . The Prime Minister , and nobody else , will decide in due course what her goals are - and the actual shape of Brexit will be determined by negotiation , so absolutely nobody can predict its final form . The next big worry is that for the opportunities of Brexit to be maximised , and the costs minimised , the UK needs free-market policies at home and abroad . We may well get the latter , but the former is in doubt for the time being . May 's embrace of big government Christian Democracy was striking , though it is unclear how the current direction of travel will change . The Chancellor , Philip Hammond , is sending out a very different message . So which is it to be ? We need a shift in rhetoric and actions to make it clear to car firms and banks that they can thrive here , regardless of any protectionism from the EU post-Brexit , and to attract more such businesses . It 's legitimate for a country to decide to control immigration , as every non-EU country in the world does . But what is utterly wrong is the idea ( first floated , paradoxically , by Ed Miliband ) that companies that employ a lot of migrants will be named and shamed , or for politicians to claim that migrants are taking jobs . They may , in some industries , be depressing wages , but that is different . Migrants are also undoubtedly increasing wages in other industries , and without them many employers would n't exist . It 's a complex picture that needs to be treated sensitively . This dangerous conflation between controlling numbers of new entrants and bashing existing , employed migrants has also rattled the City . The Government 's statements on business , interventionism and migrant workers have been damaging and have been compounded by a communications vacuum . They have contributed to sterling 's slide and a renewed angst over Brexit . This could hurt the real economy and is deeply counter-productive : the Government needs to recalibrate , and fast . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk 'The UK economy is fine - but the City is n't . It is scared and nervous '
Scotland More than half a million EU nationals could lose the right to remain after Brexit
MORE than half a million EU nationals will be forced to leave Britain after Brexit , according to the latest analysis . Under existing rules those who have lived continuously in Britain for at least five years automatically have a permanent right to reside . The Social Market Foundation said 590,000 EU nationals currently living in the UK , equivalent to a population the size of Glasgow , would not meet the residency requirements if Article 50 is triggered next year and Britain leaves the EU by 2019 . Given the `` likely protracted nature '' of Brexit , the think tank added it was `` probable '' that all EU citizens who arrived in the UK before 2014 will have permanent residency rights by the time Brexit actually occurs . The report said it would be `` very difficult , if not impossible '' for the Government to change its permanent residency criteria before Brexit and deny these people the right to stay . It found that by 2019 more than 80 per cent of the 3.6 million EU citizens currently living in the UK would meet the five-year requirement . Emran Mian , the foundation 's director , said : `` The Government should now provide its own analysis and articulate a plan for starting discussions . `` Until it does , EU residents living in the UK , the businesses which employ them and the communities in which they live , are subject to uncertainty which will become more worrying as time goes on . '' Theresa May is under pressure from Tory Eurosceptics to deliver `` hard Brexit '' that would result in EU citizens losing their right to come automatically to the UK in future . During the Tory leadership contest , the Prime Minister faced a backlash after refusing to guarantee the rights of almost three million EU nationals . Last week Mrs May told nearly 800,000 Poles living in the UK that she `` wants and expects '' them to remain in the country after Brexit . 'EU residents and businesses which employ them are subject to uncertainty which will become more worrying '
Use radical ideas to energise a free Britain
British factory production is at a 22-year high , there is record employment , and the UK has the highest level of foreign direct investment in Europe . We all supported Brexit , but if Vote Leave had told us before the referendum this would be the economic news after a Leave vote , even we would have been sceptical . Yet , a year on , that 's exactly what 's happened . So why then is Brexit still being treated as a problem we ca n't wait to be rid of rather than an opportunity to be seized ? This is n't about saying I-told-you-so to Remain supporters - they are as concerned about our country 's future as us and deserve respect . Nor is it about putting heads in the sand and pretending Brexit poses no challenges . But supporting Brexit is too often portrayed as a vote to turn back the clock . Nothing could be further from the truth . For us , the referendum was about two competing visions of Britain 's future - and we are excited about our prospects as a dynamic , global , independent nation . It is vital we start emphasising this optimistic vision . Because if we sleepwalk into seeing the next two years as an exercise in damage limitation , we will wake up to find a once-in-a-generation opportunity has slipped through our fingers . And , like it or not , that failure will be blamed on us Conservatives . If we lose confidence in Brexit as a party , we should n't be surprised if the British people lose confidence in us . In five key areas the Government must use this Parliament to make sure that does n't happen . The first is trade . Free of the customs union , we can use our new powers to link our exporters to dynamic growth around the world . Simultaneously , the Government should scrap the tariffs protecting EU special interests , a move that would instantly lower prices for British shoppers . Second , immigration . Not one of us believes in pulling up the drawbridge to international talent . But , by refusing to give the public a say on how low-skill immigration is managed , the EU has caused faith in the system to collapse . By introducing a humane , controlled immigration regime that recognises talent and shows compassion , we have an opportunity to regain the public trust necessary to reinvigorate British internationalism and once again become a beacon for the world 's brightest . Next comes regulation . Just like companies , governments innovate best when they compete . It 's not surprising , therefore , that European collectivism has left our regulations flabby . Brexit is an opportunity to spur our regulators to innovate , forcing them to make rules that revitalise our economy , not bog it down in red tape . The fourth opportunity is economic innovation . Brexit can be our industrial strategy 's rocket fuel . Thanks to restrictive state aid rules , EU membership makes support for infrastructure , like broadband , subject to onerous approval processes or bureaucratic work arounds . Brexit is a chance to sweep these aside . Better still , we can start using innovative tools currently constrained by the EU , such as beefed up , low-tax enterprise zones and free ports to attract jobs and investment to the country 's most deprived areas . Last , but most importantly , Brexit is a chance to revitalise our democracy . By muddying the waters of accountability , EU membership has made it too easy for politicians in Westminster to pass the buck to Brussels . Or they struggle against an interventionist European Court that does n't reflect British values . With a clean break from the EU , British voters will once again know exactly who is responsible for everything , from supporting the steel industry and keeping our rivers clean to setting the VAT on tampons and raising animal welfare standards , making it easier to kick out lawmakers who do n't have their own bold convictions . Opportunities like these are what Brexit means to us and why we voted to set Britain on this bold future course . We British have always been suspicious of radical ideas . But if ever our country needed to soften its upper lip , to energise it politics with passion , imagination , and optimism it is now . We 've spent long enough on the back foot . It 's time to shout about that idealistic and hopeful vision for post-Brexit Britain and find the self-confidence to deliver it for the British people . Suella Fernandes , Kit Malthouse , Will Quince , Rishi Sunak and Michael Tomlinson are Conservative MPs READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
May to build bridges with Macron as officials fail to agree Brexit talks start date
THE start of formal Brexit talks was delayed yesterday in the wake of the political uncertainty caused by Theresa May 's disastrous election result . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , yesterday met Oliver Robbins , the most senior civil servant in David Davis 's Brexit department , but the two men failed to reach an agreement on a start date for talks . The Prime Minister will this evening start trying to rebuild her authority when she visits Emmanuel Macron , France 's new president , in Paris . Mrs May hopes to make an ally of Mr Macron before the formal opening of Brexit negotiations , which is expected to take place next week . The pair will discuss counter-terrorism over dinner in the wake of the recent attacks in London before heading to watch England play France in an international football friendly . The trip to Paris was planned weeks before Mrs May lost her majority in the General Election , but could not have come at a more welcome time for the Prime Minister . Mrs May and Mr Macron will announce joint plans to fine social media companies such as Facebook , Twitter and Google if they fail to remove extremist content from their websites . However Mrs May will hope to use the meeting to build significant bridges ahead of Brexit negotiations after Mr Macron 's predecessor , François Hollande , threatened to `` punish '' the UK . There are fears that Mr Macron , an ardent pro-European who is fresh from securing a landslide victory in the French parliamentary elections , could harden France 's already tough stance on Brexit . The visit comes after England fans sang La Marseillaise in an act of defiance during a friendly with France at Wembley in the wake of the Bataclan massacre . Speaking ahead of the visit Mrs May said : `` We are united in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil . '' Brexit talks were due to open on Monday next week but Mr Davis , the Secretary of State for Leaving the European Union , said yesterday that they are now likely to take place later in the week . The delay is because Mrs May needs to publish her Queen 's Speech , which will set out her legislative programme , before she starts Brexit negotiations . However at the weekend it emerged that the EU has warned Mrs May that it could take a year for Mr Barnier to draft a new mandate for negotiations . Such a long delay would make it almost impossible to complete negotiations before the end of the two-year negotiating period . It came as Angela Merkel signalled yesterday that the triumph of Mr Macron 's new centrist party in the first round of France 's parliamentary elections paves the way for deeper EU integration . The German chancellor congratulated the French president on `` a strong vote for reforms '' as a Franco-German working group drafts proposals for closer eurozone cooperation to be presented next month . The two leaders agreed last month to draw up a roadmap for greater EU integration that could entail treaty changes , previously considered a taboo . A joint push to relaunch the EU and the eurozone by the currency bloc 's two largest economies could generate unstoppable momentum for ambitious reforms . But the expected landslide victory for Mr Macron 's party in the final parliamentary poll on Sunday may also mean tougher Brexit negotiations . The French and German leaders want to maintain the timetable for Britain 's exit from the EU , clearing the way for them to shape the bloc 's future . Proposals by Mr Macron for a joint eurozone budget , parliament and finance minister initially raised fears in Germany that Berlin could be forced to pay for struggling countries that resist reform . But Mrs Merkel said her government was ready to discuss Mr Macron 's proposals after he denied German media reports that he was in favour of turning the national debts of eurozone countries into shared eurozone debt . Germany 's deputy finance minister , Jens Spahn , said yesterday that Berlin was open to the idea of a eurozone finance minister provided the role and responsibilities were clearly defined . Mr Spahn , a senior member of Mrs Merkel 's centre-Right party , said Germany was also willing to increase its funding for European investment projects . He also expressed the hope that Mr Macron will enact reforms to boost economic growth in France . Mr Macron 's expected parliamentary majority will strengthen his hand in an inevitable showdown with France 's famously militant trade unions as he loosens rigid employment laws to end economic stagnation . The labour reforms were a cornerstone of his election campaign . The rout of the Socialists after Mr Hollande 's disastrous five-year presidency clears the way for a raft of business-friendly policies . The ex-banker , who has redrawn the French political landscape at the age of 39 , now plans to push through his labour reforms by presidential decree before September , a move likely to spark street protests by unions . Falling star Populist party fails at Italy 's local elections Italy 's populist Five Star Movement has floundered at local elections , raising serious doubts about its chances at a general election due by next year . The anti-euro party performed poorly across dozens of key towns and cities , suggesting the national battle will be between the Democratic Party of the ruling prime minister and a centre-Right coalition headed by Silvio Berlusconi 's Forza Italia . Nick Squires 'We are united in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil '
Scotland May poised to fire Brexit starting gun next week
THE Prime Minister may formally trigger Brexit as early as Tuesday after European leaders said they were making preparations for an announcement . Ministers are increasingly confident that Theresa May 's Article 50 Bill could clear both the Commons and the Lords on Monday . The swift passage of the legislation would clear the way for Mrs May to trigger Brexit negotiations in the Commons the following day . Ministers are privately pressing Mrs May to `` get on with Brexit '' and trigger Article 50 `` as soon as possible '' , The Daily Telegraph understands . The announcement would help Mrs May move the debate away from Philip Hammond 's Budget . Downing Street has said that Article 50 will be triggered by the end of the month but refused to commit to a date . Donald Tusk , the head of the European Council , said that EU leaders were prepared to respond within 48 hours of Mrs May triggering Brexit . Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , confirmed that if Mrs May invoked Article 50 next week , an `` extraordinary meeting '' of the remaining 27 members of the EU would be held on April 6 . The Government has suffered defeat in the House of Lords on two amendments to the Article 50 Bill . One of them guaranteed the rights of EU citizens living in the UK , while the other said that Parliament should be given a `` meaningful vote '' on the final deal . The Government will oppose both amendments in the Commons on Monday , and could face a rebellion by up to 20 Tory MPs . However , Tory whips are increasingly confident that they can win over many of the rebels by giving assurances on the timetable of the deal . The legislation will then pass to the Lords , where Labour sources indicated that the party 's peers are prepared to give way gracefully .
Future of British fish for British fisherfolk ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Your headline , `` Britain to ditch its 'unfair ' fishing quotas after Brexit '' ( report , October 31 ) , may give the impression that there will be no catch controls in UK waters following Brexit . Brexit gives us the chance to put measures in place within our 200-mile exclusive economic zone that will make both fish-stock conservation and sustainable harvesting possible . These will , of course , include catch quotas . In a paper by the Scottish Fishermen 's Federation on Brexit , we insisted that fisheries regulations should incorporate a commitment to sustainable harvesting . However , instead of the `` one policy fits all '' approach of the Common Fisheries Policy , we now have a chance to manage our own fisheries . Brexit brings a sea of opportunity for coastal and island communities , and will turn us into a world-class seafood harvesting and exporting country . Bertie Armstrong Chief Executive , Scottish Fishermen 's Federation Aberdeen SIR - Charles Moore ( Comment , October 28 ) is so right . Surrounded by political systems in crisis , we do not need to find a role in the world . We need to be ourselves - to find our strength in the maturity of our constitution , our liberal traditions , our cultural depth and global engagement . Winning the Brexit vote was the first battle in a long war to achieve this . Recovering national self-confidence may take time , but it is better this way - and more in our tradition of consensual change . Jonathan Campbell-James Dubai , United Arab Emirates SIR - While Jean-Claude Juncker stands at the helm of the Titanic and calls for `` full steam ahead '' through the iceberg-strewn seas of the North Atlantic , Donald Tusk tunes his violin for another evening with the quartet . The Greeks and Italians are continuing the party down in steerage , and the Germans and the French are enjoying champagne and oysters in first class . Britain , meanwhile , has found the lifeboats , worked out that the Union can just about fit in - and , despite the shouting , is still trying to persuade Scotland to put on some warm clothes and a lifebelt . It 's cold out there . David Chamberlain Leicester
How they compare on the big issues BODY : Single Market and Customs Union continued payments to Brussels for access to the Single Market after a transition period , and has said the UK will be `` perfectly OK '' if it leaves the EU without a deal . The Foreign Secretary has said that staying in the Single Market and Customs Union would make a `` complete mockery '' of Brexit . He opposes ? The Prime Minister has said that Britain `` can not possibly '' remain in the Single Market and Customs Union after Brexit . She has said she wanted to `` trade with and operate within '' the Single Market , and has also said that the UK could leave the EU without a deal , warning Brussels that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' . The Chancellor has committed to leaving the Single Market and Customs Union but has warned that jobs and the economy must come first . He has said it would be `` madness '' not to seek the `` closest possible '' arrangement with the EU after Brexit , and that leaving without a deal would be a `` bad outcome for Britain '' . Transition period ? The Foreign Secretary has called for the UK to leave the EU with `` speed and efficiency '' , with sources suggesting that he favoured a six-month transition period . for around two to three years in order to avoid a `` cliff-edge '' for businesses . The Prime Minister has repeatedly said that there will need to be an `` implementation period '' after Brexit but has declined , so far , to say how long it should last . The Chancellor has previously said that he wants a transition period lasting much as ( EURO ) 100bn . Brexit divorce bill ? The Chancellor has said the UK would `` honour '' its obligations but rejected claims that it would pay as ? Mr Johnson has been forthright on the divorce bill , saying the EU can `` go whistle '' if it thinks it will get anything like the ( EURO ) 100bn some officials are demanding . He has suggested the EU should , in fact , be paying the UK money after Brexit . The Prime Minister has been tightlipped over the UK 's Brexit divorce bill , saying it was a matter for negotiations . Ministers have suggested she may offer to pay a significant bill in a bid to break a deadlock in negotiations . When asked earlier this year , he said : `` I do n't recognise this number , I genuinely do n't recognise it . '' Trade deal `` EEA-light '' free trade deal , ahead of a landmark speech in Florence on Friday . Mr Hammond is said to be in favour of a Swiss-style `` EEA-light '' deal , which would see the UK shadow the EU 's regulatory structures and transpose European Court of Justice rulings . This approach is seen as the best way to ensure `` frictionless '' free trade . The Foreign Secretary is said to be opposed to a future trade deal based on membership of the European Economic Area , believing it would tie the UK 's hands . He favours a model based on Canada 's trade deal to ensure the UK has the freedom to negotiate deals with non-EU countries . The Chancellor and other pro-European ministers are reportedly attempting to persuade Mrs May of the need for an n , Allies ve , am ke , my i ? Michael Gove , Priti Patel , Liam Fox , Andrea Leadsom ? Amber Rudd , David Gauke , Liz Truss , Jeremy Hunt , Damian Hinds ? Damian Green , David Davis , Michael Fallon , Greg Clark , Chris Grayling , David Lidington , Brandon Lewis , is
Scotland Indyref2 issue is detracting from the potential loss of Scottish jobs
The serious concerns about the impact of Brexit voiced by Scotland 's financial enterprises are easily the most significant thus far expressed . And although couched in careful diplomatic language , there is little doubt that the main fear is that thousands of jobs could be lost in this country if important business functions are transferred abroad . As submitted to Holyrood 's Europe committee , the document from Scottish Financial Enterprise insists that many of its members had drawn up contingency plans to deal with the effects of Britain leaving the EU . Their submission homes in on worries that the SFE 's members - who include most of Scotland 's financial institutions - have about whether Brexit can be fully achieved within the proposed two-year period . But most significantly it makes plain the fact that most companies are determined not to lose valuable EU markets . They give no details about their plans but MSPs will be left in no doubt about how seriously SFE regards the threat Brexit could pose to the 140,000 jobs that are directly or indirectly employed in Scotland 's financial services sector . Given the determination of the Scottish-based institutions , including the major banks and investment houses , to maintain their access to EU markets , the fear is that significant parts of their business might be transferred to other European centres . Although the SFE paper is a shot across the bows for those , such as David Davis , who are in charge of the UK 's Brexit negotiations and who have been criticised over their tactics by EU officials , it is also bound to cause major reverberations at Holyrood . The SFE submission will provide important ammunition for First Minister Nicola Sturgeon in her onslaught against Theresa May 's government over Brexit . However , it also proves how wrong she was to announce she was planning a new independence vote in the immediate aftermath of the shock result in last year 's EU referendum . Critics insist that she would have had a bigger impact as Scotland 's political leader - given that the Scots voted by a large majority for Remain - if she 'd sought agreement with the leaders of the other political parties on a joint approach . After all , they voted Remain and all wanted Scotland and Britain to remain in the single market . But whilst they thought Brexit was bad for Scotland , they reckoned leaving the UK would be a catastrophe . Thus , the Tory , Labour and Liberal Democrat leaders could n't countenance such a deal whilst the SNP leader appeared hell-bent on subjecting Scotland to another vote on breaking up Britain . That remains the case even though La Sturgeon has acknowledged , to some degree , the message of the serious SNP reverses in the general election and put a new independence vote on a back burner . But as far as the other leaders are concerned the threat of indyref2 , while distant , is still there and so their message remains : No deal . It 's not possible to know if Nicola Sturgeon is aware of how handy her maintenance of the independence threat is for her opponents , especially Ruth Davidson . As long as it 's there the Tory leader can just keep attacking her over this long-term SNP objective and can avoid expressing a definite view about how the Brexit talks are being handled by her Conservative colleagues in London . That at least has been the situation so far . But given that any new vote on independence appears such a far-off prospect and with Brexit and the tortuous negotiations to take the UK out of the EU right in our face , is there really any point in Unionists continuing to indyref drum to all else ? Financial absolutely that our politicians on their now . Brexit and job losses in most businesses and present Scotland 's well bang the indyre the exclusion of Scottish Fina Enterprise is abs right to demand domestic politi concentrate o worries now the possible j some of our m important bus present a real a danger to Scotla being . im This is the immediate concern . Brexit and possible job losses ... present a real and present danger to Scotland 's well being
Cabinet and Eurosceptic MPs at odds over open borders extension
THERESA MAY is facing a backlash from Eurosceptic MPs after her Cabinet agreed that freedom of movement could continue for up to two years after Brexit . The Government is ready to keep Britain 's borders open during a post-Brexit transition period , which will prevent the `` cliffedge '' exit in March 2019 that business leaders have warned against . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , is understood to have won the argument within the Cabinet for a transition arrangement with the EU until a freetrade agreement is reached . Cabinet Brexiteers including Liam Fox and Michael Gove have confirmed they are in agreement . However , hardline Eurosceptic MPs reacted furiously last night at reports that continued free movement could last between two and four years as part of a post-Brexit deal . Andrew Rosindell , the Tory MP for Romford , said : `` The British people voted for Brexit and they expect Brexit to happen , in full , on time . '' Peter Bone , the MP for Wellingbrough , added : `` Free movement as it is now will not be acceptable after we leave the EU , that 's nonsense and it 's not what people voted for . '' Mr Gove , the Environment Secretary , said yesterday that decisions on an `` implementation period '' would be made `` in the best interests of our economy '' . Mr Fox also said he was prepared to wait `` another couple of years '' . Their comments indicated a widening of Cabinet support for a transitional deal between the UK leaving the EU in March 2019 and a new trading arrangement . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , said : `` Whilst there may be a need for transitional or interim arrangements , these can never be settled until there is an agreement between the Commission and the United Kingdom . '' Meanwhile it was reported that Mr Hammond told the board of the US investment bank Goldman Sachs that he is pushing for a lengthy transition period . The Chancellor reportedly made a presentation to the bank 's board on June 29 . A spokesman for the Chancellor could not confirm he was at the meeting or what he said , adding : `` He meets with key people in the financial world all the time . '' A Downing Street source said : `` It has long been the Government 's position that there will be an implementation period . The length of the implementation period will be part of the negotiations . '' The Prime Minister stressed her backing for an implementation period when talking with business leaders at a Downing Street forum on Brexit this week . Jean-Claude Juncker 's chief of staffand a key player in the Brexit negotiations has been promoted by the European Commission . Martin Selmayr 's grade was increased from AD14 to AD15 , the second highest , the Politico website reported . That means Mr Selmayr receives up to £192,000 a year before tax . 'Free movement as it is now will not be accptable after we leave the EU ... that 's not what people voted for '
Corbyn and Clegg accused of plotting to derail Brexit ; Future of Europe ; Former Liberal Democrat leader rejects suggestions that he backtracked on his word over EU vote
THE Liberal Democrats and Labour have been accused of planning to block Brexit by either watering down or overturning the European Union referendum vote if the Government loses in the Supreme Court . Nick Clegg , the former Liberal Democrat leader , yesterday said his party was prepared to vote against triggering Brexit negotiations unless it is given guarantees on single market access and a second referendum . He issued the warning after Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , said that he would seek to amend any Bill on the Article 50 process to withdraw from the EU in order to guarantee workers ' rights . Ministers are already preparing for the worst and are considering plans to clear all other parliamentary business and hold all-night sittings in a push to pass the legislation . The Bill would be just 16 words long and as tightly drafted as possible to discourage further amendments . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has made clear that she will invoke Article 50 by the end of March at the latest . The Supreme Court will give its ruling in January , which would leave the Government less than three months to get the legislation through both chambers . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , accused the Liberal Democrats of having been `` dishonest '' during the EU referendum campaign . He said : `` All this stuff about wanting Parliament to have a say is not that at all . It 's about blocking Brexit . `` The Liberal Democrats have been dishonest until now ... and now they are revealing they want to stop Brexit . These people pose as democrats only as long as it suits . `` All I can say is , roll on the opportunity to clear these people out of Parliament once and for all . '' Mr Clegg said yesterday that there were limited `` circumstances '' in which he and his colleagues would vote against Article 50 . He said : `` If I got a second referendum and the Government was quite clear it was going to seek to try and keep us in the single market , then we would vote for Article 50 . '' During an interview with the Sunday Politics programme on BBC One , Mr Clegg was also challenged over the fact he described the EU referendum as a `` once in a generation vote '' during the campaign , but was now calling for a second referendum . He dismissed suggestions that he had gone back on his word as `` textual analysis '' . The Liberal Democrats are planning to exploit any parliamentary vote on Article 50 to establish their credentials as the `` anti-Brexit '' party after last week 's by-election win in Richmond . Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , is also prepared to table amendments to any Brexit legislation regarding workers ' rights , which could significantly slow it down . Ed Balls , the former shadow chancellor , said yesterday that such a move would be `` catastrophic '' for the party . One minister told The Daily Telegraph : `` Theresa May has been clear that she will invoke Article 50 by the end of March . If it takes long sittings , then so be it . We will get it through . '' The Prime Minister will today open talks about a new post-Brexit trade deal with the Gulf as she becomes the first woman to attend an annual meeting with the region 's leaders . Mrs May will attend a meeting of the Gulf co-operation council in Bahrain with the leaders of Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , UAE , Bahrain and Oman . The Government has identified £30 billion worth of trade opportunities over the next five years , but wants to increase that significantly after Brexit . Article 50 Why the Supreme Court 's judgment matters Q What is happening in the Supreme Court ? A The Government is appealing a ruling by the High Court which found that the Prime Minister can not trigger Article 50 and begin Brexit negotiations without the support of Parliament . In November three high court judges were accused of frustrating the will of more than 17million people after declaring that Mrs May does not have the power to bypass MPs by relying on Royal Prerogative to trigger Article 50 . The ruling led to a huge backlash from Eurosceptic MPs . Today Jeremy Wright , the Attorney General , will restate the Government 's case in the High Court . Q Is the Government likely to win ? ANo . Cabinet ministers have told The Daily Telegraph that they are resigned to losing the case despite their decision to appeal . One said that the Government 's chances of winning are `` 70/30 '' , partly because it has already lost once . There are also concerns about the impartiality of some of the judges residing over the case . Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury , president of the Sup ] reme Court , made headlines when it emerged his wife had called the referendum `` mad and bad '' on Twitter . Lady Hale , the court 's deputy president , faced criticism for a speech ahead of the case in which she questioned whether the new law alone was enough to start negotiations . Q When will we find out if the Government has won or lost ? A The Supreme Court will return its judgment in January . Ministers are already drawing up plans for a 16-word bill which they plan to push through the Commons . Theresa May has been very clear that she will trigger Article 50 by the end of March . If the Government loses , that will mean that the legislation will have to proceed far quicker than usual . Ministers are considering plans for all-night sittings and clearing other business to push it through . 'The Liberal Democrats have been dishonest . All I can say is , roll on the opportunity to clear these people out of Parliament once and for all '
Scotland SNP advisers dismiss its Brexit stance ; Sturgeon told the UK is far more important than the EU
SNP ministers will today be challenged to set out exactly what they want from Brexit after two of Nicola Sturgeon 's handpicked advisers dismissed her key demand that Scotland stay in the EU single market if the UK comes out . The Conservatives said a Scottish government motion being debated in the Holyrood chamber this afternoon is `` meaningless '' as it calls for clarity over whether the UK will retain `` membership '' of the single market . Murdo Fraser , a senior Tory MSP , said Ms Sturgeon 's panel of expert advisers should have informed her that this was impossible unless a country is an EU member state . He said there were a series of other arrangements that would allow trade with the EU , including membership of the European Economic Area or a deal similar to Norway 's , but the Scottish Government has said nothing about them in 10 previous Holyrood debates about Brexit . The motion also calls for Scotland 's place in the EU single market to be `` fully protected '' even if the rest of the UK leaves , but this has already been rejected by a series of experts . Lord Kerr of Kinlochard , the Scottish cross-bench peer who wrote the EU 's Article 50 process for a member state to leave , and a member of Ms Sturgeon 's panel , told the BBC earlier this month that he did not think this was possible . Dr Fabian Zuleeg of the European Policy Centre , another member of the First Minister 's Standing Council on Europe , has said it was `` highly unlikely '' that Scotland could remain in if the UK came out . Prof Michael Keating , director of Edinburgh University 's Centre on Constitutional Change , has also dismissed the plan as `` impossible '' , warning it would mean creating a `` hard '' border between Scotland and England . Their interventions have increased concerns that Ms Sturgeon is deliberately making unachievable demands of Theresa May during the Brexit negotiations in the knowledge they will be rejected . The First Minister has warned she will stage another independence referendum if her demands are not met . She and Mike Russell , her Brexit Minister , will attend a meeting of her expert panel tomorrow . But Labour pointed out the UK Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 single market is more than four times as important as the EU version to Scottish companies and it was `` illogical '' for the SNP to argue that Brexit justifies breaking up the former . Speaking ahead of the debate , Mr Fraser said : `` I agree that we wish to continue to trade with the EU after Brexit . But we are still no clearer as to what exactly the Scottish Government is asking for . `` This is the eleventh debate the Scottish Government has held on the consequences of Brexit , with increasingly little new to say on the subject . '' He argued that Ms Sturgeon can not demand clarity of Mrs May 's Government when she can not provide it herself . Jackie Baillie , Scottish Labour 's economy spokesman , said : `` The SNP 's own figures confirm that remaining part of the UK single market is more important for Scotland 's economy than even being in the EU . `` It is illogical for the SNP to spend so much energy making the case for the EU single market yet at the same time campaigning to leave the much more valuable UK single market . '' But Bruce Crawford , an SNP MSP , said : `` Every area of Scotland voted to remain in the EU and today 's debate is an opportunity for the Tories and all other parties to reject a hard Brexit and stand up for Scotland . `` At this crucial stage while the UK Government is still working out its negotiating position , this is the time to make Scotland 's voice heard and challenge head on those who want to lead us out of the single market with all the costs to Scottish jobs and the economy . '' A Scottish Government spokesman added : `` The Standing Council on Europe deliberately includes members with a range of views and perspectives , all of which contribute to the Scottish Government 's thinking and we will set out the government 's proposals on protecting Scotland from a hard Brexit in the coming weeks . ''
No10 panics as Leave surges ; Boris attacked after Downing Street is warned of likely Brexit ; Vote Leave : PM using Queen 's birthday honours to curry favour ; Top entrepreneur backs Out with warning over EU red tape
DOWNING Street is `` panicked '' over the EU referendum amid growing internal signs that support for the Leave campaign is surging . Private data and internal polling which shows that after two weeks of building momentum there have been huge swings to the Brexit campaign has prompted growing alarm in the Remain camp , sources have said . It has led to a marked change in strategy , with the campaign to keep Britain in the EU orchestrating a series of highly personal attacks on Boris Johnson , a leader of the Leave campaign . David Cameron 's team has adopted a `` take out Boris strategy '' by allowing a Tory Cabinet minister to claim Mr Johnson only backed Brexit in order to further his ambition to be prime minister and associating him with Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader . In a sign the markets believe a Brexit is more likely , the FTSE 100 yesterday suffered its biggest one-day fall since the beginning of the campaign , decreasing by 1.86 per cent . The pound also dropped sharply as a poll gave Leave a 10-point lead , with 55 per cent of voters now backing a Brexit . With less than a fortnight to go until polling day , the campaign yesterday became increasingly fevered . In other developments : ? The Queen was dragged into the row as the Prime Minister was accused of using the birthday honours list to reward nearly two dozen backers of the Remain campaign . Sir James Dyson discloses in a Telegraph interview that he is joining the Brexit campaign , describing Remain 's warnings about trade as `` cobblers '' . Labour 's EU campaign was in chaos as senior figures admitted many of their supporters are now backing Brexit after Jeremy Corbyn 's failure to make the case vociferously for Remain . Justice Secretary Michael Gove 's Leave campaign warned that Britain will need seven new prisons by 2030 if immigration is not controlled . Wolfgang Schäuble , Germany 's fi-nance minister , has ruled out Britain joining the single market after a Brexit , declaring that `` out is out '' for the UK . British victims of Libyan-sponsored IRA terrorism are being blocked from receiving millions of pounds in compensation because of human rights laws , the Government has admitted . This weekend there will be an outpouring of patriotic sentiment as the nation celebrates the Queen 's 90th and the Duke of Edinburgh 's 95th birthdays and the beginning of the home nations ' campaign in the European football championships , which insiders believe will help the Leave campaign . Government insiders have said the Remain campaign is `` falling apart '' after a series of salvos by Mr Johnson and Mr Gove . Mr Cameron is appearing on the BBC tomorrow in what is being seen as an attempt to relaunch the campaign . Despite the Prime Minister claiming he did not want the referendum campaign to descend into a series of `` blue-on-blue '' attacks between Conservatives , the Remain campaign is now seeking to undermine Eurosceptic Tories , it is understood . During a televised debate on Thursday Amber Rudd , the Energy Secretary , made personal attacks on Mr Johnson , accusing him of joining the Brexit campaign to further his own career . She said of Mr Johnson : `` He 's the life and soul of the party but he 's not the man you want driving you home at the end of the evening . '' The Remain campaign released a poster featuring a mock-up of Mr Johnson , Mr Gove and Mr Farage , at a casino table with the slogan : `` Do n't let them gamble with your future . '' Sources in the Leave camp said their rivals were resorting to `` playground jibes '' in a sign `` they are rattled , have no discipline , no ideas and no hope '' . During a town hall event for Facebook , Mr Cameron was asked if he feels `` sorry '' for the attacks on Mr Johnson . He said the debates were `` lively affairs and that 's the way it is '' . However , Mr Cameron did suggest that he still intends to offer Mr Johnson a Cabinet position after the referendum . The Leave campaign said 21 prominent Remain supporters were named in the birthday honours list , including Richard Reed , deputy chairman of Britain Stronger in Europe , who received a CBE . Others include John Armitage , of the hedge fund Egerton Capital , who gave £15,000 to the Remain campaign and is made a CBE . Awards also went to Remain donors and people who put their names to joint letters warning of the dangers of EU withdrawal . Labour MP Gisela Stuart , the Vote Leave chairman , denounced the awards as a `` shabby stitch-up '' and accused Mr Cameron of stooping to `` a new low '' in his drive to secure a Remain vote . Government sources rejected the charge , saying that the honours were decided by independent committees and included at least three prominent supporters of the Leave campaign . In a special supplement in today 's Daily Telegraph , Mr Johnson and Mr Cameron set out the arguments for and against the EU . Mr Cameron says : `` For me , remaining in the EU is the big , bold , British decision . '' Mr Johnson writes : `` This is the time to restore health to our democracy , to go global , and to believe in Britain . It 's win-win . '' Queen 's birthday : Pages 6-7 EU reports : Pages 10-11 Nigel Farage and Editorial Comment : Page 25
Brexit fears can be overdone , but there are real risks , too ; As the referendum deadline nears , prepare for increasing volatility -and opportunity - in the market QUESTOR
THE risk that Britain will vote to leave the European Union has created turmoil for London-listed shares . However , the recent market movements could also create opportunity . Brexit risk and reward 1 There is no time like the present to prepare for the potential exit of Britain from the EU . The referendum on membership may not be due to take place until June 23 , but currency and stock markets have already begun to price in the risk of an exit . At the moment the bookies are offering odds of Britain voting to leave at about 7/4 implying roughly a 25pc chance of an exit , although there is plenty of time left for that to change . The purchasing power of the pound is one of the clearest indicators for the strength of the UK economy . The potential impact of the UK souring relations with its largest trading partner can be seen in the global currency markets . The pound has fallen by 4.7pc against the euro and 4pc against the US dollar since the start of the year . These moves are merely an hors d'oeuvre to the 20pc slump in sterling predicted by some experts if the UK does vote to leave . Property panic 2 Shares in the UK property sector have been in the eye of the storm over Brexit fears . Property in the UK is not only a place to live and work , it has also become a store of wealth for the world 's rich . London property has become the ultimate `` safe haven '' asset for everyone from oligarchs to gulf state billionaires . That position is now under serious threat as asset values face a double whammy of currency devaluation and falling prices . Shares in London-listed real estate trusts and housebuilders have been in the vanguard of a selloff . The shares of London-focused commercial property giants British Land and Land Securities have fallen 14pc and 11pc respectively , while those with a focus on West London retail and office space , such as Derwent , Great Portland and Shaftesbury have slipped 17pc , 14pc and 5pc lower respectively . The sharp move down has led to £4bn being wiped off FTSE 350 real estate investment trusts since the start of the year . This is not solely down to fears over Brexit . The global economy has also begun to slow . Lower oil prices are weighing on emerging markets that rely heavily on revenues from selling commodities , and estimates for global growth have been revised down by the International Monetary Fund and credit ratings agency Fitch . That said , when investors make decisions about where to store their cash , they want a stable political and economic backdrop , something that would go out of the window in a Brexit scenario . The great British residential property price boom is also showing signs of stalling . Shares in Londonfocused housebuilder Berkeley Group have led the selloff , falling 18pc this year , while the UK 's largest housebuilder Persimmon is down 1pc and Taylor Wimpey down 13pc . Fears overplayed 3 Markets tend to overdo it on both the upside and the downside . In this particular case Sebastian Jory from broker Liberum thinks that the Brexit fears have been overplayed thus far . A vote for Brexit will clearly hit property prices , and London , with its focus on financial services , will suffer . However , as Mr Jory points out , there should be a consistent `` UK discount '' for any risk of Brexit across all cyclical sectors . That appears not to be the case . `` Put simply , it appears that real estate is pricing a significantly worse economic outcome for the UK than other sectors , '' Mr Jory said . He compared the performance of UK stocks against their US and European counterparts since the start of the year , and the findings from the analysis suggest that the sell-off of real estate and housebuilder shares may have been overdone . Banks exposed 4 The other side to this argument is that the UK banking sector may not be adequately pricing in the full risks of leaving the EU . The UK banking industry is reliant on the cordial trading relations with one of its biggest partners . Were this to be lost it would come as a further blow to a sector already reeling from a liquidity squeeze . Analysis shows that while UK banking stocks have indeed fallen since the start of the year , they have not fallen by as much as their European and US counterparts - the suggestion being they could be exposed to further falls as the referendum vote nears . Beware nervous bystanders 5 Mr Jory also highlights the risk to London-listed stocks from US investors becoming more fearful . `` We think that selling of UK stocks by US holders might get more indiscriminate as the referendum nears , if the 'out ' vote remains a conceivable outcome , '' he said . A Liberum screen across the FTSE 100 shows the UK stocks with a high concentration of US investors . Pharmaceutical group Shire at 62pc is the most exposed , while gold miner Randgold Resources has 60pc , utility group SSE 56pc , luxury goods group Burberry 54pc , and B & Q owner Kingfisher 53pc . In the FTSE 250 , which contains the UK 's mid-sized corporates , aerospace group Meggitt is 64pc US held , discount retailer Poundland 61pc , Paddy Power Betfair 55pc , pharmaceutical group Indivior 55pc , and Domino 's Pizza 55pc .
Milk price rises likely without a Brexit deal , say dairy farmers
THE cost of a pint of milk could rise unless Brexit negotiations settle a trade and labour deal , the UK 's dairy farmers have warned . The industry - which employs more than 70,000 people - said Britain leaving the EU without striking a deal and having to resort to World Trade Organisation tariffs would be `` the worst outcome '' . Calling Brexit a `` monumental and game-changing challenge '' , Paul Vernon , chairman of trade body Dairy UK , said the industry has `` tremendous potential for exports and product development '' if a deal can be reached . Without such an arrangement , he warned of `` far-reaching consequences '' for the sector , which generates an annual turnover of £28bn . `` The stakes could not be higher and there is a fine balance between creating a climate where we can seize the opportunities that Brexit may present and being left with seriously detrimental trading conditions , '' Mr Vernon added . In a `` white paper '' on the sector , Dairy UK said it wanted continued free trade between Britain and the EU , saying tariffs would damage exports and reduce demand . Other demands included an `` unhurried '' transition to whatever arrangements are put in place as a result of leaving the EU , to allow the sector to `` adapt and take advantage of Brexit '' . A further concern is that without continued access to both skilled and unskilled labour , costs could spiral , hitting margins and potentially pushing up prices . The white paper also revealed that despite the uncertainty caused by impending Brexit , investment by companies in the sector stands at a rate of more than £100m a year . It also found that spending is rising on the full range of dairy products : milk , cream , cheese , yogurt , butter and organic produce . Despite a growing range of alternatives , 87pc of consumers drink cow 's milk and 94pc of adults buy cheese , according to the research . 87pc The percentage of consumers who drink cow 's milk , despite a growing range of alternatives , Dairy UK research found
MPs must be allowed to improve the Brexit Bill - but not thwart it ; Labour has moved beyond fair scrutiny into actively weakening our country 's negotiating position
Shortly after the General Election , I feared the new makeup of Parliament would prove toxic for Brexit . The Government , I thought , would n't be able to pass laws either to implement Brexit sensibly or prepare for a `` no deal '' collapse in talks . The EU , seeing our dilemma , would offer Britain a dreadful , take-it-or-leave-it deal as the only alternative to crashing out . I 'm not quite as pessimistic as I was , but last week the Government ran into the first roadblock that I was worried about . It was forced to postpone its most significant piece of legislation so far , the EU Withdrawal Bill , after MPs tabled as many as 300 amendments . The Government now faces a hard reality : how can it pass the laws needed to implement Brexit through a Parliament dead set against it ? To navigate its way through , it must engage not only in negotiations abroad but with its own MPs . That must involve concessions . There are plenty of reasonable concessions it could make . The simple purpose of the Bill is to transpose into UK law all of the EU rules we have been obeying for 40 years - and to do it quickly - so that we do n't face a legal vacuum in March 2019 . Without it , MPs would have to debate and vote upon some 20,000 measures in the next 18 months - clearly impossible . However , in order to achieve its aim , the Bill has to do some rather unpalatable things . It gives the Government all sorts of unusual powers , like the ability to rewrite huge swathes of regulation without parliamentary scrutiny . Doubtless many of these powers will be needed because of the unpredictability of Britain 's talks with the EU . Our Government can not negotiate certain important matters , like whether and how to cooperate on drugs regulation for example , if Parliament has preemptively nailed down an answer . It needs legal room for manoeuvre . At the same time , there are reasons to be very careful when handing the Government what is effectively , in the words of Tory MP and former attorney general Dominic Grieve , `` a blank cheque '' . Power can not be trusted to police itself . Acknowledging this does not amount to betraying Brexit . In judging Parliament 's behaviour , therefore , it is very important to distinguish between those MPs and amendments whose aim really is to sabotage Brexit and those that are simply doing what Parliament is meant to do : scour the Bill for risks , excessive power-grabs , contradictions and legal ambiguities . Though I do n't agree with all of his suggested changes to the Bill , it seems that Mr Grieve 's activities fit into the latter category . Among the worries he and others have expressed is that the Government is giving itself more power than necessary while removing people 's rights to challenge that power . For example , the Bill hands ministers the power to amend legislation derived from EU law without any scrutiny from MPs . That might make sense when adjusting supervisory processes for banks , but a lot of other laws are being swept up in the same category . One example is the 2010 Equality Act , which outlaws discrimination in the workplace . This is a controversial area in which to let a government rewrite the law without oversight . Then there are the ambiguities . For example , the Government said it intends to transfer various EU legal rights and obligations into British law . One example is the EU state aid regime , which stops states from bailing out industries on a whim . The EU test for whether state aid is allowed is whether or not it distorts trade and competition `` between member states '' . It is impossible to translate this straightforwardly into UK law , yet the current Bill seems to attempt exactly that . By what method remains unclear . Just consider the problems arising from such legal ambiguities . The first danger is that post-Brexit Britain faces a gamut of lawsuits from companies or individuals arguing over what exactly the law means . But there is another , political danger that should concentrate Tory minds in particular . Imagine that Jeremy Corbyn were to win the next election and find himself presiding over this legal morass . Various protections , like state aid rules , that have for years insured against a return to untrammelled socialist excesses might disappear just at the moment that voters hand power to a genuine Marxist . Only yesterday , Mr Corbyn was boasting that he is , as Phillip Hammond warned , an `` existential threat '' to Britain 's economic model . Should we really , for the sake of Brexit fervour , remove various safety features designed to check government power just as Mr Corbyn gets close to it himself ? But , while many MPs , including Mr Grieve , think Parliament should get a final vote on the Brexit deal , Labour 's policy goes further . Shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer has made it clear any deal Britain negotiates with the EU will always in his view be preferable to no deal . Labour will never , he says , vote to endorse a `` no deal '' Brexit . There are two problems with this . The first , obvious one is that it sends the message that the EU can dictate whatever terms it likes , because our Parliament will swallow anything rather than let the Government walk away from the table . This is deeply unhelpful . The second problem is that Labour seems to assume that if Parliament rejects `` no deal '' it will effectively stop Brexit . In fact , since Article 50 has already been triggered , we have no idea what such a vote would do , but it would likely add to the legal chaos and ensuing economic shock caused by crashing out . In reality , Labour 's position is entirely self-serving . It is using parliamentary procedure to state , pre-emptively : `` Do n't blame me . '' The party voted to trigger Article 50 and has been ambiguous about Brexit , but at the end of the process , it wants a chance to disown the whole thing . This would be legitimate party politics but for one shameful fact : it actively damages Britain 's negotiating position just when we need to show strength . Brexit is a task of great complexity . There are bound to be corrections and amendments needed along the way . MPs should not be pilloried for doing their job . But those MPs who use their leverage to send political messages that damage Britain 's negotiating position should think long and hard about whose interests they are serving . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Break in trade talks deadlock still months away , warns EU
THE European Union yesterday warned Britain it was still `` months '' away from being able to open Brexit trade negotiations as it emerged major divisions remained between the UK and EU over the so-called Brexit bill . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , insisted that Britain would have to pay its full share of spending earmarked for the EU after Brexit , as the bloc 's own auditors criticised the EU for running up spending commitments of some £210billion - - an `` all time high '' . At the end of four days of talks in Brussels , Mr Barnier said : `` We have had a constructive week , yes , but we are not yet there , '' he said , later adding : `` It will take weeks , maybe even months before we are able to say there has been sufficient progress . '' Both sides said they had made progress on citizens ' rights and the Northern Irish border , but Mr Barnier said the EU still wanted the European Court of Justice to play `` an indispensable role '' in ensuring the EU citizens ' rights guaranteed in the agreement were observed . `` This is a stumbling block for the EU , '' he said . Last night Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator , claimed that a majority of people in the UK no longer want to leave the EU . He said : `` While this [ backing Brexit ] is true for most British politicians , and for most English newspapers , this is not the case for what seems to be today a majority of British citizens . '' He joked that Mrs May chose to make her keynote speech in Florence , a city renowned for `` back-stabbing and betrayal '' , because it felt familiar for her . Meanwhile , back at Westminster , the Delegated Powers Committee in the Lords issued a damning report on the Government 's Brexit legislation , the EU Withdrawal Bill , warning that powers granted to ministers to change legislation were `` wholly unacceptable '' .
May dismisses 'pay to play ' access to European markets
THERESA MAY has insisted that Britain will not make substantial payments to the EU for market access after Brexit as she appeared to contradict Philip Hammond . The Chancellor was asked during a trip to Berlin whether the UK would be prepared to pay for access to the EU markets for City firms . He replied : `` We will talk about all of these things . '' However , Downing Street said yesterday that the Prime Minister was clear that `` we will not be paying for access '' and insisted that the Chancellor `` thought he was responding to a general point '' . It came after reports that Germany is preparing to demand `` substantial '' payments to EU budgets in exchange for market access as part of any trade deal after Brexit . The suggestion that the UK may need to `` pay to play '' in Europe after Brexit is likely to anger Eurosceptics , who have repeatedly warned that such payments would be unacceptable . Mrs May promised last year in a Lancaster House speech that the `` days of Britain making vast contributions to the European Union every year will end '' after Brexit . The Prime Minister and Mr Hammond yesterday met senior executives from some of the world 's leading financial institutions to discuss Brexit . Mr Hammond described the UK 's financial services sector as an `` enabler of the real economy across Europe '' and warned that attacks on the City after Brexit risked `` undermining Europe 's economy '' .
Settle the Brexit bill deadlock or we will 'shake the tree ' , warns EU ; Pressure mounts on May as Wall Street bankers threaten to pull jobs out of the City
THE EU will look to use the Brexit deadlock and rising uncertainty in the business world to `` shake the tree '' and force lucrative companies to relocate to Europe if Downing Street fails to make a move soon to settle the socalled `` Brexit bill '' , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . The hard-nosed EU stance comes as ambassadors met in Brussels yesterday for discussions about the shape of a possible Brexit transition and deal . The European Parliament warned that there were still `` major issues '' stopping a deal on citizens ' rights , contradicting Theresa May 's assertions that the two sides were within `` touching distance '' of a deal on the issue . The parliament rejected British plans to require the 3.2million EU citizens already in Britain to register after Brexit , subjecting them to blanket criminal records checks and charging the cost of a British passport - £72.50 - to obtain `` settled status '' documents . The ambassadors ' meeting before today 's Brexit negotiations was designed to begin `` scoping out '' options for the next phase of talks , according to a seven-page discussion document seen by The Telegraph , but also to put pressure on the Prime Minister to make commitments on the ( EURO ) 60billion ( £53billion ) Brexit bill . `` The plain fact is that , as Mr Barnier repeatedly says , 'the clock is ticking ' , and time is not on the British side , '' said an EU source with knowledge of the plans for discussion . `` The longer the UK waits , the more the pressure will build , the more we shake the tree . '' EU officials told Reuters that failure to reach an agreement on the principles behind the bill before December could lead to delaying the opening of trade talks until March , heaping more pressure on the government to secure a transition deal early in 2018 . `` Some believe that the worse it gets for the British , the better for us ... that maybe we could delay it all until , for instance , March , increasing the uncertainty and triggering the contingency plans in the corporate sector , '' the official told the agency . Pressure to make progress is growing , amid reports that Wall Street bankers had warned Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , on a visit to London that they were preparing to move thousands of jobs from the City as confidence waned in Mrs May 's ability to cut a deal . Independent analysts warned that time was running out for a deal by December . Mujtaba Rahman , the head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group , a risk consultancy , warned clients that the UK would need to make a move by `` the end of the month '' . The hardening tone reflects mounting EU frustration with Mrs May 's refusal to elaborate on the pledge made in her Florence speech , that the UK would `` honour the commitments '' made during the UK 's 43-year EU membership . `` Essentially , nothing is happening on the ground . We are not lacking public announcements , but progress in Brussels , '' said a second EU source . Mrs May indicated that the UK would pay some ( EURO ) 20billion ( £18billion ) for a transition deal in 2019 and 2020 , which would fill the immediate hole left in the EU budget by Brexit , but the EU says it wants an additional ( EURO ) 30billion . The UK disputes the EU 's arithmetic but could agree ( EURO ) 50billion if the EU offers the UK a `` deep and special '' trade partnership , but officials said Mrs May was in `` no mood '' to make concessions . Empire building Balkans could enter EU after Brexit Brexit is a chance for the EU to welcome western Balkan countries into the bloc , the prime minister of Bulgaria said yesterday at the European Commission headquarters in Brussels . Boyko Borissov called for the inclusion of Macedonia , Montenegro , Albania , Serbia , Kosovo , and Bosnia-Herzegovina . Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the European Commission , said he thought Serbia and Montenegro would be members `` before 2025 '' . By James Crisp
Scotland SNP Economy Minister attacks banks for not threatening to leave UK after Brexit
THE SNP 's Economy Minister yesterday delivered an extraordinary attack on the banking sector for `` not threatening to leave '' the UK after Brexit . Keith Brown accused the financial services industry of `` not getting on side of the public '' by failing to exert pressure on the UK Government with threats to move their operations abroad after Brexit . Speaking at a fringe meeting at the SNP conference in Glasgow , Mr Brown said the major banks and financial institutions had not shied away from going public with their concerns during 2014 's independence battle and asked : `` Why is the sector so quiet ? '' But the Conservatives accused him of trying to `` bully job creators into threatening to leave '' and pointed out the Nationalists could not even say what currency would be used in a separate Scotland during the referendum . They also attacked SNP MEPs Ian Hudghton and Alyn Smith for voting in the European Parliament against the EU starting trade talks with the UK . Kirstene Hair , the Tory MP for Angus , said the Oct 3 vote showed `` their party is hell bent on disrupting Brexit and causing chaos for UK negotiators . '' Mr Brown 's intervention came a day after Howard Davies , chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland Group , said details of a post-Brexit transitional deal with the EU need to be outlined in the next five months to stop more financial services jobs leaving London . RBS and Standard Life , which are both based in Edinburgh , warned in 2014 that independence would pose a serious risk to their businesses . Barclays and Lloyds Banking Group also warned of the economic risks , while Deutsche Bank said it would be a historic mistake . Mr Brown was appearing at a fringe meeting with Chris Cummings from the Investment Association , the trade body that represents UK investment managers . Referring to Mr Cummings , the Economy Minister said : `` He and his colleagues in the financial sector are not threatening to leave and my issue is , why is that the case ? `` We are used to having people threaten to leave Scotland when faced with constitutional change . Why is the sector so quiet ? '' He argued that `` more robust interventions '' could have forced the UK Government to listen to the sector 's concerns over Brexit and claimed the major banks were growing `` increasingly frustrated '' about being ignored . Mr Brown acknowledged the industry is warning the UK Government Brexit will hit job numbers but concluded : `` It 's not been public in the way it was during the independence referendum . '' `` By not being public , you 're not getting on side the public who then put pressure on the UK government . '' Dean Lockhart , the Scottish Tories ' shadow economy minister , said : `` These are extraordinary comments by Keith Brown and they call into question his understanding of Scottish business . His job is to back Scotland 's economy - not to bully job creators into threatening to leave . `` Financial firms went public on the dangers of separation because independence would have wrecked Scotland 's economy . Mr Brown 's rant shows he is clearly more concerned with his obsession with independence than he is with building Scotland 's economy . ''
The best companies embrace change
I 've long had a problem with publicly owned companies doing politics . They can and should do policy , of course : they certainly owe it to their shareholders to try to influence the laws and taxes that affect them directly . They are also perfectly entitled to fight for capitalism in a broad sense : without that , they would n't exist . But there is a line that should n't be crossed . They should n't explicitly back a political party or a particular side in a referendum . That should be the preserve of private individuals and private companies . PLCs should try to make the best of democratic decisions , and they should accept and embrace big social trends . It is genuine progress , for example , that big businesses increasingly embrace modern society as it is currently is , and are desperate to hire a diverse workforce . Major elections and referendums often reflect another kind of social change ; that too needs to be absorbed by the business community . Which brings us to Brexit : the job of PLCs is to try to mould the outcome in a way that is best for them , or for the economy as a whole , not to seek to reverse it . Some banks have a real challenge on their hands , because of the EU 's protectionist attitude to the selling of financial services : but they should seek ways around it , and replacement trade arrangements , not campaign against Brexit per se . It is fair for companies who believe that their business has been damaged by a side-effect of Brexit to say so ( for example , the partly irrational slump in sterling has damaged retailers that import the kinds of products it is n't feasible to produce in the UK ) . But others that have n't really been affected should n't use the referendum as an excuse for poor management or bad luck . Conversely , firms that have done well from what has already happened as a result of Brexit should be free to say so . Export volumes of manufactured goods have been booming , thanks to the weaker pound : there was a 9.9 percentage point rise in the three-month year-on-year rolling average growth rate between July 2016 and March 2017 following the EU referendum vote , according to the Office for National Statistics . The reality is that the best companies are those that always embrace change . They realise that it is pointless and stupid to fight against the tide of history and do their best to make the most of it . One of the best responses to Brexit to date from a major business - and one that certainly meets my criteria of what a firm should say when confronted with major political change - came from Burberry this week . Christopher Bailey , chief creative officer , said as part of the company 's latest results presentation that the potential for post-Brexit Britain is `` enormous '' . He pointed out , quite sensibly , that his company was `` absolutely committed '' to keeping its manufacturing in the UK . Even better , he argued that `` Britishness resonates globally '' and that his business now has a huge opportunity to grow . This is the sort of upbeat talk that real leaders understand to be necessary in times such as these . He was absolutely right - just as he was right to warn that restrictions to immigration should n't become so severe as to make it too hard to operate a dynamic business from London . His intervention was pitched exactly right , and it is worth remembering that Bailey , like many other big business leaders , backed Remain . So this is my new litmus test : I respect businesses that embrace the upsides of Brexit and that seek to mitigate the downsides in a constructive , sensible manner that is respectful of the UK 's democratic choice . I respect those that come up with plans to make Brexit work as well as possible , in the short as well as long term . I do n't respect those that seek to bully or blackmail the UK into reversing our choice . And , guess what - I bet that upbeat , optimistic firms such as Burberry will do much better than those that still refuse to accept the new political reality . 'I respect those that come up with plans to make Brexit work as well as possible '
Hammond : I 'll prove Britain can flourish in customs union
PHILIP HAMMOND is preparing to challenge Liam Fox to prove that Britain 's trade deals after Brexit will compensate for the losses it faces from leaving the EU 's customs union . Treasury officials have drawn up an analysis which questions whether Britain will be able to line up free trade arrangements with non-EU countries that outweigh the cost of leaving the customs union . The Chancellor wants Britain to retain associate membership of the customs union during an `` implementation period '' after Brexit to ensure it can continue to enjoy `` frictionless '' border arrangements . However , Dr Fox , the International Development Secretary , says Britain needs to leave the customs union so it can exploit the trading opportunities provided by Brexit . The customs union enables tarifffree trade between members of the EU while also reducing administrative and financial barriers such as customs checks and charges . But it also means Britain can not strike its own free-trade deals with non-EU countries . Mr Hammond said last month that developing new customs arrangements after Brexit would be difficult . He said : `` To do this in the context of our wider objectives will be challenging . It will almost certainly involve the deployment of new technology . '' Mr Hammond has vowed to put business first in Brexit talks , and said that immigration would not be `` shut down '' but rather `` managed '' after Brexit . He said : `` We recognise that this is a negotiation , and our negotiating counterparts will have their own priorities . When the British people voted last June , they did not vote to become poorer , or less secure . ''
Scotland Sturgeon : PM planning economic 'race to the bottom '
NICOLA STURGEON yesterday claimed that Theresa May 's plan for a clean break with the EU will mean a `` low tax , de-regulated race to the bottom '' as she intensified her efforts to use Brexit to push for Scottish independence . The First Minister said it appeared Brexit would mean the UK stripping away workers ' rights to help deliver a low-cost environment for business and argued this economic model raised a `` fundamental question '' about `` what kind of country do we want to be '' . Her latest warning followed reports that the Prime Minister will use a major speech tomorrow to state that she intends to take Britain out of the single market and customs union so the UK can control its borders and negotiate its own trade deals . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , suggested yesterday that he could cut taxes to encourage companies to move to the UK if the EU retaliates by limiting access to the single market . But the `` clean break '' strategy threatens to inflict major political damage on Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , who has repeatedly stated that maintaining free trade with the EU in the Brexit deal is more important than limiting immigration . Mike Russell , the SNP 's Brexit Minister , yesterday tweeted an extract of an interview Ms Davidson gave last July in which she said she wanted to stay in the single market even if that meant keeping free movement of labour . He said that he hoped Tory MSPs would support this stance in a Holyrood debate tomorrow after which they will vote on a Scottish Government motion backing the SNP 's plan for Scotland to stay in the EU single market even if the rest of the UK comes out . But critics have warned that Ms Sturgeon 's highly complicated proposal to create a separate business regime north of the Border would create a hard economic border with England . The Spanish government has also appeared to deliver a fatal blow to the plan by stating there would be one Brexit deal for the whole of the UK and no special arrangement for Scotland . Reacting to media reports yesterday outlining the Brexit model Mrs May intends to pursue , Ms Sturgeon tweeted : `` Looking like Brexit will mean low tax , de-regulated race to the bottom , with workers ' rights , environmental protection etc under threat . '' She added : `` If that is the case , it raises a more fundamental question - not just are we in/out the EU , but what kind of country do we want to be ? '' Alex Rowley , Scottish Labour 's deputy leader , described the reports as `` worrying '' and argued it was in Scotland 's best interests to have access to the single market . The Conservatives rejected Ms Sturgeon 's arguments and the attacks on Ms Davidson , arguing the First Minister should instead focus on working with the UK Government to get the best Brexit deal . John Lamont , the party 's chief whip , said : `` This is just the latest insight into Nicola Sturgeon trying to further her separation goals by toying with the Brexit argument . ''
After wooing the Leavers , Mrs May must offer a Brexit for Remainers ; The PM has proved she wants to take us out of the EU . Now she should reach out to those who disagree
There is nothing , it seems , that Theresa May does not want to make work for `` everyone '' rather than the `` privileged few '' . This has been her trademark phrase , bolted on to everything from the economy to democracy . It is , of course , meaningless - unless she can point us to a prime minister who promised to govern for the benefit of the few . In her New Year message , Mrs May went a step further and promised a Brexit that works for everyone , even for those who voted to remain in the European Union . Quite a pledge , but she wanted this to be the year of the olive branch . It did n't last for long . Within a few sentences she had slipped back to the old sectarian language hailing Brexit voters as the overlooked and downtrodden - standing in contrast , one assumes , to the wealthy and aloof Remainers . The Prime Minister should be forgiven for making such points : she backed the losing side in the referendum and often seems to feel ( wrongly ) guilty about it . Britain remains sore about the referendum . The polls suggest a nation still evenly split . Remnants of both camps are still fighting hard , but there 's a case to be made for peace . And she is the woman to make it . Mrs May is in an enviable position of being a Remainer who is trusted , completely , by Brexiteers . Her muchmocked soundbite , `` Brexit means Brexit , '' was her way of saying that she could be trusted . There would be no sneaky attempts to be a member in all but name : no free movement of people , no more diktats from European judges and the Article 50 notice served to the EU by April Fool 's Day . At times , she has sounded more strident than any of her colleagues , talking about the referendum as if it were a victory of the masses and an overdue defeat for the `` citizens of the world '' . This is the paradox . Had Michael Gove or Boris Johnson won the Tory party leadership , they 'd have done far more to reassure Remain voters that Brexit was not a nativist coup . They 'd have spent weeks on a love-bombing mission to Europe , offered new scholarships to British universities and new , generous forms of defence and economic cooperation . Daniel Hannan , a leader Leaver , told the European Parliament ( in French ) that the referendum was a vote against the EU 's bureaucracy , not against Europe . The Leave campaign offered a liberal and globally minded version of Brexit , one they would have fought hard to project and protect . Instead , it was Mrs May who took the crown and she jumped the other way , sounding meaner than the most flintyhearted Brexiteer . Even Ukip was appalled to see her use the three million EU nationals living in Britain as bargaining chips , but at least , now , there is no Brexiteer who doubts her intentions . She spent the second half of last year establishing herself as the Brexit Boadicea , who enjoys flaying her enemies . If Leave campaigners have a problem with her nowadays , it is that she can take things a little too far . Her credentials are such that she can now sound more conciliatory and the opportunity to do so will come in her speech about Europe later this month . The idea of a Brexit that works for Remainers is not so preposterous , if you consider the arguments that animated the campaign and the overlap between www.them.No one was very enthusiastic about the EU itself , which is why Remainers struggled to make a positive case for staying in . They instead sought to frame the referendum as being about something more : a choice between a Britain that was open or closed , tolerant or bigoted , internationalist or nativist . It was a powerful argument , and remains so now . Mrs May can adopt this language , and speak about an open , tolerant global Britain - one that has just voted to lift its sights to more distant horizons . A country that cherishes immigrants and needs more , albeit under a fairer , accountable admission system . That she looks forward to an end to Australian and Indian immigrants being discriminated against simply because they are not European . At the Davos economic forum later this month she can boast that , at a time when protectionism is on the rise , Britain stands ready to champion free trade . She is not used to making such arguments , but this is how Brexit was successfully sold to an outward-looking nation . If she were to change her mind and allow all EU migrants to stay in Britain , for example , polls suggest she would be thanked by four fifths of the public and three quarters of Leave voters . The harsh kind of Brexit that she occasionally seems to champion , one that does n't much care about uncertainty cast over Polish NHS nurses and their children in British schools , would never have won the referendum . A more emollient tone would also help prepare the ground for what critics would call a `` hard Brexit '' , which is looking increasingly likely . Sir Ivan Rogers , our now-departed ambassador to the EU , was probably right to say that most European diplomats think there 's no chance of her agreeing a deal by the next election . The EU 's chief objective is its own survival , and it can scarcely afford to let Britain walk away from the club without any real punishment . Mrs May will be negotiating with a wounded beast , one whose leaders face their own Eurosceptic challengers at home . The worse things get on the continent , the less the chance of the EU agreeing a sensible compromise with Britain . Mrs May seems to sense this , and has started to talk about how no deal is better than a bad deal . She might soon start to make the case for pulling out of talks and falling back on what might be called `` global free trade '' : the basic rules of the World Trade Organisation . This is the basis for our trade with the United States , our biggest export market , so it 's hardly a disaster . It would leave her free to cut deals with any country in the world , on her own terms . But politically , she would need to make this sound like a positive choice , not the result of failure in Brussels . All told , the Prime Minister has chosen the right moment to stop talking as if she was somehow elected to govern for the 52 per cent and reach out to Remainers , too . Whether at home or abroad , she will soon need every friend she can get . FOLLOW Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland 40 Tory rebels ready to support Corbyn on Brexit ; Labour leader 's motion to force publication of May 's plan 'supportable ' , says ex-Conservative minister
UP TO 40 pro-European Conservative MPs are prepared to rebel against the Government and back a move by Labour to force it to publish its plan for leaving the European Union , a former minister has said . Labour will tomorrow table a motion in the Commons to attempt to force Theresa May to publish the plan before Brexit negotiations are formally triggered in March . Downing Street sources made clear the Government will not support the motion . Mrs May yesterday accused the Liberal Democrats and Labour of `` frustrating the will of the people '' by plotting to delay or overturn Brexit . Nick Clegg , the former Liberal Democrat leader , said at the weekend that his party is prepared to vote against triggering Brexit negotiations unless it is given guarantees on Single Market access and a second referendum . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , has said that he will seek to amend any bill on the Article 50 process to withdraw from the European Union in order to guarantee worker 's rights . The Prime Minister 's spokesman said yesterday : `` While others are seeming to make clear that they want to frustrate the will of the British people by slowing down the process of leaving and trying to tie the Government 's hand in the negotiation , the Government is getting on with respecting what the British people decided and making a success of Brexit '' The motion , tabled by Mr Corbyn , demands that the Government set out its broad aims for Brexit and appears carefully crafted to attract as much Conservative support as possible . It acknowledges that there `` should be no disclosure of material that could be reasonably judged to damage the UK in any negotiations '' . Anna Soubry , a former employment minister , told BBC Radio 4 's World at One : `` I have read the motion . I ca n't see anything in it that I do n't approve of and could n't support . `` I have never voted against my Government , I have always been very loyal , but this transcends party politics . '' She suggested that up to 40 Conservative MPs could back the motion unless the Government published its own alternative . Pro-European sources in the Tory party suggested the number is likely to be closer to 20 , which is still significantly more than the Government 's majority . EU citizens living in the UK will need `` some sort of documentation '' to prove their status , the Home Secretary has announced . Amber Rudd said that people already living here will have to prove they have a right to stay as part of plans to help employers understand who can legally work in Britain , but MPs have warned the process could cost £100 million .
EU negotiators question Brexit Secretary 's 'lack of involvement ' ; Brussels is told to 'get serious ' after Juncker 's comments on 'stability and accountability ' of Davis
DAVID DAVIS 'S relationship with Brussels reached a new low yesterday when EU negotiators questioned whether he was he was sufficiently `` stable , accountable and available '' during Brexit talks . Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , said Mr Davis 's `` apparent lack of involvement '' risked `` jeopardising the success of the negotiations '' . Supporters of Mr Davis hit back at the `` bar room insults '' and suggested that Mr Juncker was more interested in a `` public slagging match '' than reaching a pragmatic solution on Brexit . It came as senior EU figures suggested trade talks can not now begin until at least December , rather than October , as was previously suggested . A debate over the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill got under way in Parliament yesterday but it was overshadowed by the comments made by Mr Juncker and Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , in a briefing to all 28 EU commissioners . Minutes of the meeting on July 12 , published for the first time , disclosed that Mr Barnier `` expressed his concern about the question of the stability and accountability of the UK negotiator and his apparent lack of involvement , which risked jeopardising the success of the negotiations '' . Mr Davis did not respond to the comments , which the Brexit department said were `` out of date '' . But Charlie Elphicke , the Tory MP , said : `` It 's clear the British Government seizing the initiative in the negotiations is causing frustration in Brussels . `` These bar room insults show how weak and defensive they have become . The clock is ticking - there are less than 600 days to go . They need to get serious about the negotiations . '' At a press conference in Brussels , Mr Barnier insisted he had a `` cordial '' and `` professional '' relationship with Mr Davis . However , he was combative in his comments about the future of the border between the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland as he presented several new Brexit position papers . He heaped pressure on Britain to ensure Brexit did not jeopardise the Good Friday Agreement , Common Travel Area and `` invisible border '' between the Republic and Northern Ireland . Mr Barnier said British hopes of a bespoke customs deal on the Irish border that could be replicated for all UK-EU trade were doomed to failure . `` The UK position paper worries me . '' he said . `` The UK wants to use Ireland as a kind of test case for a future UK-EU customs relationship . This will not happen . '' The latest round of negotiations broke up last week with a stalemate over the size of any Brexit `` divorce bill '' Britain must pay the EU and progress still needed on citizens ' rights and the Irish border issue . The EU has said it will only begin trade talks when it is satisfied that `` sufficient progress '' has been made - a decision that was going to be addressed in October . The European Parliament president Antonio Tajani said he would advise the European Council to delay its assessment until December , while former Council president Herman van Rompuy said the chances of moving on to the second phase in October were `` in the neighbourhood of zero '' . Editorial Comment : Page 21 Pressure on Corbyn MPs push for policy of free movement Labour MPs are attempting to force Jeremy Corbyn to accept permanent freedom of movement as party policy , as around two dozen consider rebelling against his Brexit plans . A pro-Remain group is seeking a debate at Labour 's annual conference , which could force Mr Corbyn to pledge to allow free movement of EU nationals after Brexit by staying in the single market . Labour has committed to keeping free movement for an interim period but has stopped short of promising to do so permanently . All Labour MPs have been told to vote against the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill and the programme motion that allocates time to the debate next week . But at least half a dozen have said they will vote for the Bill , while as many as two dozen others are considering abstaining over fears about immigration policy .
Beneficial trade deals can continue after Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Of all the countries in the European Union , the Netherlands is one of the most friendly towards Britain . I was therefore dismayed to hear their finance minister , Jeroen Dijsselbloem , declare on Tuesday 's Newsnight that Brexit represents a `` lose-lose situation '' for both Britain and Europe . Of course , Brexit means Brexit , and we shall surrender our seats in the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission - but there is really no reason why our existing trading arrangements should not survive to the benefit of both parties . Mr Dijsselbloem appeared to be saying that , unless we accept the free movement of people within the EU , both parties will suffer negative economic consequences . He does not seem to take into account that , once out of the EU , it would be deeply unfair for us to discriminate against citizens from the rest of the world in favour of EU citizens . Tim Spurrier Brooke , Norfolk SIR - Your front-page article ( November 16 ) quotes the German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , as saying that making an exception for Britain to the rules of freedom of movement in the wake of Brexit would `` endanger principles of the whole internal market in the EU , because everyone else will then want these exceptions '' . I always thought that doing `` what everyone wanted '' was a basic principle of democracy . Geoffrey Leeming Holyhead , Anglesey SIR - It might be easier to settle on what `` Brexit '' means if we started giving it its full name - Britain 's exit from the European Union . To define that , it is first necessary to understand what is meant by the `` European Union '' . Is it to be a Europe of Free States , as advocated by Marine Le Pen of France 's National Front - or is it to be the United States of Europe , as advocated by Brussels ? The former is close to what Britain first signed up to ; the latter is a different world . Philip Styles Cheddar , Somerset
Remainers are just being disingenuous ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : So much of the argument against Brexit is disingenuous . Critics claim that they are motivated by one thing when their thinking is plainly informed by another . They all ignore the will of the people . The only way they will get away with it is if the Government lets them . Consider the Scottish National Party , which has announced that legislation will be published next week threatening another independence referendum if Scotland and the UK do not remain within the single market . The EU is not really the issue here : Nicola Sturgeon is buckling to pressure from within her own party . Never mind that if Scotland voted for independence then it would find itself outside both the EU and the UK . Never mind , either , that polls show Scots do n't even want a referendum . Mrs Sturgeon has a base to satisfy . Then there is Unilever , which claimed a falling pound necessitated a rise in its prices - including Marmite . Outraged MPs hit back by arguing that all the ingredients for Marmite are found within the UK . Unilever appears to have backed down , which suggests it was not Brexit that was responsible for any potential price rise , but the desire of a company to increase profits . An intensely political multinational , we note , that spoke out against Brexit during the referendum . So , of course , did a lot of MPs - and now they insist that Parliament must be in the driving seat for Brexit . The hypocrisy of some of them is breathtaking . For years they sat by as the EU undermined Parliament 's sovereignty . Now they want to assert it . Some Tories taking this position are motivated by principle - but it is hard to forget that some of them are sacked ministers and might be described as `` disgruntled former employees '' . On the Labour side , people who violently opposed Brexit now pay lip service to it while desperately fighting for ways to stymie it . They need to agree on a coherent strategy . Ed Miliband , who lost the 2015 election on a manifesto that opposed a referendum , said that Britain must remain within the single market but rethink freedom of movement . Jeremy Corbyn has said that integral aspects of the single market must go but that unlimited immigration must continue . Mr Cobyn was never a fan of the European project : he feels he must play the Europhile to appease his increasingly metropolitan party . But the Labour side is packed with others who have a fanatical commitment to the EU . Their goal is obvious : to prevent Brexit through parliamentary debate and delay . Some , such as David Lammy MP , have had the decency to be honest about their intentions . `` Our sovereign Parliament needs to now vote on whether we should exit the EU , '' he said after the referendum . `` We can stop this madness and bring this nightmare to an end . '' Most voters do not consider Brexit madness . They accept that negotiations will be tough , they understand that things might get difficult . But they can also see that those Remainers making a fuss about parliamentary sovereignty are , in some cases , bitter losers trying to undo the referendum . What they want to see is Theresa May take control of the political situation . There has been a lack of clarity about her objectives ; some of the talk about business policy post-Brexit has been ambiguous , even unfriendly . This is unnecessary . Britain has a bright , free-trading future . The Government needs to be more specific about its global ambitions and get on with the job . It must resist the antidemocratic schemes of Remainers in denial .
Brexit 'would deliver a 'great ' blow to eurozone economies ' ; Up to 0.3 pc of eurozone GDP would be wiped off in 18 months should Britain leave , economists claim
THE eurozone would suffer a substantial economic blow if Britain votes to leave the European Union , economists have warned . Up to 0.3pc of eurozone GDP will be wiped off the single currency 's 19 economies within 18 months , Dutch bank ING has calculated , noting that any prolonged political fallout from a Brexit could cause even `` greater and longer lasting '' damage to the bloc . Ireland would see the biggest economic contraction in the event of a Brexit , with cumulative growth down by as much as 1.1pc in the two year period following this summer 's referendum , said ING . The adverse impact on Ireland is almost as much as that estimated for the UK economy which could shrink by 1.2pc until 2017 . Malta , the Netherlands , Belgium and Luxembourg would also suffer a substantial hit with growth lower by between 1pc and 0.7pc . Germany , the eurozone 's largest economy , is in line to suffer a 0.5pc GDP contraction , with France at 0.4pc and Italy the least affected at 0.3pc . Falling exports , weaker investment and a shift in the direction of EU economic policy away from free market reforms , would all combine to create a sizeable adverse shock to the continent , said Peter Vanden Houte and Carsten Brzeski , economists at ING . In the short term , a sharp depreciation in the pound - which could fall as low as ( EURO ) 0.90 against the euro - would crimp eurozone exports to the UK , with small trading nations such as Ireland , Belgium and the Netherlands suffering the biggest losses to trade . A weaker pound would also see profits of European companies fall when converted into euros and leave eurozone businesses possibly facing higher trade tariffs if bilateral trade deals with the UK are not concluded within the two-year time frame awarded by Brussels after a 'Leave ' vote , they said . The Dutch bank 's calculations are more severe than rival estimations of the economic consequences of a Brexit for Europe . Germany 's Bertelsmann Foundation forecasts a Brexit would only lower eurozone GDP by as much as 0.36pc up over the next 15 years . But highlighting the political turmoil unleashed on the EU after the summer referendum , the report said a messy exit for the UK meant the risk of a `` broader fragmentation of the European Union has therefore increased , with potential negative economic consequences in the longer run '' . `` By agreeing to a 'deal ' the rest of Europe has made itself vulnerable to copycats : other countries may also ask for exceptions and national special treatment , '' said Mr Vanden Houte . ING 's warning came as Swiss asset manager Unigestion said a Brexit would prove `` more detrimental for the European Union and the eurozone than for the UK '' . Brexit would be the `` first actual step back in the European construction process that started in 1957 '' , said the Geneva-based fund which manages £16.3bn in assets . `` If there is one consequence investors should anticipate out of the Brexit situation , it would be renewed questioning of the viability of the European construction as it sits today '' , said Unigestion .
Without a free trade vision , we may lose our Brexit opportunity
Proverbs 29:18 in the King James Bible states , `` where there is no vision the people perish '' . In a contemporary context the verse makes me think `` where there is no vision Brexit perishes '' . The Prime Minister 's Florence and conference speeches were n't about the `` vision thing '' - a vision of Britain 's place in the world , a new , outward-looking , dynamic economy , eager to exploit post-EU freedoms to become the ultimate offshore economy , very free , very big and very wealthy . But that 's the vision that needs to be sold . Instead of being iffy about abandoning the EU regulatory state , the Prime Minister and Chancellor should embrace the offshore potential exhibited by small economies such as Singapore and Hong Kong . Per capita nominal GDP ( in US dollars ) in Singapore is 33pc higher than in the UK . We should abandon the EU regulatory state and embrace economic freedom with alacrity . Turning away from interventionism and towards economic freedom is much more than abandoning statism at home . It is also about abandoning protectionism abroad . It is about the destruction of the protectionist fortress that is the EU Common External Tariff , and its replacement with classical free trade and zero-tariff and non-tariff barriers on imports from every country in the world . This is the true Holy Grail of Brexit : zero-tariff and non-tariff barriers on imports from everywhere . Unfortunately , HM Treasury see the Holy Grail as precisely the opposite - zero-tariff and non-tariff barriers on our exports to the EU . If the Prime Minister is to project a vision of opportunity post Brexit , she needs to abandon the Treasury world view with alacrity as well . Wedded to its gravity model and ridiculous projections of what Brexit would do to the economy in the short and long term , HM Treasury has boxed itself into a corner and ca n't get out.Unfortunately it means the post-Brexit vision is boxed into a corner as well . The electorate is desperate for a positive vision of Brexit . It has voted to leave the EU and now wants its political leaders to promise the world and deliver it . Somebody needs to brief the Prime Minister on the remarkable opportunity that has landed on her doorstep , which she seems unaware of . First is the historic opportunity to implement classical free trade . The Prime Minister has the opportunity to go down in history as the First Lord of the Treasury who delivered the Holy Grail . In his biography of Sir Robert Peel , the Prime Minister who led the 19th century abolition of the Corn Laws , Douglas Hurd states : `` He did not invent the doctrine of free trade . But Sir Robert was in undisputed charge of the crucial country at the crucial moment . '' Second is the political opportunity.The Treasury perspective on Brexit is producer driven , whereas classical free trade is driven by the consumer and the gains they will receive from trading at lower world prices - a difference that could be 10pc to 20pc . The gain to consumers from classical free trade is huge . The Prime Minister has an unprecedented opportunity to be on the side of the little guy and show why free market competition is good for everyone . Classical free trade will lower prices and boost the spending power of consumers in the short term and raise long-term productivity and incomes . Third , classical free trade provides a deliverable opportunity . If the Government promises it they can deliver it . It 's a decision entirely within the control of the Government . It does n't have to be negotiated with the EU , all it requires is lodging a tariff schedule full of zeros with the WTO . Fourth , Brexit provides an opportunity for moral leadership . Classical free trade is a truly selfless policy . It 's a world apart from selfish protectionism or even self-interested trade negotiations . It could be our greatest export to the world . Classical free trade is also an enlightened policy because at its heart lies the counter intuitive truth that by moving to trade at world prices , powerful positive economic forces are unleashed . This is the economic opportunity from Brexit . The economic opportunity comes in two parts . First is the static effect , whereby lower import prices free up the spending power of consumers to purchase other goods and services . The full effect of tariff and non-tariff barriers imposed by the EU has been estimated to raise import prices 10pc to 20pc compared with world prices . This is a huge potential boost to the discretionary spending power of consumers . Second is the dynamic effect . This is the spur of greater competition on UK producers , which raises productivity and makes both producers and consumers better off in the long run . Then there is the entrepreneurial opportunity . Brexit provides the opportunity to systematically take down the regulatory state and its impact on product and labour markets . It 's an opportunity to implement common sense regulation alongside common sense values . However the entrepreneurial opportunity should not end there . The Government should seize the moment and announce a breathtaking shift in tax policy to boost the UK 's competitiveness . The obvious example would be to say corporation tax would be reduced to 10pc by 2025 . There 's also the opportunity to use classical free trade to boost the City . The biggest advocate of free trade would be home to the biggest financial centre . Talk about great branding and alignment in a 21st century networked world . This is an opportunity that would grow and grow as the EU pursued its desire for a financial transaction tax . Finally , post Brexit the UK could get its geopolitical relationships with the EU and the rest of the world right . The analogy here for the EU is that we all have great friends , but if we married them that relationship could end in divorce . One can get too close with certain friends and that undermines instead of strengthens the relationship . With regard to the rest of the world , opportunities for free trade agreements abound , but there is also the opportunity to develop deeper trading relationships with the Anglosphere - the US , Canada , Australia and New Zealand . These economies already account for 33pc of global GDP with the UK . The fall in the price of food as a result of the abolition of the Corn Laws unleashed a tremendous rise in production from factories aided by the new rail economy . This can be surpassed in the 21st century by free trade and the new network economy . In the words of the Foreign Secretary , we need to `` let the lion roar '' . Graeme Leach is founder and chief economist of consultancy Macronomics 'Classical free trade is a truly selfless policy and could be Britain 's greatest export to the world '
Boris warns May Brexit transition can not exceed 2 years ; MPs tell May to walk away from EU talks by Christmas if there is no sign of trade deal
BORIS JOHNSON says the Brexit transition must last `` not a second more '' than two years as he laid out a series of challenges to Theresa May on the eve of the Conservative party conference . The Foreign Secretary insisted there can be `` no monkeying around '' over the date the implementation phase ends , and also said Britain must not accept any new EU rules or European Court of Justice rulings after March 2019 . But Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader who will be among the first speakers when the conference begins tomorrow , attacked Mr Johnson by saying that `` serious people '' need to be in charge of Brexit . Ms Davidson , who along with Mr Johnson is one of the favourites to succeed Mrs May as Tory leader , said that `` overoptimism '' about the future of Britain outside the EU `` sells people short '' - a direct reference to Mr Johnson 's 4,000-word Brexit essay in The Daily Telegraph a fortnight ago . The party conference in Manchester is seen by many as a make-or-break moment for Mrs May 's hopes of leading the Conservatives for years to come , and likely to be dominated by Brexit and the leadership question . Mrs May is under pressure on multiple fronts , and has been told by Tory MPs she must walk away from EU talks at Christmas if Brussels fails to start negotiating a trade deal by then . Party grandees including former Brexit minister David Jones today insist the Prime Minister should give formal notice that the UK will leave without a deal if `` serious '' talks on a free trade deal have not begun by the end of the year . They say Britain has `` nothing to fear '' from a no-deal scenario and must not be `` held to ransom '' by the EU . It comes after Jean-Claude Juncker , the President of the European Commission , said `` miracles '' would be needed for talks on a trade deal to begin by the end of October . Mrs May looked humiliated yesterday when she attended an EU summit in Estonia and was kept as far away as possible from the German Chancellor Angela Merkel in official pictures . At one point Mrs Merkel appeared to be making a `` binoculars '' gesture towards Mrs May because she was so far away from her .
Labour plot to derail the Great Repeal Bill ; Watson says Labour is party of 'soft Brexit ' as it demands series of changes to Government 's plans
LABOUR will next week unveil plans to block Theresa May 's Great Repeal Bill after Tom Watson said they are now the party of `` soft Brexit '' . The party 's deputy leader said Labour will support Britain staying part of the customs union and single market during any transition , and hinted it may support indefinite membership . Labour will seek to derail the bill by demanding a series of changes to win its support for the plans , which will be brought before MPs later this month . The party is expected to set out conditions on workers ' rights , how much power Government ministers will have to change EU laws once they are on the UK statute book and how the transition process will work after Britain leaves in 2019 . It will not support the bill as it has been proposed by the Government , sources said , making it difficult for Mrs May to get it through the Commons if any of her own MPs rebel . The plot has led to fears that Labour is seeking to block Brexit or delay the process and force the UK to accept concessions handed down by the EU . Mr Watson branded Labour the party of soft Brexit - a step further than previous public statements made by Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary . He told BBC Newsnight : `` You have seen Keir Starmer 's statement , we think that being part of the customs union and the single market is important in those transitional times because that is the way you protect jobs and the economy , and it might be a permanent outcome of the negotiations , but we have got to see how those negotiations go . '' Sir Keir said the UK should transitionally remain in the trade organisations for up to four years after formally leaving the EU in 2019 . With such a tight majority Theresa May will need the support of all her MPs , including those who oppose Brexit , to get the legislation through . But strong opposition on Labour benches could make it difficult for the Prime Minister and Mr Watson 's claim that the UK could remain in the single market and customs union `` permanently '' has led to fears that the party could try to block Brexit altogether . The Great Repeal Bill is designed to copy and paste EU law into British law to provide continuity . The rules can then be amended or scrapped at a later date . But a Labour source warned the party has concerns about how much power will be left in the hands of Mrs May and her ministers . If the bill fails to make its way through Parliament , the Government will be unable to transpose EU law onto the UK statute book and ministers argue this could lead to the UK crashing out of the union without enough control over the process . Labour has been criticised for shifting its position on Brexit after Jeremy Corbyn previously took a much harder line on leaving , calling for Article 50 to be triggered right away and claiming the country can not stay inside the single market after leaving . This is because of concerns that freedom of movement would still apply in this case , one of the drivers of the Brexit vote . However , Sir Keir has softened the party 's position and Labour now supports a transitional period , although Mr Watson 's remarks hint at an even more sceptical approach .
Scotland Sturgeon urged to use Brexit to win Scotland extra powers ; First Minister urged to use Brexit to secure new settlement that Scots can unite around
A LEADING constitutional expert has urged Nicola Sturgeon to put aside another independence referendum and use Brexit instead to work towards a `` confederal deal '' that would bring Holyrood wide-ranging new powers . Prof Jim Gallagher said the vote to leave the EU was economically bad for Scotland but paradoxically might offer the country a chance to `` reset '' its relationship with the rest of the UK . He also warned that another independence vote could create deeper divisions than those caused by the vote to leave the EU . He used a lecture at Glasgow University to suggest Holyrood should have new powers over areas such as agriculture , fisheries and the environment , while operating independently of the UK but `` co-operating with it as equals '' . Prof Gallagher said Scotland had already gone beyond federalism , and described confederalism as a `` set of different countries , different nations , of radically different sizes who have entered into a common relationship for a lot of very important things , like running a currency , running an internal single market , sharing some welfare risks , sharing defence and so on '' . He also argued that Brexit could even pave the way for some control over migration being handed to ministers in Scotland , Wales , Northern Ireland and even the London mayor . He claimed it was `` entirely possible , and arguably desirable '' that politicians in Edinburgh could `` manage the process of EU migration into their territories '' , while also admitting it would be politically `` difficult '' . His comments came as the muchvaunted `` iron discipline '' of the SNP continued to crumble in advance of its conference in Glasgow this week . His words echoed those of Alex Neil , a former SNP cabinet minister , who urged Ms Sturgeon in The Daily Telegraph last month to seek `` neo-independence '' for Scotland by abandoning her referendum threat . Other senior figures have warned against a rush to a snap second vote , including Kenny MacAskill , the former justice minister , who said yesterday that Ms Sturgeon 's agenda had been marked `` more by timidity than radicalism '' . Prof Gallagher , professor of government at Glasgow University and a research fellow at Nuffield College , Oxford , said that if the governments on both sides of the border were imaginative they could reach a deal that would keep Scotland in `` a confederation with the rest of the UK '' while giving it space to develop its own relationship with Europe . The former senior civil servant , who backed the Better Together campaign , Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 told the BBC 's Good Morning Scotland programme : `` There is a bundle of additional powers heading Holyrood 's way ... That inevitably means that Holyrood is going to be a more powerful institution . `` In a sense I am finding consolation in Brexit . I would prefer Brexit did n't happen because Brexit is economically bad for Scotland and it is economically bad for the UK , but given that something called Brexit is going to happen there are still opportunities in it . '' He added : `` The SNP , of course they want independence , there is no secret about that . But they also want what is best for Scotland and one of the things that is going to be good for Scotland I hope ... is that maybe we can stop being divided about the constitution and we can coalesce around a constitutional arrangement that most Scots would think gives them most of what they want . '' Prof Gallagher warned there was no certainty about what an independent Scotland 's relationship with the EU would be , while separation would raise `` unanswerable questions '' , including those over currency , the loss of oil revenues and the border with the rest of the UK . Writing in The Times , Mr MacAskill , who stepped down as an MSP in May , called on the First Minister to focus more on domestic policies . He urged her to take action on health , education and local government instead of just `` managing decline '' . Jackson Carlaw , the Scottish Conservative deputy leader , said the comments were another reminder to the First Minister that her priority should be the `` day job '' . He added : `` While radical elements of the SNP membership want to prioritise another separation vote , the First Minister would do well to ignore this . ''
Scotland 'We must look beyond Europe ' ; PM sets out Brexit blueprint to make Britain 'truly global ' ? There will be no border deal to keep UK in single market ; 'We 'll decide ourselves how we control immigration '
BRITAIN must look beyond Europe for economic success , the Prime Minister has said as she suggested there would be no deal on immigration to keep the UK in the single market . Setting out her first detailed blueprint for Brexit Theresa May said that the UK would become `` truly global '' as she listed eight nations including China , India and Singapore prepared to sign major free trade deals with the UK . Addressing the Conservative Party conference yesterday for the first time since becoming Prime Minister , Mrs May made it clear that border controls are a red line in the Brexit negotiations , saying that `` we are not leaving the European Union only to give up control of immigration again '' . Mrs May said that after Brexit the UK will be `` a fully independent , sovereign country '' that will no longer be in the `` jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice '' , suggesting that Britain is preparing to leave the single market . The Prime Minister also affirmed that Scotland will leave the EU with the rest of the UK after Nicola Sturgeon 's Brexit minister rehashed her disputed claim she can block the process . Mrs May told the conference there would be `` no opt-out from Brexit '' and she would `` never allow divisive Nationalists to undermine the precious Union between the four nations of our United Kingdom . '' She said her Government would negotiate its departure from the EU `` as one United Kingdom and we will leave the European Union as one United Kingdom '' . In an angry response , the First Minister accused Mrs May of `` going out of her way to say Scotland 's voice and interests do n't matter . Strange approach from someone who wants to keep UK together . '' Addressing the conference in Birmingham , Mrs May said Tory MPs and peers trying to stop Britain from leaving the EU were `` insulting the intelligence of the British people '' and `` subverting democracy '' . It came after she said that Britain will leave the EU by 2019 after she announced that she will trigger Article 50 - the formal process to exit the bloc - by March next year . `` Brexit should not just prompt us to think about our new relationship with the European Union , '' Mrs May said . `` It should make us think about our role in the wider world . `` It should make us think of 'Global Britain ' , a country with the self-confidence and the freedom to look beyond the continent of Europe and to the economic and diplomatic opportunities of the wider world . Because we know that the referendum was not a vote to turn in ourselves , to cut ourselves off from the world . It was a vote for Britain to stand tall , to believe in ourselves , to Continued on Page 6 Reports : Pages 6-9 Dominic Raab : Page 16 Editorial Comment : Page 17 Continued from Page 1 forge an ambitious and optimistic new role in the world . '' She added : `` Countries including Canada , China , India , Mexico , Singapore and South Korea have already told us they would welcome talks on future free trade agreements . And we have already agreed to start scoping discussions on trade agreements with Australia and New Zealand . A truly global Britain is possible , and it is in sight . '' Taking the unusual step for a Tory leader of addressing the annual Conservative conference on its opening day , Mrs May confirmed plans for a Great Repeal Bill to overturn the 1972 Act that took the UK into what was then the European Economic Community . She rejected the argument of a choice between `` hard Brexit '' - in which the nation regains control over immigration but loses full access to the European single market - and `` soft Brexit '' , with access to the single market but free movement for EU workers . To rapturous applause from her audience , Mrs May said : `` I know some people ask about the 'trade-off ' between controlling immigration and trading with Europe . But that is the wrong way of looking at things . `` We have voted to leave the European Union and become a fully independent , sovereign country . We will do what independent , sovereign countries do . We will decide for ourselves how we control immigration . And we will be free to pass our own laws . '' EU leaders have repeatedly said that Britain will get no access to the single market unless it continues with freedom of movement rules , allowing all EU citizens to live and work in the UK . Speaking after Mrs May , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said that `` in an age of anxiety and uncertainty it is surely obvious that the values of global Britain are needed more than ever '' . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary said that Mrs May would prove Brexit opponents wrong in the same way as Margaret Thatcher defied her critics to become Britain 's longest-serving prime minister . `` Back in 1979 , [ Mrs Thatcher 's ] government had to confront some huge challenges , '' he said . `` And today , just as then , we are at a turning point in our nation 's story . Just as then , people have voted to chart a new course for our country - to transform Britain . `` And just as then , there is no shortage of doom-mongers telling Britain that it ca n't be done . Ladies and gentlemen , Britain showed them it could be done . We proved them wrong then , and with your help , Britain will prove them wrong again . '' 'In an age of anxiety and uncertainty it is surely obvious that the values of global Britain are needed more than ever '
Scotland Sturgeon warns of lost decade after Brexit
NICOLA STURGEON yesterday argued that Scots could avoid Britain 's `` lost decade '' while it faces the consequences of Brexit by opting for independence . The First Minister told MSPs that the UK was facing 10 years of turmoil that will inflict `` deep and severe '' damage and this should make Scots `` sit up '' . Giving evidence to Holyrood 's Europe committee , following new figures showing a sharp drop in Scottish unemployment and a record increase in employment , she rejected claims this showed the impact of the June 23 Brexit vote had been exaggerated . Instead she suggested that a second independence referendum should be staged if there is a `` hard '' Brexit that hits the financial industry 's EU passport , restricts free movement , damages universities ' links with the continent and `` has exporters having to jump through all sorts of hurdles in European markets '' . Ms Sturgeon disclosed that Mike Russell , her Brexit negotiations minister , will meet David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , on Thursday to discuss the process by which her government 's priorities will be incorporated in the UK 's negotiating position with Europe . In an outspoken attack on Theresa May in particular , she argued it was untenable for the UK 's stance to continue being shrouded in a `` cloak of secrecy '' and said she was bracing herself for a `` hard '' Brexit . But she did not address expert warnings that this would mean a separate Scotland having to choose between membership of the EU or the UK single market . Scottish firms export more than four times as many goods south of the border as to the rest of Europe . Her appearance came ahead of the second anniversary on Sunday of the Nationalists ' defeat in the 2014 independence referendum , which the Conservatives plan to mark with a series of street events and a call for Ms Sturgeon to drop her demands for a rerun . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , said Ms Sturgeon had signed an agreement promising to respect the result but that pledge `` has now gone up in smoke . '' She also pointed out that Alex Salmond had promised that the referendum would not be repeated for another generation , perhaps a lifetime . `` It is time to let the country move forward , '' she added . Official figures published yesterday showed the unemployment rate fell by 1.1 points between May and July to 4.7 per cent , below the UK rate of 4.9 per cent , while employment increased by 51,000 over the quarter - the largest rise on record . But the First Minister yesterday told MSPs independence had to be an option on the table if Scotland 's best interests were to be protected . She said : `` Brexit has n't started yet . We have n't even started this process yet and that potential for a lost decade for the UK should make us all sit up and take notice . `` And in Scotland it should make us think very carefully about whether there are better alternatives to just accepting that we have to be part of that . '' She said the protracted timescale was not yet `` fully appreciated '' by the public , as the two-year Article 50 process only covers the UK leaving the EU and not the lengthy negotiations over their new relationship .
Free movement 'ends on day of Brexit '
THERESA MAY has promised that freedom of movement for EU citizens coming to Britain will end on the day Britain leaves the EU in March 2019 . Brussels has insisted free movement must continue to the last day of any transition period , meaning EU citizens would be free to settle in Britain until at least the end of 2020 . But the Prime Minister made it clear that changing the rules on migration as soon as Britain leaves the EU is a must for her in negotiations over the transition period , which begin next week . Speaking in China on the first day of a three-day trade visit , she said people `` did not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU '' . She said that the issue of citizens ' rights had been agreed in December when the EU agreed to move on to trade talks after `` sufficient progress '' had been reached in phase one of talks . The Government was yesterday forced to accept that it would have to release a leaked Brexit economic report in full , despite a warning from Mrs May that doing so could undermine negotiations with Brussels . However Robin Walker , a Brexit minister , said that the gloomy report could be redacted and that the study would only be made available to MPs on a confidential basis . It came as Downing Street rebuked Philip Lee , a junior justice minister , for suggesting that the study could put the legitimacy of Brexit in question . He said : `` If these figures turn out to be anywhere near right , there would be a serious question over whether a government could legitimately lead a country along a path that the evidence and rational consideration indicate would be damaging . '' A Downing Street spokesman said that Mr Lee had been told by the Chief Whip to keep his views private in future . Earlier this week , Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , said Britain must accept free movement as part of a status quo implementation period . Eurosceptics raged against the EU 's position , saying Brussels wanted to delay Brexit . Mrs May said : `` When we agreed the citizens ' rights deal in December , we did so on the basis that people who had come to the UK when we were a member of the EU had certain expectations . `` They made a life choice and it was right that we made an agreement that ensured they could continue their life in the way they had wanted to . For those who come after March 2019 that will be different because they will be coming to a UK that they know will be outside the EU . '' Brexiteers in the Conservative Party fear a transition deal that would turn Britain into a `` vassal state '' by forcing the UK to accept new EU rules and regulations with no power to block them . The Prime Minister said that business welcomed the transition period because it gives them stability at the point when Britain leaves the EU . She also denied that British officials were `` secretly '' negotiating for a threeyear implementation period , saying : `` We are not talking about something that is going to go on and on . '' Mrs May yesterday repeatedly refused to say she believed that Gavin Williamson , the Defence Secretary , had told the truth about his departure from a previous job after an office fling . Mr Williamson has come under pressure to clarify his account of the end of his career at fireplace manufacturer Elgin & Hall after former colleagues disputed his version of events . The minister told a newspaper he decided he could no longer work at the company because it would mean he came into daily contact with the married woman with whom he had a romance while he , too , was married . Allister Heath : Page 18 Nick Timothy : Page 19 'The British people did not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU '
Tax 'revenge ' on tycoons who bankrolled Brexit ; HMRC under attack after demanding up to £2m on entrepreneurs ' EU campaign funding Leave campaigners hit with 'political ' tax bills
DONORS who bankrolled the Brexit campaign have accused the taxman of a `` political attack '' after they were hit with six or even seven-figure tax demands on their contributions , The Daily Telegraph can disclose . Among those targeted are Lord Edmiston , the Midlands entrepreneur , who donated £1million to Brexit campaigns ; Peter Cruddas , the City mogul ; and Arron Banks , who made millions from his insurance businesses . HM Revenue and Customs has issued letters in the last fortnight that could land them with tax bills of up to £2million . In what has been dubbed the `` revenge of the Establishment '' , the tax authorities have seized upon a relatively obscure area of inheritance tax laws which forces people to pay tax upfront on large `` gifts '' . Donations made to political parties , charities and other bodies are usually exempt , but HMRC has said that payments from individuals to referendum campaigns are taxable . At least one Remain donor has also been sent a tax demand - although banks including Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan , which bankrolled the Remain campaign , have not been embroiled in the crackdown because they can not be made liable for inheritance tax . The demands will disproportionately hit donors who supported Leave because their various campaigns were financed by entrepreneurs rather than by mainstream publicly listed companies that tended to back Remain . The money was donated to Leave campaigns including the one fronted by Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary . Yesterday Mr Johnson , on a visit to Russia , attacked the Kremlin , claiming it had unsuccessfully tried to interfere in the EU Referendum , and also said he was winning a Cabinet battle over a `` divergent '' Brexit . The three Brexit-supporting businessmen last night told The Telegraph that HMRC was acting undemocratically . Philip Hammond , viewed with suspicion by many Brexit campaigners , may now come under pressure to intervene . HMRC , whose executive chairman is Ed Troup , a former special adviser to Kenneth Clarke , the Remain-supporting former chancellor , last night said the bills were not sanctioned at board level and were just part of the tax department 's `` day-to-day work '' . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the Conservative MP , said the tax bills were hostile to democracy and showed that the Government was penalising those who challenged it . He said he would write to the Chancellor to complain and suggest that tax laws were changed . He said : `` Any money routed through the Establishment is tax-free and any money that challenges the Establishment is taxed - a double outrage because the Government spent taxpayers ' money advocating its own view and is now penalising people who had the audacity to challenge it . `` It is fundamentally hostile to democracy and the law should be changed urgently by amendment to the Finance Bill which is currently going through Parliament . '' Matthew Elliott , the former chief executive of Vote Leave , said : `` It is outrageous that HMRC is targeting EU referendum donors in this way . `` This is the Establishment having their revenge on good people who support democratic activity . The Treasury should intervene immediately and force HMRC to rescind the demands . '' Lord Edmiston gave £850,000 to the official Vote Leave campaign and £150,000 to the unofficial Grassroots Out campaign through his company IM Group . He is facing a bill of £200,000 . He told The Telegraph : `` I just feel it is against democracy - if any time in the future there is an issue and someone is asked 'would you mind supporting this particular position ' , the Revenue are going to jump on your back . '' Mr Cruddas said he would challenge HMRC . He donated £900,000 to the official Vote Leave campaign and is facing a tax bill of £180,000 . Mr Cruddas , who with his family paid £50million in taxes last year , said the claim was `` outrageous '' and donors felt victimised for taking on the Government , which spent £9million on a pro-EU leaflet sent to every home in Britain . He said : `` There are very strict laws around donations . You have to be resident and on the electoral roll . So de facto we paid tax on that money . `` We put money up - and at the time we were taking on the Government that put up £9million of taxpayers ' money to present one side of the argument . What we did was to match that through leaflets . I think we are being victimised . My accountant has never seen anything like it . '' Mr Banks , a former Ukip donor , is also facing a demand . He could be expected to pay £2million in inheritance tax on his £8.1million donation to the unofficial Leave.EU campaign . He said the demand was the `` revenge of the Establishment '' . He added : `` After the campaign all the Remainers got gongs and the Leavers got kicked in the a -- - . That money was taxed - why should it be taxed a second time ? It is lunacy . It is a political attack . '' David Harding , who gave £750,000 to the official Britain Stronger in Europe campaign , confirmed his tax demand . He said : `` I was surprised . I assumed it would have been treated like other political donations I made . '' By levying the charge , HMRC is thought to have decided that those who donated are liable because giving away such large sums will reduce the value of their estate when they die . Individuals can give away £325,000 in their lifetime without paying tax on it . Above that , taxes will apply . HMRC said that no campaign could be termed `` a political party '' even though they were regulated by the Electoral Commission . A spokesman said : `` No special exemption was granted ahead of the referendum . The legislation is applied without regard to the policies of organisations , groups or parties . '' Attack on the Brexiteers The men hit with tax bills of £2million Arron Banks Co-founder of Leave.EU campaign and major UKIP donor . Southern Insurance , has interests in a diamond mine in South Africa CEO of rn Rock nce , erests mond n and a licence to mine in Lesotho . Estimated wealth £100m-£250m . Banks , EU is shop bankrupt countries '' 51 , said the E a `` closed sh for bankr countrie and `` is holding the UK back '' . Peter Cruddas Founder of online traders CMC Markets and one of the richest the City , worth £860m-£1.3bn . a London comprehensive men in , Left n -school with no qualifications and worked his way to the top . Has donated of thousands of to the party effectively chief fundraiser . Lord Edmiston Became a millionaire through his car import and property firms , including International Motors . Was 209th in a Sunday Times Rich List with a g onal fortune put at £440m . Backed the Tories and gave them £2m . In a House of debate in 2013 he opposed gay marriage . Retired from Lords in July 2015 .
May heads to Brussels for talks to save Brexit ; MPs taken aback as the Prime Minister leaves for meeting with EU leaders today to break deadlock
THERESA MAY will travel to Brussels today for talks with EU leaders amid reports that she has personally urged Angela Merkel to end the Brexit stand-off . The meeting comes days after Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the EU Commission , and Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , said talks about Britain leaving the EU in March 2019 were deadlocked . Mrs May is taking Oliver Robbins , the civil servant leading the Brexit talks , with her for the dinner - the first since a frosty meal in Downing Street in April . Mr Juncker was reported to have launched a scathing attack on Mrs May during the April dinner , saying that Brexit `` can not be a success '' . Downing Street sources insisted today 's meeting had `` been in the diary for weeks '' but the announcement caused surprise in Westminster , and comes after last week 's negotiations ended with little movement . The visit comes a day after Mrs May phoned Mrs Merkel , the German Chancellor , to urge her to help end the Brexit stand-off at this week 's EU summit in Brussels . France and Germany are understood to have pushed for changes to a draft paper prepared for Thursday 's summit to avoid giving the impression that the EU will agree guidelines on a transition period as soon as `` sufficient progress '' has been made in issues relating to the exit . No10 is keen to open the next stage of talks about Britain 's relationship with the EU after Brexit . A colleague of Mrs May told The Financial Times : `` We 've almost run out of things to talk about . It comes down to money : by discussing the transition deal at the same time , you create a broader framework for talking about the money . '' Commenting on the phone conversation with Mrs Merkel , a spokesman for Downing Street said : `` They looked ahead to next week 's council , agreeing on the importance of continued constructive progress in the negotiations . '' The news came amid concern a nodeal Brexit could place added strain of up to £500million a year on the NHS . A report backed by the NHS Confederation suggests that tens of thousands of British pensioners living in Europe could return home if the Government is unable to strike a deal with the EU to continue existing healthcare arrangements . Under EU law , European citizens benefit from reciprocal rights to healthcare when they are in any of the 28 member states . Brussels and the UK are currently negotiating on what will happen to those rights after Britain 's withdrawal in March 2019 . The report , compiled by the Brexit Health Alliance , warns that patients could suffer dramatically if reciprocal rights to healthcare were scrapped , because they could face huge medical bills if they fall ill while travelling abroad , while the cost of travel insurance could prove prohibitive for people with existing conditions . The £500million figure is based on analysis that estimates the cost of caring for everyone who could return to the UK at £1billion a year , minus the £500million that would no longer have to be paid to European health systems . It does not take into account any income that could be generated from EU citizens potentially having to pay for NHS care when they are in the UK .
Scotland Davis 'will retire and leave Brexit transition to Boris ' ; Conservative Party Conference
DAVID DAVIS plans to retire in less than two years and leave Boris Johnson to steer the country through the Brexit transitional period , The Daily Telegraph can disclose . The Brexit Secretary told friends that Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , `` needs this to work more than I do '' because he plans to step aside in June 2019 , whereas Mr Barnier will still be in post . Mr Davis believes Brexit will be his `` last big job '' , friends told this newspaper . It came as Mr Johnson warned that some EU leaders believe Britain could still remain in the union , putting the chance of an early deal on trade at risk . Mr Davis told friends he planned to `` retire '' in 2019 when the UK has left the union , sparking fears that the move will trigger a reshuffle and a potential leadership challenge . But allies of Mr Davis have called on him to act as interim leader if Theresa May is forced out after Britain leaves , to act as a steady pair of hands while a new leadership candidate is found . The Brexit Secretary told friends Mr Johnson should deal with the transitional period , which could open the way for the Foreign Secretary to make his own pitch to be Prime Minister . He also said Mr Johnson , who will address the Tory conference today , was `` back inside the tent '' and has been `` tied to the tent pole '' . Yesterday Mr Johnson told Tory activists that Brussels believes Britain will `` bottle it '' over Brexit . The Foreign Secretary said some EU leaders believe Britain will lose its nerve and try to cancel Article 50 . Conference reports : Pages 8-9
Scotland We need a positive and inspiring vision to win over the nation
Brexit was supposed to be about parliamentary sovereignty . But the electorate has given us an inconvenient answer . They have returned a hung Parliament . Theresa May is right to see through her duty to provide a stable government . It is therefore the job of all of us as democratically elected parliamentarians to try to represent the will of the people we serve . One thing is clear : we could n't reject the results of the EU referendum , and nor can we reject the results of a general election called explicitly to secure a mandate for Brexit . There are many reasons for what went wrong : a woeful campaign , a shambolic manifesto process and the undemocratic concentration of power in the hands of a narrow inner circle . When a manifesto is produced without having even being seen by ministers ( or myself as chairman of the Prime Minister 's backbench policy board ) it shows a fatal contempt for parliamentary opinion . So the Prime Minister is right to move fast to acknowledge that , change her team and hopefully signal a step change in the way the Government is run . The restoration of Cabinet Government , the appointment of Damian Green as First Secretary of State , and a parliamentary chief of staff are key first steps . But we must go further than that . Politics did n't stop on the day of the EU referendum . This new Conservative Government needs to look hard at what drove the Corbyn surge . And redouble our commitment to tackle the grievances it spoke to . The British people have sent some clear messages . First , they do not trust any single party enough to give us the blank cheque on Brexit and austerity we asked for . After two successive Conservative prime ministers have chosen to outsource difficult decisions and `` ask the people '' , the people are signalling they 'd like us to sort it out . They want Parliament to do its job . They will not thank us for another election or referendum until things are a lot clearer . Second , the shift of Brexiteers to Corbyn 's Labour Party with its strong message on the limits to austerity and the critique of `` crony capitalism '' ( winning a number of former Brexit stronghold seats ) signals a key point . The Brexit vote was as much about a roar at a broken model of growth , politics and public sector austerity as it was a principled view on our appropriate relationship with Europe . In this campaign we managed to alienate both business and frontline public servants . To make a success of Brexit , tackle our deficit and productivity we need to mobilise both . Third , the Corbyn surge was fuelled by a young millennial cohort and a massive vote by public service professionals ( doctors , nurses , teachers , even the police ) fed up at the prospect of indefinite austerity . If we look like we are intent on balancing the public finances on the backs of public sector workers , we risk losing them for ever . We need to properly set out a positive `` offer '' for public service reform and leadership and for the under-30s which reflects their reality on lack of affordable housing , and our broken public finances . As the parliamentary Conservative Party convenes this week we need to show fast that we have listened to the British public , that democracy is alive and well , and that we trust the people and their elected representatives . That is , after all , what Brexit was supposed to be about . So let 's commit to an `` open Brexit '' based on much greater parliamentary scrutiny , debate , and democratic mandate . The British people have told us they want a new relationship with the EU , in which we are outside the existing political union , and controlling our immigration in our own national interest . But they have also told us that they are alarmed by the language of hard Brexit since the referendum , want a new approach to public service austerity , and a more inspiring economic vision for how this country gets out of debt and creates and spreads opportunity . They did not vote for a Brexit which makes us poorer or less secure . Fail to capture the mood of the nation and we risk gifting the keys of No 10 to Jeremy Corbyn and his hard-Left union barons . So we need a Queen 's Speech which reflects what the electorate are trying to tell us . A hardline Brexit coalition with the DUP risks sending the wrong signal . Let us show a commitment to redouble domestic reforms and the big challenges such as social care , inter-generational fairness and mental health . Then this new government can secure the mandate it deserves . George Freeman MP , is chairman of the Conservative Policy Forum . 'The Corbyn surge was fuelled by a young cohort and public service workers fed up with austerity '
Anti-Brexit campaigner raises funds to support Remain MPs ; Election 2017
GINA MILLER , the businesswoman whose legal action forced Theresa May to hold a parliamentary vote on Brexit , has launched a fundraising campaign to support pro-Remain MPs in the general election . Ms Miller has asked for £40,000 in donations to prevent an `` extreme Brexit '' by securing the election of as many MPs as possible who oppose it . Within hours of the launch , it smashed the original £10,000 target and Ms Miller increased her demand to £25,000 and then £40,000 after raising £33,000 in a day . The campaign will tour marginal seats and provide extra campaign staff for anti-brexit MPs . On the gofundme website Ms Miller wrote : `` We need to prevent MPs and the people being forced into an extreme Brexit that is not in Britain 's best interests . ''
Whitehall needs more optimism on Brexit ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : When Mervyn King speaks about the economic future , it is generally a good idea to listen . The former governor of the Bank of England did not have a perfect record as an economic forecaster ( no one does ) , but he does have a near-unique experience of economic policy built up over more than 30 years at the Bank . Lord King , a cross-bench peer aligned to no political party , says Britain should be more optimistic and `` self-confident '' about its prospects outside the European Union . Stephen Martin , the new head of the Institute of Directors , strikes a similar note , arguing that leaving the EU will `` open our eyes '' to the economic opportunities that lie outside Europe . Mr Martin , too , is politically non-partisan , interested only in what is good for British business . Both men are right and politicians should learn from them . Many of those who lead this country , or simply aspire to , should be approaching Brexit with a very different , more optimistic attitude . Asking for more optimism about Brexit is not , as some of its opponents suggest , a way of continuing the divisions of the referendum . As Theresa May proves , it is perfectly possible to have voted Remain in June and to argue today that Brexit can be good for Britain . Mrs May will soon give a major speech on Brexit which she says will offer a vision of the country Britain can become outside the EU . If it lives up to her promise , Mrs May 's speech will be exactly what the country needs , but her most important audience may be among her own colleagues and officials . Voters are largely positive about the future , believing in this country 's ability to thrive . Sadly , that belief is often lacking in some ministers and especially in the Civil Service . Too many still regard the Brexit vote as an error and the exit that must follow as a problem to be managed and mitigated , not an opportunity to be seized . Outside the EU , Britain will be able once again to decide its own laws on everything from immigration to industrial strategy . We must surely also get more scope to build closer trading relationships with dynamic economies around the world . These are the freedoms that the British people chose for themselves and their country in the biggest vote in our history : the referendum vote to leave the EU was a huge collective act of optimism and belief that this country 's best days are yet to come . Brexit is a good news story , and our leaders should do more to tell it that way .
Fresh legal Brexit challenge to keep UK in single market BODY : THE Government faces a second legal challenge over Brexit this week as campaigners have instructed lawyers to begin fresh action over whether leaving the EU means automatic withdrawal from the single market . The British Influence think tank wants a judicial review of the Government 's legal position on membership of the wider European Economic Area ( EEA ) which forms the internal trading bloc . The think-tank believes leaving the EU does not mean quitting the EEA which extends the single market 's tariff-free trade in goods to countries such as Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein . A legal challenge could result in Parliament being given the final say on EEA membership . A spokesman said : `` There is no need for a hard Brexit and there is no mandate for a hard Brexit . '' The group says voters did not decide to leave the trading arrangement when they backed Brexit in the referendum .
Scotland Non , non , non ! May baulks at call for Brexit talks in French
THERESA MAY last night slapped down EU demands that Brexit negotiations be conducted in French as she rebuked European leaders for a lack of maturity . The Prime Minister used her first European Council meeting to dismiss an attempt by Michel Barnier , the EU 's top Brexit negotiator , to rule on the `` working language '' of the talks . She also suggested that `` immature '' EU premiers are looking for `` problems '' rather than `` opportunities '' during Brexit talks . Mrs May made clear that she intends to negotiate trade deals ahead of Britain 's formal exit despite threats of legal action from Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission . Mr Barnier was yesterday reported to have demanded that EU and British officials conduct all major Brexit talks in French , in what was seen as an attempt to humiliate Mrs May at her first Brussels summit . Mrs May responded : `` We will conduct the negotiations in the way that means we are going to get the right deal for Britain . '' Aides made clear that she will refuse any attempt to use French during the negotiations . Minutes after Mrs May 's response , Mr Barnier said that he had yet to decide in which language the negotiation would be conducted . He denied that he had `` expressed '' an opinion but said the language would be `` set '' at the start of exit talks . An EU spokesman stressed this was not an official line . `` There is no language regime for the negotiations , '' she said . Using French marks a shift away from standard practice among multinational teams in Brussels , where French lost its status to English as the EU 's main working language after northern and eastern states joined over the past two decades . Even officials from the EU 's founding powers , France and Germany , communicate mainly in English . The demand sends a signal to Mrs May that the EU plans to put its own interests first in negotiating the `` divorce '' talks which the Prime Minister has promised to launch by March . As an EU commissioner until 2014 , Mr Barnier , 65 , had a difficult relationship with the UK government , as he sought to tighten regulation of Britain 's dominant financial services industry . Reports : Pages 4-5 Rosa Prince : Page 23
Enemies of Brexit resemble Trump in refusing to abide by the result ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Donald Trump 's bizarre refusal to commit himself to accepting the result of the American presidential election has led to a reaction of shock and horror among political commentators in Britain and in his homeland . His position is rightly condemned as an affront to the democratic process . However , many of these same commentators have revelled in downgrading the validity of Britain 's referendum to leave the EU , which produced a result they did not want . Irony or hypocrisy ? Clearly , the American goose has to be served with a different sauce from that for the British gander.Eric Sneddon Marden , Kent SIR - Allister Heath ( Comment , October 20 ) is right . Some die-hard Remainers do not care how much economic damage their attempts to reverse the referendum outcome inflict . If anything , the more damage the better , as they blame every bit of bad news on Brexit . Having won the referendum war , those of us who campaigned for Leave , it seems , must now win the Brexit peace.John May Arkesden , Essex SIR - I find it frustrating that commentators on Brexit have fallen for the Remainer bluff that free trade between Britain and the EU will be impossible if we do n't accept free movement of people ( Letters , October 19 ) . Several countries in Europe manage to conduct entirely tariff-free trade with the EU while not accepting opendoor migration . Thus , migrating to tariff-free and exclusive Monaco may sound attractive , but obtaining residency permission will be unlikely unless you 're Lewis Hamilton . Monaco 's `` impossible '' situation , of having its cake and eating it , is shared with countries including the Channel Islands , the Isle of Man , Liechtenstein , San Marino , as well as giant Turkey . Another 52 countries all round the world have brokered free-trade deals with the EU without signing up to open-door migration from the EU . Martin Burgess Beckenham , Kent SIR - We hear much about the downside of Brexit . But will the EU still be here to complete the final agreement with us ? Kevin Court Fetcham , Surrey SIR - The Prime Minister has just said she would like a smooth Brexit . Hard , soft , now smooth . How many versions are there to be ? Just Brexit for me.Mary L Wylie Manaton , Devon SIR - You report that Prince Charles , the Lord of the Isles , asked staff at a whisky distillery on Harris why their glasses are made in Poland . In international trade , by paying the Poles for their glasses , we give them ready funds to buy our whisky . Dugald Barr London W8
Universities should be ashamed of their bias ; Academics ' hatred of Brexit is all too real . I have 40 years ' experience of their love affair with the EU
Chris Heaton-Harris MP is in trouble for asking universities for information about their European Studies courses , in a letter widely interpreted as implying massive anti-Brexit bias . If he had asked me , he could have saved himself the bother . I 've 40 years ' experience of universities ' love affair with the EU . Between 1980 and 1990 , I was Convenor of the MA in European Studies programme at the LSE . I was also co-chairman of its postgraduate European Studies research seminar and met many academics who specialised in the EU . Were they objective ? Many held titles such as Jean Monnet Professor or Jean Monnet Reader or Jean Monnet Lecturer , which implied that they were wholly or partly funded by Brussels . Most worked on the institutions or policies of the EU or on how the process of integration developed . All took it for granted that European unification was a benevolent aim and that integration brought more peace , prosperity and democracy . By 1990 , I no longer believed this , and founded the Anti-Federalist League in 1991 , which became Ukip in 1993 . My students became discontented and told me I should no longer teach them European history ( I never lectured on the EU ) . The LSE supported me , but I gave up teaching my course to go on sabbatical . My colleagues , however , continued to support the EU . It took a long time before they admitted that there was a democratic deficit or that the euro was not working . Today , leading specialists take a more critical view , but they all hate Brexit . Curiously , so , too , do most academics who are not specialists in the EU . During the referendum , the universities were mobilised as never before behind Government policy and claimed that Brexit would lead to the withdrawal of all EU research funds and that foreign researchers would no longer come to Britain . There was no evidence for this . All EU Research Infrastructure Consortia are open to non-member states and member states on the same basis , with equal voting rights . The likes of CERN and the European Space Programme have nothing to do with the EU . In any case , the Government has promised to make good any funding that might be lost . Nor is there any evidence that academics have been put off coming here . If they have , it can only have been on account of the anti-Brexit scare stories spread by universities themselves . Vice-chancellors and professors are still writing ill-informed , if not mendacious , letters and articles . There is no doubt that Brexit is deeply resented by British universities , who see it simplistically as a rejection of international collaboration or even xenophobia . Hence the letters to their foreign students assuring them they are still loved . The fact that institutions dedicated to critical thought can take such a monolithic and unscientific view is bewildering . Our academic nomenklatura and its apparatchiks are behaving like the staff of Soviet universities , following the party line even after the policy has failed . It gets personal , too . On a recent visit to LSE , I was rebuked by a former pro-director with the words : `` You were the only person here who voted for Brexit . '' When I attended a leaving party for a colleague , I was accosted by a world-famous historian , who shouted above everyone else in the room : `` -- -- off ! You founded Ukip . You are responsible for this mess . So just -- -- off ! '' It took a quarter of an hour to calm him down . Others there clearly agreed with him , although most of my colleagues have behaved admirably . Does this matter ? Most students are intelligent enough to see the defects of the EU and will recognise propaganda when they are offered it . In any case , the majority of university courses have nothing to do with the EU . As for grants and foreign staff , in the end university life will return to normal . Heaton-Harris could have found most of the information he sought online without upsetting our overpaid and over-sensitive vice-chancellors . But his letter touched a nerve . Universities have a lot to live down . Instead of acting in a neutral manner during the referendum , they behaved in the most grotesquely partisan fashion possible . Let us hope that they have learnt their lesson . They have tarred their reputation for objectivity . Alan Sked is Emeritus Professor of International History at LSE FOLLOW Alan Sked on Twitter @ profsked ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Focus on prize of free trade , say employers ; CBI 's Fairbairn calls for new Brexit advisory taskforce
BRITAIN and Brussels will both be better off if they stop wrangling over an enormous Brexit divorce bill and instead focus on the real prize - a trade deal to preserve the £600bn of trade which flows back and forth across the Channel each year . Business group the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) wants the negotiators to prioritise jobs and economic growth , and to avoid becoming bogged down in hostile rhetoric at the start of the Brexit talks . `` This is a message to all negotiators on this because it is as much a question for European economies as it is for ours , '' said Carolyn Fairbairn , the CBI 's director general . `` The negotiations will have all sorts of twists and turns , and the Bill is an early issue . But we should [ prioritise ] the bigger prize which is the long-term comprehensive free trade opportunity and to keep on working towards this . '' She said that `` moving on from this divorce bill as quickly as possible '' is crucial if businesses were to get any certainty over the future of trade and regulation after Brexit . The latest divorce bill demand has been put at ( EURO ) 100bn ( £85bn ) . The CBI wants the Government to transfer EU regulations into UK law en masse and to resist the temptation to fiddle with the rules on the way , so that businesses will face exactly the same Continued on Page 3 Continued from Page 1 rules on exit day as they do now . Only after that should the review of red tape take place over a longer time period to avoid any unwelcome surprises . Ms Fairbairn wants the government to set up a Brexit business taskforce to advise on the divorce process . `` We 're heading into a new phase in the Brexit negotiations where it is really about the heavy lifting of what a new deal might look like - there are a number of really complicated areas which we really must n't underestimate , around customs , borders , tariffs , regulations , the 34 EU regulators that will no longer have jurisdiction , '' she said . `` It is a time to have the brightest and best from government and business working together so that we get it right . The principle is that we 're all on the same side here , businesses want nothing more than to make a success of Brexit , and they have a lot of experience and sharp end , on-the-ground knowledge that should be brought to the table . '' The CBI also wants domestic changes to taxes and rules to promote innovation and enterprise in the UK , boosting the economy after Brexit . That should include a review of business rates as well as measures to reduce the overall tax burden on companies , the CBI said . The call for a review of business rates was echoed by a group of powerful trade bodies representing retailers , publicans , small businesses and the property sector . In a joint letter to all three main political parties , the Federation of Small Businesses , the British Chambers of Commerce and the British Retail Consortium say how the next government tackles this issue will `` shape investment and growth in the UK economy for decades to come '' . Meanwhile , energy giant SSE has also urged the Government to reconsider the future of onshore wind power after scrapping subsidies for turbines in 2015 . The company , itself a wind farm developer , said wind should be at the heart of the Government 's industrial strategy because it is now the cheapest low-carbon source of electricity . 'We should [ prioritise ] the bigger prize which is the long-term comprehensive free trade opportunity '
The OBR and the Chancellor got it wrong , wrong , wrong and wrong
The Chancellor 's Autumn Statement took its cue from the Office for Budget Responsibility 's downward-biased forecasts for Britain 's Brexit economy . It and he failed to take account of the optimal policies for carrying Brexit through . These are free trade with lower consumer prices and more competition , better ( home-based ) regulation and intelligent control of immigration to limit costly unskilled immigration . The OBR followed the Remain consensus argument that Brexit will reduce trade ; via falling sterling , reduce growth ; reduce immigration generally ; and cause damaging uncertainty . For the following reasons that consensus is wrong : 1 The Brexit uncertainty effect is small - and also positive . As we have seen already , the effect of any Brexit `` uncertainty '' has been minimal : in the second and third quarters when it was at its maximum , growth was strong at 0.7 per cent and 0.5 per cent . `` Uncertainty '' simply consists of not yet being sure that we will have a clean Brexit ( with positive results for growth ) or a `` soft '' Brexit which is the status quo . So any uncertainty is about the extent of the upside . 2 The average fall in sterling against other major currencies of about 15 per cent is a huge monetary stimulus to the economy . It raises exports , reduces imports and so raises incomes ; this in turn stimulates employment and consumption . Yes , prices will rise but then so will wages in the tight labour market we now have . 3 Brexit will increase trade not reduce it . How can opening the UK up to free trade with the whole world , including the EU , reduce trade ? Whitehall is unable to grasp the idea of such free trade , yet ordinary people do , even if they work within EU-protected sectors such as manufacturing . For example , all car-making constituencies voted Leave , for the good reason that our car industry sells two thirds of its exports outside the EU on world markets . The long-term bonus for the UK economy from the opening up of our trade to the world would , I estimate , be around 4 per cent on GDP , with an 8 per cent fall in consumer prices acting like a big tax cut for UK households . 4 Unskilled EU immigration is a drain on our taxpayers and the economy . Remainers in Whitehall endlessly bang on about the gains from immigration ( which we all accept ) . They do not grasp that the economic problem of immigration consists exclusively of allowing unskilled immigrants on low wages unfettered access to our welfare state , both for themselves and for any dependants they bring in . The best available Labour Force Survey data suggest that each adult EU unskilled immigrant costs the UK taxpayer around £3,500 a year . This burden falls on the poorest communities where these immigrants live and where , to add insult to injury , they also drive down local wages . Controlling unskilled immigration - while being as liberal as now on skilled immigration that more than pays its way - is the optimal policy . On these four points the OBR and Chancellor have got it wrong , wrong , wrong and wrong . We expect better in future . Patrick Minford is co-chairman of Economists for Brexit
Scotland Blair 's return to fight Brexit cheers Tories
TONY BLAIR 'S plan to return to politics by spearheading an anti-Brexit group has been welcomed by Eurosceptics who said it would increase public support for leaving the EU . The former Labour prime minister is setting up a new political institute that will seek to influence Britain 's withdrawal , but Tory MPs said the level of public anger directed at him would embolden the Brexit movement . Last month Mr Blair told Remain voters that `` we 're the insurgents now '' and said Britain should keep its `` options open '' over holding a second referendum . Eurosceptic MPs said it was a `` complete win '' to have a `` discredited establishment figure '' leading the campaign for a `` hokey cokey Brexit '' . A Whitehall source revealed Mr Blair has already held meetings with George Osborne , the former chancellor , to discuss the `` political climate '' . A source close to Mr Blair told The Sunday Times : `` He 's not impressed with Theresa May . He thinks she 's a total lightweight . He thinks Jeremy Corbyn is a nutter and the Tories are screwing up Brexit . He thinks there 's a massive hole in British politics that he can fill . '' Owen Paterson , the former environment secretary , told The Telegraph : `` This is glorious news , he is one of those discredited establishment figures who repels many people . '' Peter Lilley , the MP for Hitchin and Harpenden , said : `` He is in favour of a hokey cokey Brexit . One where you take your left leg out , put your left leg in , shake it all about and end up where you were when you started . '' John Redwood , MP for Wokingham , said : `` I think it 's a complete win for my side ... I welcome him being an intervener in all the things that we hold dear . It is a great help to us . ''
Scotland A triumph for those who want a liberal withdrawal on cordial terms ; Brexit turmoil ; Comment
LET us toast the High Court with Kentish sparkling wines . Its ruling on Article 50 today is a service to the nation . The elemental purpose of Brexit is and has always been to restore the supremacy of Parliament - and to return legal authority to British courts - not to introduce a lawless dictatorship of plebiscites . It is up to Parliament - acting under the Burkean principles of Bristol - to discern the will of the nation and to discern the broader collective interest , imposing its constitutional authority as it sees fit . Assuming that this ruling is upheld by the UK Supreme Court the Government has effectively lost its power to impose its own Brexit predilections . This is a triumph for those who want a liberal withdrawal from the EU on cordial terms , and place the highest value on the cohesion of the UK 's four constituent nations . Theresa May will now have to reckon with a Scottish political veto through the arithmetic of the House of Commons , and listen even more attentively to Northern Ireland MPs . Or put another way , she can now use this pressure to rein in the hotheads in her own www.party.No party or grouping has ownership of this process , or a monopoly on how to interpret the vote . The British signalled many different things on June 23 . There was not a single word on the ballot sheet about immigration , despite a reductionist attempt by some in the Leave camp to make it seem so . Remainers and moderate Brexiteers together form a large majority of citizens . They are in implicit alliance over nature of Brexit , if they could only stop arguing . The EU treaties are like no ordinary treaty , and the referendum was not an election where the winner takes all . The Government has no electoral mandate to impose a particular form of Brexit - be it hard , clean , diamantine , or whatever you care to call it - against the collective will of Parliament , if that is what it intends to do . The window is open for a more equal debate about the access to the EU single market and passporting for the City , and this new possibility has been instantly reflected in the value of sterling , back up to a one-month high of $ 1.288 against the dollar . My own loose preference is for some variant of the European Economic Area as a transition arrangement for the next decade , a phased withdrawal that allows Britain to negotiate trade deals gradually with the rest of the world . The EEA allows an emergency brake on migrants and even , in theory , a quota system , but the issue of free movement is in any case a shifting debate since France and Germany themselves face populist dissent . There may well be better arrangements than the EEA , but at least we can now have the discussion rather than being steamrolled toward a hard Brexit by a self-appointed vanguard in one part of the Conservative Party . But Remainers have to make a choice . If they still think they can reverse Brexit altogether the situation will become extremely unpleasant . It will grate on fellow citizens . Brexit means Brexit . Let us argue
Scotland No10 panics as Leave surges ; Boris attacked after Downing Street is warned of likely Brexit ? Top entrepreneur backs Out with warning over EU red tape ? Vote Leave : PM using Queen 's birthday honours to curry favour BODY : By Peter Dominiczak , Christopher Hope , Ben Riley-Smith and Kate McCann DOWNING Street is `` panicked '' over the EU referendum amid growing internal signs that support for the Leave campaign is surging . Private data and internal polling which shows that after two weeks of building momentum there have been huge swings to the Brexit campaign has prompted growing alarm in the Remain camp , sources have said . It has led to a marked change in strategy , with the campaign to keep Britain in the EU orchestrating a series of highly personal attacks on Boris Johnson , a leader of the Leave campaign . David Cameron 's team has adopted a `` take out Boris strategy '' by allowing a Tory Cabinet minister to claim Mr Johnson only backed a Brexit in order to further his ambition to be prime minister and associating him with Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader . In a sign the markets believe a Brexit is more likely , the FTSE 100 yesterday suffered its biggest one-day fall since the beginning of the campaign , falling by 1.86 per cent . The pound also dropped sharply as a poll gave Leave a 10-point lead , with 55 per cent of voters now backing a Brexit . With less than a fortnight to go until polling day , the campaign yesterday became increasingly fevered . In other developments : ? The Queen was dragged into the row as the Prime Minister was accused of using the birthday honours list to reward nearly two dozen backers of the Remain campaign . Sir James Dyson discloses in a Telegraph interview that he is joining the Brexit campaign , describing Remain 's warnings about trade as `` cobblers '' . TELEGRAPH ? Labour 's EU campaign was in chaos as senior figures admitted many of their supporters are now backing a Brexit after Jeremy Corbyn 's failure vociferously to make the case for Remain . ? Justice Secretary Michael Gove 's Leave campaign warned that Britain will need seven new prisons by 2030 if immigration is not controlled . THE FOR GROV ? Wolfgang Schäuble , Germany 's fi-nance minister , has ruled out Britain joining the single market after a Brexit , declaring that `` out is out '' for the UK . PA ? British victims of Libyan-sponsored IRA terrorism are being blocked from receiving millions of pounds in compensation because of human rights laws , the Government has admitted . This weekend there will be an outpouring of patriotic sentiment as the nation celebrates the Queen 's 90th and the Duke of Edinburgh 's 95th birthdays and the beginning of England 's campaign in the European football championships , which insiders believe will help the Leave campaign . Government insiders have said the Remain campaign has been `` falling apart '' after a series of salvos by Mr Johnson and Mr Gove . Mr Cameron is appearing on the BBC tomorrow in what is being seen as an attempt to relaunch the campaign . Despite the Prime Minister claiming that he did not want to see the referendum campaign descend into a series of `` blue-on-blue '' attacks between Conservatives , the Remain campaign is now seeking to undermine the Tories , it is understood . During a televised debate on Thursday Amber Rudd , the Energy Secretary , made personal attacks on Mr Johnson , accusing him of joining the Brexit campaign to further his own career . She said of Mr Johnson : `` He 's the life and soul of the party but he 's not the man you want driving you home at the end of the evening . '' The Remain campaign released a poster featuring a mock-up of Mr Johnson , Mr Gove and Mr Farage , at a casino table with the slogan : `` Do n't let them gamble with your future . '' Sources in the Leave camp said their rivals were resorting to `` playground jibes '' in a sign `` they are rattled , have no discipline , no ideas and no hope '' . During a town hall event for Facebook , Mr Cameron was asked if he feels `` sorry '' for the attacks on Mr Johnson . He said the debates were `` lively affairs and that 's the way it is '' . However , Mr Cameron did suggest that he still intends to offer Mr Johnson a Cabinet position after the referendum . The Leave campaign said 21 prominent Remain supporters were named in the birthday honours list , including Richard Reed , deputy chairman of Britain Stronger in Europe , who received a CBE . Others include John Armitage , of the hedge fund Egerton Capital , who gave £15,000 to the Remain campaign and is made a CBE . Awards also went to Remain donors and people who put their names to joint letters warning of the dangers of EU withdrawal . Labour MP Gisela Stuart , the Vote Leave chairman , denounced the awards as a `` shabby stitch-up '' and accused Mr Cameron of stooping to `` a new low '' in his drive to secure a Remain vote . Government sources rejected the charge , saying that the honours were decided by independent committees and included at least three prominent supporters of the Leave campaign . In a special supplement in today 's Daily Telegraph , Mr Johnson and Mr Cameron set out the arguments for and against the EU . Mr Cameron says : `` For me , remaining in the EU is the big , bold , British decision . '' Mr Johnson writes : `` This is the time to restore health to our democracy , to go global , and to believe in Britain . It 's win-win . '' Queen 's birthday : Pages 6-7 EU reports : Pages 10-11 Nigel Farage and Editorial Comment : Page 25
Confidence delicate as bosses see more risks than opportunities
CONFIDENCE among Britain 's businesses appears brittle as fears about trade and economic growth have escalated in a trio of surveys . Brexit has been identified as the biggest concern among those in control of company finances and is likely to lead to more subdued spending by businesses , according to a Deloitte survey . A total of 112 chief financial officers , including 83 at major listed companies , told Deloitte in its latest survey that Brexit was their most prominent concern , rating it at 62 out of 100 in the final quarter of 2017 - up from 58 in the previous quarter . What is more , nearly three quarters ( 73pc ) said they expected the overall business environment to worsen after Brexit , up from 60pc in the third quarter . This prompted 39pc ( up from 30pc ) to claim they expected the amount they spend on investing in their businesses to drop . Ian Stewart , chief economist at Deloitte , said CFOs were `` more focused on controlling costs than at any time in the past eight years '' . The manufacturers ' organisation EEF and global insurer AIG also found some growing pessimism in their 2018 outlook survey of 281 senior company executives in the manufacturing and engineering sectors . Half of respondents claimed they saw more risks to their businesses than opportunities in 2018 , virtually double the number who thought the opposite . Brexit also exacerbates several of the manufacturing sector 's concerns . EEF and AIG asked respondents whether their worries were related or unrelated to the UK leaving the EU . It found fears about rising input costs , economic volatility , a rising exodus of EU workers and major customers leaving the UK were all linked to Brexit . Lloyds Bank 's Business in Britain report also identified some unease from the business community . The bank found a steep drop in the number of businesses who felt their interest would be protected post-Brexit in its survey of more than 1,500 predominantly small and medium-sized companies . The survey was conducted before Prime Minister Theresa May secured an agreement to move on to the second phase of Brexit talks .
European officials deride UK 's negotiating efforts ; Road to Brexit ; 'Unimpressive ' Johnson and 'poor quality ' of UK politicians criticised in leaked private report
The Government 's performance in the Brexit negotiations has been branded chaotic and incoherent , according to a leaked paper setting out the private views of European officials . An internal Irish government document reveals top EU figures describing Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , as `` unimpressive '' . The confidential document , obtained by Ireland 's RTE news , also shows officials bemoaning the `` political confusion '' in the UK and `` the quality of politicians in Westminster '' . It is based on a collection of political reports from Irish embassies across Europe between Nov 6 and 10 . The paper claims that the Czech deputy minister for foreign affairs , Jakub Durr , told officials he `` felt sorry for British ambassadors around the EU trying to communicate a coherent message when there is political confusion at home '' . It also notes that Brexit was barely mentioned during a meeting between David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and French ministers for defence and foreign affairs - something which was viewed as a wasted opportunity . In another meeting , a minister in the Czech government described Mr Johnson as `` unimpressive '' but noted that at least he had `` avoided any gaffes '' during a visit in September . Ian Forrester , the British judge in the European Court of Justice , is reported to have bemoaned `` the quality of politicians in Westminster '' during a meeting in Luxembourg . He is also said to have questioned whether the British public would view Brexit as `` a great mistake '' when they realised what leaving the EU entailed . Senior government officials in Latvia said UK ministers had made `` a poor impression on their rounds of capitals and Latvia is pessimistic with regards to reaching an agreement in December '' . They added that `` the biggest problem is the chaotic political situation in the UK government '' . The Department of Foreign Affairs in Dublin declined to comment on the leaked report . Downing Street defended the UK 's preparations for Brexit and insisted there was a `` good and constructive '' relationship between London and Dublin . The Prime Minister 's official spokesman said : `` I do n't comment on leaked documents . The Government is working hard on preparations for Brexit . '' He added : `` There is a good and constructive working relationship with the Prime Minister and the Taoiseach . '' There had been progress in talks on the issues with Ireland - particularly the common travel area - but there was `` more work to be done , everybody accepts that '' , the spokesman said . `` Equally , I think everybody is committed to ensuring a frictionless border . '' In recent weeks the intractable issue of how to preserve an open border in Northern Ireland , while making good on Theresa May 's pledge to leave the EU customs union and single market , has been forced back onto the agenda by strong Irish diplomacy . Dublin is seeking `` written assurances '' that the UK will not allow Northern Ireland to diverge too far from the EU rules and regulations in order to preserve an open border between North and South . 'He felt sorry for British ambassadors trying for a coherent message with so much confusion at home '
Scotland Hammond rebukes Johnson , warning no one is 'unsackable ' ; Tories in Manchester ; Conservative Party Conference
PHILIP HAMMOND delivered a clear rebuke to Boris Johnson for `` downplaying '' the complexities of Brexit as he continued his feud with the Foreign Secretary yesterday . The Chancellor said `` focus '' and `` unity '' would be needed if Britain was to come out of the Brexit negotiations with a good deal . And he warned that the Foreign Secretary that no minister was `` unsackable '' . Meanwhile , Sir Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , espoused the virtues of `` discipline and loyalty '' in a sideways reference to Mr Johnson on a day when he from his Cabinet Mr Hammond , before `` Mr Johnson 's conferencwill remain the EU '' following stressed the and cautious '' Mr Johnson articles in The Telegraph and The month to set Brexit `` red and to demand his Cabinet colleagues started show more optimism faced mounting criticism inet colleague.s . ond , speaking a day benson makes his own speech , said Britain `` closely linked with lowing Brexit , and need for a `` careful `` negotiation . on used arti-Daily Telehe Sun last t out his lines '' nd that t colted to opti-Brexit '' . on believes uld be pree the EU withal , and has o many of his re downplayfits of leaving about Mr Johnson Britain should prepared to leave without a deal , suggested too colleagues are downplaying the benefits the EU . mond took the proach in his ng : `` If we get Britain will ht future be-But to get to be clear-eyed hallenges along Mr Hammond opposite approach speech , saying : this right - have a bright beyond Brexit '' . it , we must about the challenges our way . not downplay the difficulderestimate the complexiwill be one of the most tasks ever undertaken by a `` We must difficulties nor underestimate complexities . This will challenging peacetime government but with focus and determination and unity , we will succeed . '' Mr Johnson 's conference speech today will be arguably the most anticipated of the conference in Manchester . The reception it gets could make or break his ambitions of one day leading his party , and if he is seen as being disloyal it could also increase calls from some of his Cabinet colleagues for Theresa May to sack him . Mr Hammond did not name Mr Johnson in his speech , but in another barb clearly aimed at him , he said the Government must `` pick our way carefully and cautiously across the difficult terrain of EU negotiation , to ensure we arrive in good order on the fertile plains at the other side '' , adding that `` focus , determination and unity '' would be needed to succeed . In a series of media interviews earlier had said sackable ' '' , after to answer Sunday about Secretary lier in the day , Mr Hammond hthat Mr Johnson was `` sackablthe Prime Minister refused swer a question on Sundawhether the Foreign Sewas sackable . Mr Johnson 's making it Davis , the to negotiate Brussels . He also suggested M son 's disloyalty was maharder for David Da Brexit Secretary , tiate in Brussel He said : `` T we can show the strong negotiatin tion w Europ ion w His would stronger when it that he has a unite net behind him . '' The more unity , stronger our negotiating position with the European Union would be . hand be is clear united Cabinet Asked abou Johnson 's clai the Brexit tr period should years and not a more '' , he shru would describe a rhetorical flour Mr Hammon gested that Mrs M given Britain `` ity '' over the le the Brexit transit riod by saying it wo about Mr claim that transition be `` two second shrugged : `` I that as flourish . '' Hammond suggested May had flexibility - '' length of transition period - would last `` around '' two years . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , said the transition period could last `` a few months either side '' of two years . The Daily Telegraph understands that several Cabinet ministers believe a period of two and a half years would be acceptable . Sir Michael Fallon was also scathing when asked about Mr Johnson 's chances of becoming the next Tory leader . Speaking on Chopper 's Brexit Podcast , Sir Michael said his advice to his squabbling colleagues was to `` have a look at the military . People admire our military the world over ... Why ? Because of ... those virtues of discipline and loyalty '' . He said a poll that showed 21 per cent of Tory members wanted Mr Johnson as the next leader `` does n't seem extremely high '' . Speaking on the same programme , the former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith said Mrs May needed to show by the end of the conference that she could `` lead a united party , or we will not succeed '' . Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , said Mr Johnson `` had to go '' unless he could demonstrate his loyalty within days . Speaking at a Conservative conference fringe event , Mr Green refused to rule out paying for single market access after the Brexit transition period - which would cross one of Mr Johnson 's red lines . He said : `` I 'm not ruling anything in or out that will be in the detail of the negotiation because David Davis has got a difficult job and he is eminently suited to doing it . `` I 'm not going to do anything that makes his job more difficult . '' Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , issued a further jibe at Mr Johnson at a conference fringe event , insisting he would not be wading into the `` unfortunately public debate '' about the nature of a transitional deal . William Hague : Page 14 Editorial Comment : Page 15 Business : Page 1 'Brexit will be one of the most challenging tasks undertaken by a peacetime government '
US will always stand by UK , pledges new ambassador
WHATEVER happens in the Brexit negotiations , America will stand by Britain , the new US ambassador to the UK has said , Woody Johnson last night used his first speech as ambassador to emphasise the long-standing ties between Britain and the US , saying they would not be harmed by Brexit . `` Britain 's decision to leave the European Union takes your country into new territory - but you are not heading there on your own , '' he said . `` The United States is committed to standing with the UK through Brexit . `` Our position on Brexit is clear . We want a strong and prosperous UK to remain a leader in Europe , and we want both the UK and the EU to remain strong leaders globally . '' Speaking in Middle Temple Hall in London at the annual lecture of The Pilgrims of Great Britain , an Anglo-American friendship society , the 70-year-old billionaire owner of the New York Jets American football team said the UK would always have a `` strong and reliable trade partner '' in the US , despite Brexit . `` It is in everyone 's interest that Brexit be transparent , smooth , and orderly , '' he said . `` But whatever the outcome of the negotiations between the UK and the EU , Britain should know you will have a strong and reliable trade and investment partner in America . '' Mr Johnson , heir to the Johnson & Johnson pharmaceutical empire , told how his grandfather chose the UK to establish the company 's first overseas subsidiary more than 100 years ago . The lure remains `` just as true today , '' he said . `` Our countries are among each other 's largest inward investors . Americans and Brits hold roughly one trillion dollars of investment and employ approximately one million people in each other 's countries - jobs that have increased prosperity and opportunity in all four countries of the United Kingdom and in every American state , '' he said . Seeming to reference Barack Obama 's warning that the UK would be `` at the back of the queue '' for trade deals after Brexit , Mr Johnson said : `` As far as the president is concerned , the United Kingdom , our most enduring ally , is always at the head of the line . '' Mr Johnson used his speech to reassure his audience that they would warm to the new president . `` Many of you do not know the president , '' he said . `` I have known him for over 30 years . Our sons were born three days apart in the same hospital . Our relationship is long-standing , personal and close . And I can promise you , when you get to know him , you 'll like him . '' Hillary Clinton is `` convinced '' that associates of the Donald Trump campaign colluded with Russia to beat her in the US presidential election last year . In her most outspoken allegation so far , she said she was in `` no doubt '' that people connected to her rival helped Russia to interfere . Mrs Clinton was speaking as she promoted her 495-page book about the campaign called What Happened . In it , she called Mr Trump `` hateful and flagrantly sexist '' , and a `` fraud and liar '' who made her skin crawl .
Even Remainers ca n't want Britain on the rack ; Europhiles appear to hope we fail in negotiations , but it is in the national interest to get the best Brexit deal
It 's decision time : do you stand with Britain or with the EU ? The referendum is over . Brexit is happening . Withdrawal negotiations are about to begin . However you voted last year , you ought to want your country to get the best deal possible . If you do n't - if you actually want Britain to suffer - then I do n't know what to say to you . Except perhaps this : kick the Europhilia , my friend . Put Britain first . When I was boy , I used to hear it said : `` My country , right or wrong . '' That 's daft , of course . If you think your country is doing wrong then you have a patriotic duty to correct it - and I cast no aspersions upon those who honestly believe that staying in the EU is the right thing for Britain . But there are people who seem to feel that they have no country at all or that the EU can do no wrong . Exhibit A : those who say Britain has a big bill coming . We will have to part with some cash , very probably , but it 's odd how some salivate as they throw out higher and higher numbers as if to suggest that we should stop Brexit right now because it 's going to cost too much . The Financial Times , whose editor was awarded the Légion d'Honneur for services to the EU debate , says it could be ( EURO ) 100billion ( £84million ) . This is nothing more than conjecture . The European Commission 's own lawyers have conceded that such a bill would be legally impossible to enforce . Exhibit B : those who believe everything the EU says . Why was Jean-Claude Juncker 's account of a meal with Theresa May reported uncritically ? Of course he said Brexit `` can not be a success '' and that the Prime Minister is deluded - that 's his negotiating stance . Juncker hates Brexit , probably hates us for voting for it , and would like us to limp off humiliated and impoverished to deter anyone else from trying the same . It is precisely to avoid such an outcome that the UK Government is taking such a tough stance itself . We are threatening to walk away with no deal in the hope that , in order to persuade us otherwise , the other side will offer us the best deal . This position is framed to serve the national interest . More journalists should honestly explain it . Exhibit C : those who yearn for failure . This was palpable when Emmanuel Macron won the French presidency . Joy that Marine Le Pen was defeated was entirely justified . Her victory would have been a victory for a nationalism from the margins of politics , unleashing something dark across the continent . Not so welcome was the suggestion by certain Remainers that Le Pen and Brexit are analogous ( they are certainly not ) and Macron 's win was a popular endorsement of the EU ( it was a protest vote against the protest vote ) . Macron , said the militant Remainers with an unsettling thrill , once called Brexit a `` crime '' . Well , here come the thumbscrews and the cat o'nine tails . Let 's tie Britain down and get on with these negotiations ! Why would any Briton want to see their country stretched on the rack ? The id of the Euromasochist contains many parts . Pride : they insisted for decades that Brexit would never happen and then it did . A sense of loss : this was supposed to be their country , until the voters stole it from them . Superiority : I 'm not sure I can take one more article alleging that Brexiteers are educationally subnormal . Metropolitanism : civilisation is a vegan café staffed by cheap Poles . And identity with otherness : Europe is better than Britain simply because it is not Britain . I have no doubt that if Brussels was to send in the tanks to put down Brexit , AC Grayling , the Europhiles 's barmy philosopher , would be on the streets of Westminster handing out flowers to the occupying forces , thanking them for liberating us from ourselves . The voter looks upon all this with incomprehension . We voted for Brexit , did n't we ? And now it 's happening , should n't we try to make it work ? Out on the campaign trail , Tim Farron , who has tried to turn the Lib Dems into the official party of Remain , was challenged along those lines by one Malcolm Baker . Mr Baker accused him of talking down the country : `` I 'm proud that we 'll be coming out of Europe , '' he said , `` and not have people telling us we have to pay £100billion . If that 's your policy I hope you get six seats . '' One suspects that Mr Farron secretly regards six seats as a heady ambition . Mr Baker added that he was a lifelong Labour supporter but that he 'd be backing the Tories this time - and it 's easy to see why . Theresa May is far ahead in the polls not only because Jeremy Corbyn is inept and Farron is anonymous . It 's because this is a khaki election . The issue is our imminent war with the EU negotiating team , and the public is rallying around the only mainstream party that appears to be on Britain 's side . I 'll be accused of jingoism , but using the language of national interest is reasonable when the national interest is at stake . The interest of the country is Brexit and its failure would be a national humiliation . Nobody should wish that on their greatest enemy , let alone their fellow Britons . FOLLOW Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Sturgeon 's Brexit bombshell that crushed May 's big announcement ; Brexit : Article 50 ; No 10 accuses Scottish First Minister of 'playing politics ' after revelation hijacks Article 50 plan
AS LATE as Sunday afternoon , Theresa May had Tuesday , March 14 pencilled in her diary as a potential date for formally triggering Brexit . Confident that she had seen off a Tory rebellion on the Article 50 Bill , she knew that it would clear Parliament by the end of yesterday , removing the last obstacle in her way . Whitehall departments had been told to prepare for the big announcement to come this week . Buckingham Palace was told that the Bill would be sent for royal assent among today 's paperwork in the Queen 's daily red box . Ministers hoped that the Article 50 announcement would finally shift the agenda away from last week 's fumbled Budget . Then along came Nicola Sturgeon . On Sunday evening , the Scottish National Party secretly briefed journalists that the First Minister would be holding an 11.30 press conference the next morning at her official residence , Bute House . The Daily Telegraph , having discovered that Ms Sturgeon would be setting out plans for a second independence referendum if Scotland did not get a special deal on Brexit , called Downing Street to find out what they knew . Ominously for the Prime Minister , the call from the Telegraph was the first No10 had heard of it . Having been kept in the dark about the timing of the Article 50 announcement , Ms Sturgeon had decided to seize the initiative and hijack the Brexit timetable with a political bombshell . Despite being armed with the knowledge that Ms Sturgeon was about to make her move , Downing Street appeared to freeze : television and radio broadcasts yesterday morning continued to run reports that Brexit was going to be triggered this week , unchallenged by No10 . In the daily briefing for lobby journalists at 11am yesterday , the Prime Minister 's spokesman shunned the opportunity to rule out an early announcement on Article 50 . An hour later , the picture was very different . Ms Sturgeon had stolen the agenda with spectacular aplomb by announcing that she would set the wheels in motion for a second Scottish independence referendum next week . Her intention , she said , was for the referendum to take place between autumn 2018 and spring 2019 - before Britain exits the EU . As Westminster came to a halt to stare at television screens showing the press conference from Edinburgh , she said : `` I will now take the steps neces-sary to make sure that Scotland will have a choice at the end of this process . `` A choice of whether to follow the UK to a hard Brexit - or to become an independent country , able to secure a real partnership of equals with the rest of the UK and our own relationship with Europe ... next week I will seek the authority of the Scottish Parliament to agree with the UK Government the details of a section 30 order - the procedure that will enable the Scottish Parliament to legislate for an independence referendum . `` If Scotland is to have a real choice - when the terms of Brexit are known , but before it is too late to choose our own course - then that choice must be offered between the autumn of next year , 2018 , and the spring of 2019 . '' Back in Downing Street , the battle to wrestle back the narrative was about to begin . Before heading off to a Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey , Mrs May invited the BBC into the Cabinet room to film her slapping down the First Minister . Her message to Ms Sturgeon was that `` Politics is not a game , '' adding that `` the majority of the Scottish people do n't want a second independence referendum so instead of playing politics with the future of our country the Scottish Government should focus on delivering good government and services for the people of Scotland '' . The official government response said that `` another referendum would be divisive and cause huge economic uncertainty at the worst possible time '' . But Ms Sturgeon 's intervention appeared to have rattled the Prime Minister . By 3.30pm Downing Street was briefing journalists that the Article 50 announcement would not be happening until the final week of March - the first time No10 had ruled out triggering Brexit this week . March 27 was now the most likely date for the announcement . Had Mrs May been bounced into pausing Brexit by Ms Sturgeon 's surprise announcement ? Sources close to the Prime Minister insisted that she had always intended to wait until the end of March , though no explanation was offered as to why that was a more suitable date than March 14 . It also failed to explain why No10 had , for days , done nothing to disabuse the media and the rest of Whitehall of the notion that Brexit would be triggered this week . Prime ministerial aides were adamant that Ms Sturgeon had not influenced the decision to postpone Article 50 , and insisted that the First Minister would not pressure Mrs May into reconsidering Ms Sturgeon 's demands . Critics of Mrs May , however , say that she is not good at thinking on her feet , and likes to have plenty of time to consider her response to events . One person who certainly had not been briefed on when Article 50 would be triggered was Nicola Sturgeon . The entire reason for her surprise press conference was that she was expecting the Article 50 announcement `` very possibly as early as tomorrow '' , and hence felt the need to issue her ultimatum before Mrs May sent her all-important letter to Brussels . It was a last-ditch attempt to force the Prime Minister to plead for the special deal for Scotland that Ms Sturgeon has been trying to secure , in which Scotland would remain part of the single market while the rest of Britain dropped out . `` I do n't know whether Article 50 is going to be triggered tomorrow , or Wednesday , or next week or the week after that , '' said Ms Sturgeon . Perhaps if Downing Street had let her in on the secret , the Prime Minister would be having a rather easier week . 'I will now take the steps necessary to make sure that Scotland will have a choice at the end of this process '
Europe will be the loser if Britain punished for leaving , warns Le Pen
IMPOSING a punitive divorce settlement on Britain in the forthcoming Brexit negotiations would be proof that Europe can only advance by `` threats , intimidation and blackmail '' , the leader of France 's Front National has warned . Marine Le Pen , the hard-Right leader who is expected to reach the second round run-off in the French presidential election in May , said a punitive deal with Britain would bolster the position of populist forces across Europe , not deter them . `` The way the EU has reacted to Brexit has put paid to the few in Europe who still believe that there is an ounce of democracy in this structure that is the EU . `` Europe would be showing its true face , as it already has done so in Greece and tried to do with Britain , '' she said when asked if Brussels taking a hard line with the UK would play into the hands of her party . `` This EU does n't move forward by consent because it knows its people no longer adhere to this political structure . It advances via threats , intimidation and blackmail . '' European federalists in Brussels , Paris and Berlin have argued that Britain will need to be left conspicuously worse off after Brexit to clearly demonstrate to other EU members states the perils of leaving the club . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , repeatedly warned last year that Brexit would show `` it is much better to show solidarity than stand alone '' . Meanwhile Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , said in a letter to leaders last year that a Brexit deal must leave everyone in `` no doubt '' about the benefits of EU membership . However independent analysts have warned that an EU punishment strategy - designed to face down the rising forces of populism that threaten Europe 's political establishment - might have precisely the opposite effect . Referring to anti-Establishment parties across Europe , Vincenzo Scarpetta , a senior policy analyst with Open Europe said : `` They would be able to claim that the EU is an undemocratic club where a sovereign nation gets punished for merely exercising a right enshrined in the treaties . '' Ms Le Pen 's remarks to the Anglo-American Press Association in Paris appeared to confirm that risk - which is also advanced in private by British officials and negotiators . `` It hardly makes the EU look like a club you 'd want to be a member in if they try and shoot the first member who decides to leave of their own accord , '' said one senior British official . If elected , Ms Le Pen said she would give the EU six months to yield to a list of demands that would enable France to take back control of its borders and economy , including embarking in `` intelligent protectionism '' . If her demands were not met , Ms Le Pen said she would advise the French people that it was time for France to leave the EU . Polls show that Ms Le Pen remains very unlikely to win in May , when opponents from Left and Right are expected to unite to defeat her .
Scotland Do n't defy the people , judges told ; As historic legal challenge over Brexit begins , Attorney General warns Supreme Court not to 'stray into areas of political judgment ' ; Government expects judgment in new year
THE Attorney General will today warn Supreme Court judges not to defy the `` will of the electorate '' or `` stray into areas of political judgment '' during a landmark Brexit legal challenge . Jeremy Wright is expected to say the judges should `` resist '' intervening in a matter of significant `` political sensitivity '' as they decide whether Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has the power to trigger Brexit negotiations without a vote by MPs . He will say that people who voted for Britain to leave the European Union did so on the `` clear understanding '' that the Government had the power to implement the vote without `` further approval of Parliament in yet further primary legislation '' . Mr Wright will present the Government 's case to 11 Supreme Court judges as it begins an appeal against the High Court ruling which stated that Mrs May must have a parliamentary vote before Article 50 - the formal mechanism which begins the process of the UK leaving the European Union - is triggered . In written submissions to the court which set out the arguments he will make today , Mr Wright urges the judiciary not to intervene in politics , saying : `` The Court is being invited ... to stray into areas of political judgment rather than legal adjudication . The Court should resist that invitation , particularly where the underlying issue is one of considerable political sensitivity . '' Today 's case comes amid growing suggestion that EU-supporting politicians will attempt to use the result to force the Government to reveal its Brexit plans or face the prospect of losing a vote on Article 50 . The Liberal Democrats yesterday said that they would would vote to overturn the EU referendum result by voting against legislation to trigger Brexit in Parliament if the Government loses the court case . Ministers privately concede that the Government is likely to be defeated and warn that the Supreme Court will create a `` constitutional crisis '' when it returns its ruling in January . Writing in today 's Daily Telegraph Lord Howard of Lympne , the former Conservative leader , today warns that peers will provoke the biggest `` constitutional crisis '' for a century if they seek to block Brexit . He says : `` Of course their lordships do not face the consequences of electoral wrath in the same way as MPs . But that very fact makes it inconceivable that the unelected Upper House would seek to thwart the clearly expressed will of the people . Were they to do so , that would indeed bring about a constitutional crisis that would dwarf anything we have seen for over 100 years . `` So , whatever the decision of the Supreme Court , I do not think there is any serious risk that the Government will not be able to achieve its objective of activating Article 50 in the spring of next year . '' Following the original High Court case politicians were criticised for questioning the motives of the judges who made the ruling . But tomorrow Mr Wright will appeal directly to the country 's most senior members of the judiciary not to intervene in the government 's delivery of Brexit . The Daily Telegraph understands that the Government is also examining plans for Supreme Court judges to be forced to make public more information about the political interests of both themselves and their family members . It comes after Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury , President of the Supreme Court , faced calls to recuse himself from the case after it emerged that his wife had called the referendum `` mad Continued on Page 5 Michael Howard : Page 16 Editorial Comment : Page 17 Continued from Page 1 and bad '' on Twitter . Lady Hale , the court 's deputy president , also faced criticism for a speech ahead of the Brexit case where she questioned whether a new law alone was enough to start Brexit negotiations . The Government 's appeal will be heard over four days and will be televised in full . However , no judgment is expected until the new year . Mr Wright will open the hearing by highlighting the fact that more than 17 million people voted for Britain to leave the European Union on the understanding that the Government would then use its powers to implement the vote . In a written submission to the court , he adds : `` The premise of the 2015 [ referendum ] act was the continued existence of the Government 's prerogative powers to act on the international plane - including , specifically , to give Article 50 notice as the first step to implementing a `` leave '' vote . `` That was the clear understanding of all concerned and the basis on which people voted in the referendum . '' Mrs May has vowed to invoke Article 50 by the end of March even if the judges rule against the Government . The Daily Telegraph understands that ministers are examining plans for all night sittings and clearing business from both houses to push the legislation through if they lose the case .
Brexit minister rejects Leave camp 's promise to spend £350m on NHS ; Europe 2016 ; I made no such pledge , declares David Davis , as gulf widens between him and Boris Johnson
DAVID DAVIS , the minister tasked with negotiating Brexit , yesterday distanced himself from Boris Johnson and the Leave campaign 's pledge to spend £350 million more on the NHS after exiting the EU . In further signs of differences between the pair , Mr Davis pointedly refused to endorse the slogan , which had appeared on the side of the official Leave campaign 's bus . Instead Mr Davis , who voted for Brexit , told a committee of MPs that he `` made no such pledge '' - an implicit criticism of those senior Tories who endorsed the promise . It is another indication that the promise to spend more on healthcare after leaving the EU , made by some Eurosceptics before the vote , will not be taken as binding by Theresa May 's government . The comments came as the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator threatened the UK with being stripped of single market `` access '' unless it accepts unlimited migration from the Continent . Guy Verhofstadt tweeted that Britain must `` accept the free movement of citizens '' to maintain its current access and also demanded that Brexit be wrapped up by 2019 . Mr Davis , who will face Mr Verhofs-tadt across the negotiating table , refused to address the comments directly but appeared to jokingly refer to his opposite number as `` Satan '' in his response . An aide later said Mr Davis 's throwaway comment referred to the MP asking the question and not Mr Verhofstadt . The exchanges came as Mr Davis , whose official title is the Secretary of State for Exiting the EU , appeared before the foreign affairs select committee . Asked about the £350 million NHS pledge , Mr Davis said : `` I made no such pledge . Some did and if you want them to argue the case you should invite the people here who made that argument . You will find in no speech of mine any reference to that . '' He also accused an influential group of Lords of ignoring the views of the British people over their `` extraordinary '' demand for Parliament to vote on starting Brexit negotiations . Mr Davis said those pushing for a vote were trying to `` gainsay the view of the British people '' and mocked the idea that voters thought the EU referendum was only `` advisory '' . A committee of Lords on Tuesday said it would be `` constitutionally inappropriate '' and set a `` disturbing precedent '' if Mrs May did not get the approval of both houses of Parliament before triggering Article 50 , the formal mechanism for beginning talks . The committee said MPs and peers must `` play a central role '' in the decision to launch negotiations , either by passing an Act of Parliament or approving resolutions tabled in both Commons and Lords . However Mr Davis ruled out holding a vote , warning that allowing MPs to theoretically block the start of negotiations `` could put Parliament in opposition to the people '' . He said : `` The government in its manifesto said it would respect the result of this referendum This was not advisory . The British people did not think they were being asked their opinion . The previous prime minister did n't resign because he did n't like the opinion . So I think we 've got to take this seriously . '' Mr Davis added : `` It is for Parliament by all means to debate the conditions of departure , but it is not for Parliament to gainsay the view of the British people . Full stop . '' In a separate development , Ken Clarke , the pro-EU former Tory cabinet minister , was found to have written to constituents telling them that `` the referendum is not binding '' . According to The Guardian , Mr Clarke bemoaned the fact that most politicians `` paid lip service to the supposedly democratic nature of the exercise '' . Mr Clarke reportedly said : `` None of the Brexiteers at the moment have any clear idea of what they want to do next by way of actual change to our economy , trade , migration and other arrangements with the EU . A flood of legislation and regulations will probably have to be put before Parliament over the next few years . ''
Call me America 's Mr Brexit , says Trump
DONALD TRUMP appeared to predict yesterday that he would become known as `` Mr Brexit '' after turning US politics on its head with his tumultuous presidential campaign . The Republican candidate made the suggestion in a post on Twitter which read simply : `` They will soon be calling me MR BREXIT ! '' Neither Mr Trump nor Hope Hicks , his spokesman , were immediately able to provide any clarification . `` His tweets speak for themselves , '' she said . Mr Trump used the sobriquet in a TV interview the previous day , describing himself as a `` political phenomenon '' . In reply to an interviewer who said : `` The country 's changing . The world is changing . We saw Brexit and now we 're seeing it in the United States '' , Mr Trump said : `` Well I think I will be called Mr Brexit . '' Mr Trump may have been referring to the result of the Brexit referendum , which came as a surprise to many . However , he has trailed rival Hillary Clinton in every national poll over the past three weeks . His current deficit is five percentage points , according to a Reuters poll released on Wednesday and the margins are larger in many of the key swing states . Kellyanne Conway , named Mr Trump 's new campaign manager in a sudden staffing shake-up , yesterday said the gap is a good thing . `` I think it helps us to be a little bit behind , and we are , '' she told CNN . `` It lights a fire under us and reminds us what we need to do to get this done . ''
Annus horribilis ? 2017 has been a success , says a defiant May
THERESA MAY has denied that she has endured a `` horrible '' year as she renewed her pledge to fight the next election as Tory leader . The Prime Minister said that she is `` in it for the long term '' . She added that while she will `` undoubtedly '' deliver Britain 's exit from the European Union she does not want to be known only as `` Madame Brexit '' . Speaking during a trip to RAF Akrotiri , in Cyprus , Mrs May insisted that her year has been a success despite a disastrous snap election , a botched coup and the resignation of three members of Cabinet . She said : `` I 'm here to do the job that I believe needs to be done and that 's what I 'm going to focus on . I 'm doing the job that I believe is right for the British people . '' During a trip to Poland this week the Prime Minister was accidentally described as `` Madame Brexit '' by a translator . Mrs May said : `` You might have noticed I smiled when I heard the translation of Mrs Brexit or Madame Brexit . Look , I am going to deliver on Brexit . That is undoubtedly the case , but I am doing other things as well . If you look at the changes we are making on skills , education and training for example . '' The Prime Minister said that Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant has been `` crushed '' in Iraq and Syria as she hailed the armed forces as `` simply the pride of our nation '' . She told servicemen and women : `` Here in Cyprus you are at the epicentre of so much of our military activity in the region . It is you , your professionalism , your courage and your sacrifices that give meaning to the pledges we make as a nation . ''
Hammond takes opportunity to seize control ; While the PM and Foreign Secretary are out of the country , the Chancellor pushes his vision for Brexit Analyis
If opportunity makes a thief , Philip Hammond has certainly taken the chance of Theresa May 's three-week summer break to steal the Brexit agenda while he is in charge of the country . The Chancellor has presented such a clear vision for a soft , `` jobs first '' Brexit - for which he now has support from virtually every Cabinet minister but Boris Johnson - it seems he will be able to present Mrs May with a fait accompli when she returns from the Alps . Mr Hammond wants a `` standstill '' transition when Britain leaves the EU in March 2019 so that businesses retain full access to the single market and the customs union . He then wants a transitional period to last for up to three years , far longer than supporters of a `` hard '' Brexit would like . And on the evidence of recent days , Mr Hammond will get his way . Since the Prime Minister arrived in Lake Garda on Monday for the first part of her European tour , former Leave campaigners including Michael Gove and Liam Fox have fallen into line behind Mr Hammond 's vision of a `` status quo '' transition followed by a lengthy implementation period . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , who said less than a fortnight ago that the implementation period should last just a few months , has now decided that a two-year transition phase would amount to no more than a `` rounding error '' . Mr Gove , the Environment Secretary , who earlier this month reportedly wanted to bring Brexit talks `` crashing to a halt '' to ensure a hard Brexit , has now said that an implementation period will ensure that `` we continue to have not just access to labour but the economic stability and certainty that business requests '' . He added : `` That is something around which the Government and the Cabinet is united . '' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , has said that a `` broad and simple '' deal is needed that avoids a `` cliff edge '' for business , which seems to put him in Mr Hammond 's camp . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , said this week that EU citizens will be free to come to Britain to work and live after March 2019 as long as they register with the Home Office , meaning freedom of movement will effectively continue . Tellingly , Downing Street , which insists Mrs May remains very much in charge even while she is on holiday , has not pushed back against any of these views . Where once it dripped poisonous briefings against the Chancellor , Number 10 now insists that Mr Hammond has the Prime Minister 's support . One senior source yesterday said he `` speaks for the Government on many of these issues '' . Mrs May , of course , has been emasculated by the general election result . Her intention was to get rid of Mr Hammond in a post-election reshuffle , but instead Mr Hammond 's power appears to grow by the day . Shorn of her inner circle of Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill , the joint chiefs of staff on whom she relied so totally before the election , Mrs May can no longer impose her will on her ministers , who take every opportunity to put forward their own views . Perhaps more significant than the fact that Mrs May is in Italy ( where she is keeping fully abreast of developments ) is Boris Johnson 's absence from the country . The Foreign Secretary , who has the most difficult relationship of any Cabinet minister with Mr Hammond , is in Australia on government business , sufficiently far away as to make it difficult for him to impose his own views on the debate . The Chancellor and the Foreign Secretary have not seen eye to eye for years , but their relationship soured during the EU referendum campaign to the extent that they openly mocked each other - something which Mr Hammond continues to do . Until yesterday , Mr Johnson had not made any comment on what his Cabinet colleagues have said in his absence , and when The Telegraph contacted his spokesman yesterday , he initially made it clear that he would not be doing so . Hours later , however , the Treasury and the Foreign Office issued a joint statement to The Telegraph saying : `` The Chancellor and Foreign Secretary are working together to take the UK out of the EU including out of the customs union , single market and European Court of Justice . `` They , along with the whole of government , are getting on with this very important work . '' The brief statement hardly amounted to a ringing endorsement from Mr Johnson of the Chancellor 's plans . Both men , of course , are seen as potential successors when Mrs May 's premiership comes to an end , and while Mr Hammond seems to be winning the argument in the Cabinet , Mr Johnson is more popular with the party membership and will surely want to maintain a harder stance over Brexit in any future leadership bid . Another potential leadership contender , Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservatives leader , yesterday described the recent Cabinet rows over Brexit and the leadership as a `` really unedifying spectacle '' . She said : `` The rule should be to get behind the Prime Minister at this time of great national interest . A bit of sharp elbowing around the top table does not help anybody . '' For now , however , Britain seems likely to accept the sort of lengttransitional deal favoured by the EU . The arrangement put forward by Mr Hammond involves a `` swift , broad and simple '' deal , according to one British official , iwhich companies retaiaccess to the single market and customs unioand allow free movement to continue for a period , followeby a transition phase in which in retain union followed Britain gradually disentangles itself from EU rules and obligations . The UK-EU trade deal could be finalised during the transition phase , which Mr Hammond has said must be completed before the next election in 2022 . Advantage Hammond How the Cabinet has swung behind the Chancellor on Brexit Sunday Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , says that having waited 40 years for Brexit , `` 24 months would be a rounding error '' . Monday Theresa May , the Prime Minister , goes on holiday to Lake Garda in Italy . Tuesday Michael Gove , the Eurosceptic Environment Secretary , says he is `` pragmatic '' about the need for a three-year transition period during which free movement continues . Thursday Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , says there will be no `` cliff edge '' after Brexit and EU migrants will be able to continue to come to Britain during a transition period . Yesterday Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , claims that `` literally nobody '' wants to see a post-Brexit migration cliff edge . Friends in high places Where the key players stand Mr Hammond 's key Cabinet supporters on a Brexit transitional deal include David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who has previously indicated a transitional deal would not last longer than two years , but appears to have softened his position . Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , is said to have changed his mind on the issue after his return to government . Dr Liam Fox , International Trade Secretary , has previously warned that a transitional deal would delay the ability to strike new free trade deal but now accepts Mr Hammond 's position . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , is one of Mr Hammond 's key supporters on a transitional deal ; she has repeatedly said that Britain needs a `` soft landing '' . The one who may need convincing is Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , who has repeatedly clashed with Mr Hammond over Brexit and said that the UK could walk away from talks without a deal .
Germany 's king-makers demand a Brexit cabinet ; Resurgent Free Democrats urge Mrs Merkel and the EU not to punish the UK and to find a `` fair deal '' ; Merkel could replace EU apostles with pro-UK group
GERMANY 'S Free Democrats have demanded a special `` Brexit cabinet '' in Berlin to safeguard the vital interests of the country , citing growing alarm among industrial and manufacturing companies over the disastrous implications of a failed deal with the UK . The fast-rising party says it will push for an amicable compromise in Brexit talks if it joins the ruling coalition this autumn - as now looks fairly likely - warning that it would be a fatal error for Europe to humiliate Britain . `` We are hearing an uttering of concerns from German companies and trade unions about what could happen if there is a crash-Brexit and no deal in place . Criticism is growing , '' Michael Theurer MEP , the party 's economics chief told The Daily Telegraph . `` Small enterprises are very concerned . There are also a lot of German companies that rely on financing from the City of London , and they are very happy with the service they get now . '' The sentiment is echoed by the leader of the Free Democrats ( FDP ) , Christian Lindner , who has stressed ever since the referendum that the EU should handle Brexit with extreme care . `` I warned against a humiliation of Great Britain . The country must continue to be a strong partner for the EU and within NATO , '' he said . The party would like what it calls a `` fair deal '' along the lines of the Norwegian formula that preserves mutual market access . Mr Theurer said the German government gave the impression of coherence on Brexit but in reality its response had been ad hoc and shambolic . `` Nobody is in charge . There is a lack of priorities . We absolutely need close coordination with the economy minister taking the lead , '' he said . The FDP has recovered from electoral massacre four years ago . It has regrouped under younger leaders , rising 9pc in the opinion polls with a push for tax cuts and tougher migration policies . The party has a good chance of regaining its post-War role as the kingmakers of German politics in elections this September , forging a coalition with chancellor Angela Merkel 's Christian Democrats . `` We are a very British-minded party in favour of free trade and market economics . Our view is that we should get along with the British as well as possible . A successful Brexit is of fundamental importance to Germany , '' Mr Theurer said . The Free Democrats are closely aligned with the Mittelstand nexus of medium-sized machine-tool , engineering , and manufacturing firms - many of them family-owned - that feel neglected as Brexit talks go on far above their heads in Brussels . Mario Ohoven , head of the Mittelstand federation ( BVMV ) , said his members accounted for half of Germany 's ( EURO ) 86bn ( £77m ) of exports to Britain , claiming that 750,000 German jobs are closely linked to UK trade . `` We plead for a soft Brexit . That does n't mean Britain should be able to cherry pick but it is in everybody 's interest to avoid tariffs and trade barriers , '' he said . Chancellor Merkel is currently in a `` grand coalition '' with the Social Democrats ( SPD ) , now led by Martin Schulz , the former president of the European Parliament . He is an apostle of the EU project and Continued on Page 28 Continued from Page 27 backs the hardest possible Brexit to show others that leaving the EU comes at a very high price . But Mr Schulz 's brief surge in the polls has already faded . In May his party suffered what he admitted was a `` crushing defeat '' in its historic bastion of North Rhine-Westphalia . There would be major consequences if Mrs Merkel switched to a FDP coalition . The Free Democrats are viscerally opposed to any kind of fiscal union or debt-polling for the eurozone , and would demand a policy of zero-tolerance towards any fiscal slippage by Greece . The Free Democrats have a eurosceptic tinge and would not be friendly to a `` grand bargain '' between Germany and France aimed at rebuilding monetary union on fresh foundations , with joint eurobonds backed by an economic government . However , Sophia Besch and Christian Odendahl , from the Centre for European Reform , said Brexiters were deluding themselves if they thought Berlin will yield much ground on points of principle in order to safeguard unfettered trade with Britain . `` Germany 's major political parties are various shades of pro-European . Even German businesses value the integrity of the single market and the EU more than tariff-free access to the UK market , '' they said . `` Geopolitically , Germany considers Brexit an act of vandalism - and of selfharm . In Berlin 's view , Britain has undermined its own value as a security partner , and must be prevented from further dividing the EU . `` To get Germany on side , Britain needs to make clear that London is willing to contribute to European stability . '' Yet tensions between economic selfinterest and German pieties over European solidarity are ever present in EU affairs . Nothing quite so exposes the hypocrisy as the Nord Stream gas pipeline , a sweetheart deal with the Kremlin at the strategic and economic expense of Poland and Eastern Europe . It would be highly corrosive if the smaller and weaker EU states felt that they were being pushed around by a resurgent Franco-German axis . In this respect , British withdrawal sets off an awkward dynamic for Europe that is more complex than it looks . Germany is discovering that shibboleths will not be enough as the Article 50 deadline nears . They have to play four-dimensional chess .
This indulgent Tory infighting risks turning Brexit into a national disaster ; Cabinet ministers must stop putting their own ambitions and grudges before the national interest
Humans like to think we are better than animals . Sometimes , though , observing beasts can tell us a lot about human behaviour . When , for example , a pack of dogs loses its leader , the hounds often descend into a power struggle , snarling and scrapping to test one another 's strength . As it turns out , Cabinet ministers are n't so different from dogs . With Theresa May humbled by the general election , the Cabinet is now in an open war with itself . It 's not a pretty sight . Ministers are sending out `` friends '' to brief against one another and accusing their colleagues of skulduggery on Sunday chat shows . The conflict supposedly revolves around enormous policy differences between great and powerful rivals . The truth , though , is that the Government 's warring factions are not as far apart as they look . Their power struggle is about personalities , not policies , and it is threatening to turn Brexit into a disaster . On the face of it , the ongoing disagreements about Brexit - soft or hard , fast or slow - look fundamental . The fight in Parliament , between die-hard Remainers and the rest , has an epic feel to it . But among ministers there is , in fact , a broad consensus . Hard-headed politicians , Remain and Leave , accept that Brexit must be implemented and they mostly agree that it should be done sensibly , with a reasonable transition period . Both sides in this fight , from arch-Brexiteer David Davis to Remainerin-chief Philip Hammond , accept this reality . They both want the Brexit transition to be time-limited . They both want to negotiate a final deal with as low an exit fee as possible , conditional upon a free-trade agreement . They might disagree over the timeline and the trade-offs that Britain faces , but these outcomes will be determined by the negotiation in Brussels , not by theoretical arguments in Cabinet . The Government 's divisions are spreading , however . Recently , a new fissure has opened up on fiscal policy . The fight centres on whether to loosen the purse strings for public sector pay . Mr Hammond , ever the fiscal hawk , says no . His rivals , led by Michael Gove , disagree . But the difference , as with Brexit , is n't as wide as it looks . Listen to the nuances on both sides , and you 'll hear the fiscal doves admit that they have little appetite for a massive spending splurge , while Mr Hammond admits there are certain recruitment problems in public services that must be addressed . In other words , the Cabinet policy splits are not irresolvable . The more vicious row is about power and presentation : should the Tories adjust the pay cap quietly or ostentatiously ? And , crucially , who gets to decide ? These fights , over Brexit and fiscal policy , need n't tear the Government apart . Unfortunately , with the premiership seemingly up for grabs , ambitious ministers smell an opportunity . They are exaggerating their differences to set out their stalls and drum up support . Meanwhile , on its two most important political battlefields , the Government is adrift . The legislation needed to implement Brexit faces threats from all sides , starting with the Repeal Bill , which will shift all our current laws on to British , rather than EU , foundations . Even without a majority , an authoritative government might have railroaded its Bills through Parliament . Instead , the Cabinet has declared open season on itself . MPs are forming themselves into raiding parties , ready to attack the legislation with all sorts of amendments and obstructions . And this is only the first of many Bills . If the situation in Parliament is bad , it is even worse in Brussels . A government without the command of its own Cabinet and MPs is in no position to strike highly contentious political agreements abroad . The Whitehall machinery seems to be in disarray . Its Brexit planning operation is so fragile that , according to the chief of the National Audit Office , it 's liable to `` fall apart like a chocolate orange '' . Our new EU ambassador hardly seems to be involved , having not even moved to Brussels for the job . And as their ministers tussle , civil servants are locked in turf wars or toiling away on policy that might be abandoned or altered as the Government 's strategy evolves . The chaos means that our negotiating team can not guarantee that its promises or demands will not shift or fall apart later . This is poison for a negotiation , substantially raising the risk that the talks will fall apart . If so , the public wo n't easily forgive the Conservatives . It 's one thing for Brexit negotiations to collapse over a fundamentally irresolvable disagreement . It is quite another for them to fail because the Government is simply too incompetent and wracked with infighting . None of this is necessary or inevitable . It has come about because Cabinet ministers are putting their own ambitions and grudges before the national interest . They should instead be playing a long game . Their electoral success is tied to that of Brexit , and that wo n't be determined by a quick , sharp skirmish . It is a long , protracted battle and , with the EU 's own institutions evolving , a shrewd , well-run British government may well have opportunities to further its interests in the years ahead . In order to get there , though , two things need to happen . The first is that the Conservatives must fill their leadership vacuum . Fighting dogs only quieten down once they establish definitively who is master and who is follower . Likewise , the Government will only regain stability through a leadership contest or a grand bargain between the major players that is supported by MPs . After that , whoever is in charge needs to create a policy consensus by admitting that it wants a sensible transitional deal before it tackles longer-term matters , like developing our future immigration policy and building the infrastructure it requires . This would enable MPs of different stripes to rally behind a programme and create space for Parliament and the public to scrutinise the finer details of policy , heading off unnecessary rows like Britain 's Euratom withdrawal . The Government is in a terrible mess of its own making . But it can be unmade . If it is n't , voters will deliver a harsh verdict at the next election - and the Conservatives will roundly deserve it . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
We will be bribed with our own cash
At times like this I turn to history for enlightenment . Back in the year 193 , there were five Roman emperors . The result was chaos for Rome . And things were n't exactly hunky-dory for the emperors either . The first four lost their lives . This year could turn out to be similarly chaotic - although hopefully it will only be political careers that are lost . It is ironic that the Brexit negotiations start on June 19 , the same day as the Queen 's Speech in Parliament . If the Government 's programme is not passed , then there would surely have to be a change of prime minister , and possibly another general election . Since the political future is so uncertain , large parts of our economic future are uncertain too , including what sort of Brexit we will secure and , indeed , whether Brexit will happen at all . Such uncertainty is debilitating for the economy . Nevertheless , there are some reassuring precedents . 'It will be difficult to enact the measures necessary to In 1964 , the Labour Party under Harold make Brexit work ' Wilson won the general election with a majority of only four seats . This made governing extremely difficult . Two years later , however , he secured a bigger majority . The economy performed reasonably well . In 1974 , Harold Wilson again won most seats but it was a hung parliament . In the second election in October he achieved a three seat majority . Labour clung on with support from the Liberals until 1979 . This period is widely regarded as one of the worst in living memory , with high inflation and serious industrial unrest . Yet the economy grew at an average annual rate of 3pc . Towards the end of John Major 's Government , the economy continued to grow strongly , even though he had lost his majority . More recently , the election of 2010 produced a hung parliament , leading to the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition , under which the economy recovered and the budget deficit was considerably reduced . And the uncertainty caused by last year 's Brexit vote did not impede Britain 's growth . So the economy can be remarkably resilient in the face of political upsets and uncertainty . Nevertheless , it would not be surprising if some real investment in the economy was now put on hold or consumers decided to rein in their spending a bit . Either would depress the economic growth rate . Fortunately , there is an offset , namely the weakness of the pound , which should bolster Britain 's net exports . Uncertainty may be a bad thing , but the way it is eventually resolved can also have adverse economic effects . If we land up with a Labour Government under Jeremy Corbyn then both government spending and taxes would rise . This is exactly the opposite of what needs to happen to make Brexit work well for Britain . Even if current uncertainty is resolved by the continuation of Mrs May , or someone else , as the head of a Conservative minority government , Brexit will be messier . She called the election supposedly to strengthen her hand in the Brexit negotiations . Presumably it follows that her , or her successor 's , hand is now weaker . Moreover , whether the UK secures a deal or not , it will be difficult to enact the sort of radical measures that are necessary to make Brexit work . For the British people seem to be tiring of austerity . They want improved public services and various other goodies , to be paid for , of course , by someone else . The Labour manifesto offered exactly this , including the abolition of tuition fees , which went down well with many students . By contrast , the Conservative manifesto offered the opposite , including plans to end the triple lock on pensions . Whatever happens in the next few weeks , it is surely going to be difficult for the Conservative Party to face the electorate again with so few goodies in the shop window . In view of this , the agenda that many of us had hoped a Conservative government would pursue coincident with Brexit , namely continued pressure on public expenditure enabling radical reductions in taxes , no longer seems very plausible . I fear that we may be in an era when the political parties compete to bribe us with our own money . That is exactly what Roman emperors used to do with the provision of bread and circuses . Roger Bootle is chairman of Capital Economics . Contact him at roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com 'It will be difficult to enact the measures necessary to make Brexit work '
Now is not the time to discuss Scottish independence vote , May tells Sturgeon ; No negotiations as PM closes down the First Minister at hotel meeting
IT was her big chance to tackle the Prime Minister over Scottish independence , but Nicola Sturgeon was only `` briefly '' allowed to mention a second referendum before she was shut down by Theresa May , it was claimed last night . The Prime Minister is understood to have dictated terms during their meeting in a Glasgow hotel , running down the clock by talking about Article 50 and a policing exercise before Ms Sturgeon tried to grab her chance at the end of their talk . But sources made it clear last night that there was no `` substantive '' discussion of a referendum because Mrs May had already reiterated her position that `` now is not the time '' . She instead told the First Minister to forget all thoughts of a second Scottish referendum until voters have seen how Brexit is working `` in the real world '' . However , the First Minister insisted there is no `` rational '' case for an independence referendum being delayed longer than two years because the Prime Minister told her both the UK 's Brexit and EU trade deals will be known by then . Speaking after her meeting with Mrs May in a Glasgow hotel , Ms Sturgeon said she sought total clarity on the timings of both the Brexit and trade deals and the Prime Minister was not `` under any illusions '' about why she was asking . But sources rejected the First Minister 's interpretation of the conversation , saying that Scots should not be asked to make such a momentous decision until they have seen how Brexit is working in practice . They made clear this would not have happened by the time Ms Sturgeon wants to hold the referendum , between autumn 2018 and spring 2019 . Ms Sturgeon met Mrs May on the eve of a vote in the Scottish Parliament , which is expected to give her the authority to ask the Prime Minister for the powers to hold another referendum . Sources said the Prime Minister 's discussion with Ms Sturgeon about the vote was extremely brief . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , is also expected to write to the Scottish Government today with an official rejection of Ms Sturgeon 's highly complex plan for Scotland to stay in the EU single market even if the rest of the UK comes out . Mrs May met Ms Sturgeon yesterday as part of her pledge to consult with the devolved administrations ahead of the triggering of Article 50 . The venue , Glasgow 's Crowne Plaza hotel , was kept secret until after the discussions had completed . The First Minister described the talks as `` cordial '' and said she had wished Mrs May well in the Brexit talks . However , she said the preparatory work necessary for an independence referendum would have to start `` quite quickly '' if it was to be held within the next two years . She said Mrs May was `` absolutely adamant '' that both the terms of the Brexit and trade deals would be known within two years . She added : `` I think it makes it very difficult for the Prime Minister to maintain a rational opposition to a referendum in the timescale I have set out . `` I think based on the discussion today I would struggle to see what her rational opposition to it would be in the timescale we have been talking about . '' A Downing Street source said : `` We totally disagree with the First Minister 's assessment [ on timing ] . It 's not enough to take a decision based on the outline of a deal . People have to see how it is working in the real world . '' No10 later said there had been no `` substantive '' discussion about a referendum because the Prime Minister had already set out her position . Instead , most of the meeting is understood to have been taken up with a briefing from Mrs May on the process of triggering Article 50 . A similar briefing was given to Carwyn Jones , the Welsh First Minister , last week . 'It 's not enough to take a decision based on the outline of a deal '
Wetherspoon 's boss criticises rival for gloom over Brexit
TWO of Britain 's biggest pub companies are at loggerheads over the impact of Brexit on the economy . Tim Martin , chief executive of J D Wetherspoon , is resolutely upbeat about the UK 's impending departure from the EU , while rival Greene King is warning it has hit consumer confidence . Mr Martin , who was a vocal campaigner for Brexit , used his company 's full-year results yesterday to criticise those who had warned about the consequences of leaving the European Union and to suggest that Britain does not need a trade deal with the EU . Greene King , meanwhile , struck a more cautious tone and insisted there was already evidence that its customers have been rattled by the vote . Asked why there was such a disparity between the two companies ' attitudes towards Brexit , Mr Martin suggested that the referendum result is an easy excuse for companies who are performing poorly . `` The only thing worse than complaining about the weather , '' he said , `` is complaining about Brexit . '' He advised Greene King to undergo some self-examination . `` If the EU is keen for a trade deal , we should cooperate , but unelected apparatchiks like President Juncker ca n't be controlled , which is one of the main reasons we voted to leave , '' argued Mr Martin , who founded Wetherspoons . `` Common sense , therefore , suggests that the worst approach for the UK is to insist on the necessity of a 'deal ' - we do n't need one and the fact that EU countries sell us twice as much as we sell them creates a hugely powerful negotiating position . '' He said that `` the gloomy economic forecasts for the immediate aftermath of the referendum have been proven to be false '' , with Wetherspoons , which has 926 pubs , reporting that sales had risen 4.1pc since the end of its financial year on July 24 . Full-year pre-tax profits climbed 12.5pc to £66m after exceptional items on revenues that advanced 5.4pc to £1.6bn . In contrast to Mr Martin 's bullishness , Greene King , the brewer of Old Speckled Hen and operator of 3,035 sites , said in a trading update that it was braced for more difficult times ahead as a result of the referendum . `` As expected , uncertainty surrounding the UK 's future withdrawal from the European Union has translated into a softening of some economic indicators and a reduction in consumer confidence , '' the company , which is led by chief executive Rooney Anand , said . `` While the broader implications remain unclear , a number of recent industry surveys have flagged risks to leisure spend and we are alert to a potentially tougher trading environment ahead . '' Like-for-like sales growth at its 1,823-strong managed pubs , restaurants and hotels business slowed to 1.7pc in the first 18 weeks to Sept 4 , down from the 2.8pc it had reported in June for the first eight weeks . At its leased and franchised division of 1,212 , net income rose by a much stronger 4.5pc on a like-forlike basis . The slowing growth at Greene King 's managed pubs business , as well as its caution about the wider economic environment , sent its shares down 6.1pc to 789p . Wetherspoons shares climbed 2.4pc to 946½p after its annual results beat expectations .
Scotland Labour split as Corbyn shuns single market ; Moderate MPs furious after their leader says he will only seek 'access ' to Europe following Brexit
JEREMY CORBYN has opened a public split with his shadow chancellor John McDonnell by suggesting he wants Britain to leave the single market after Brexit . In comments that were met with fury by many moderate Labour MPs , the party leader said he will only seek `` access '' to the single market . Mr Corbyn 's approach is in direct conflict with that of Mr McDonnell , who warned that pulling out of the single market could cause `` substantial '' damage . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , yesterday refused to say whether Britain will seek to retain its single market membership after Brexit , insisting that she does not want to `` give away '' Britain 's negotiating hand . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , said on Monday that it was `` improbable '' that Britain would remain in the single market after Brexit . But Mrs May told MPs in the Commons : `` We will not reveal our hand prematurely and we will not provide a running commentary on every twist and turn of the negotiation . `` And I say that because that is not the best way to conduct a strong and mature negotiation that will deliver the best deal for the people of this country . '' Mr Corbyn , who was criticised by his own Labour MPs for failing to do more during the EU referendum campaign , said that he `` accepts and respects '' the Brexit vote . However , he said that he is concerned by state aid rules which prevent the Government from intervening to save companies and requirements which mean governments have to `` liberalise and privatise public services '' . Mr Corbyn said : `` We will be pressing for full access to the European Single Market for goods and services as part of the negotiations . `` But there are directives and obligations linked to the single market which we would not want to see as part of a post-Brexit relationship . '' In July , Mr McDonnell said : `` Whatever emerges from negotiations , when the final proposals for Brexit are decided , we do not want to lose the benefits that membership of the European Union has brought . The damage that would be done to our economy by pulling out of the single market at this time could be substantial . '' Chris Bryant , the former shadow leader of the Commons , said that Labour was in danger of becoming `` some wild woolly sandal-wearing protest movement '' . Pat McFadden , a Labour MP , said : `` The question of the single market matters to jobs , trade , investment and prosperity . `` We can not gamble our economic future on a Liam Fox world tour exploring trade deals when countries have already said that settling our relationship with the EU is the priority . `` Any new deals will be more comprehensive if the UK has maximum access to European markets , which means membership of the single market . '' Owen Smith , Mr Corbyn 's rival for the Labour leadership , said : `` Tens of thousands of Labour members and trade unionists will be worried to hear that Jeremy Corbyn appears to agree with David Davis that our membership of the single market is not worth fighting for . `` I have been consistent in saying that trade with Europe is in our national economic interest . It brings jobs , growth and investment . `` Jeremy seems happy to accept Brexit at any cost - even if that means putting British jobs and investment at risk . `` Perhaps this explains why he failed to ask a single question of Theresa May at Prime Minister 's Questions about Brexit and why he failed to campaign hard enough during the referendum . '' Juliet Samuel : Page 23
Brexit not to blame for 'shrinkflation ' ; Thousands of products have been getting smaller - and it was going on long before the EU referendum
SUPERMARKET items have been getting smaller for at least five years , official data show , as manufacturers were accused of using Brexit as an excuse for short-changing customers . Statistics published yesterday by the Office for National Statistics revealed that more than 2,500 consumer products have shrunk over the past five years , despite being sold at the same price . This so-called `` shrinkflation '' flation '' effect has hit goods ranging from chocolate bars and toilet rolls to coffee and fruit juice , with food products most heavily affected , it said . Manufacturing giants including Premier Foods , which owns brands such as Mr Kipling , Hovis and Bisto , have blamed shrinking products on Brexit fallout since the vote to leave the EU . The claim is that rising commodity prices and the higher cost of importing ingredients , thanks to the weakening value of the pound , are forcing them to choose between putting up prices or shrinking packs . But the ONS dismissed the referendum result as a reason for a perceived boom in post-Brexit shrinkflation , as the number of products affected annually has been relatively consistent since 2012 . `` Our analysis does n't show a noticeable change following the referendum able ch that would point to a Brexit effect , '' it said . It also cast doubt on whether the cost of raw materials , on which manufacturers have often blamed price hikes , has actually increased . The European import price of sugar has been falling since the middle of 2014 , and reached a record low in March 2017 , it said . Instead , experts said `` shrinkflation '' effect was a lasting impact of the recession as manufacturers avoided upsetting `` sensitive '' consumers choosing to quietly shrink packs instead of charging more . Mark Jones , a food drink solicitor at Gordons firm , said : `` Shrinkflation born out of the recession on ers `` price s by rink ing ood and ordons law flation ' was sion and has gathered staggering pace since 2009 . The ONS 's report confirms this . Against the backdrop of a weak economy , commodity prices have been rising over the last five years . `` The recession made people very price sensitive and you can see the evidence of that by looking at the impressive growth of discount retailers in the last five www.years.No retail sector has faster . '' Inrecent months , consumers been angered by changes to a number of popular products , including Toblerone , Doritos and Maltesers . Alex director service that m and fo Neill , Which ? managing of home products and services , said : `` We have found many popular household food products have shrunk over the years , often with the price staying the same or increasing . `` Manufacturers and retailers should make any changes to their products clear , otherwise they risk people feeling cheated . '' Meanwhile health campaigners said that although smaller packs were generally better for people 's diets , shrinkflation could backfire as consumers cotton on to the practice . Graham MacGregor , chairman of Action on Sugar , said : `` When we are trying to tackle obesity , and especially childhood obesity , reducing portion size is a really good strategy . `` I think the size of these products should be reduced , but these companies should n't be charging the public the same amount of money for them . I think that could backfire if people end up feeling deceived . '' Lattes , smoothies and juice cartons will have their sugar content cut , or portion sizes will shrink , health officials say . Public Health England ( PHE ) is to set new targets to reduce the calories in sweetened dairy drinks , juices and smoothies , following talks with manufacturers . It follows plans to cut sugar content in a range of products - including biscuits , cakes and puddings - by 20 per cent by 2020 . Health officials have yet to agree what the new drinks targets will be , with talks expected to continue over the summer . The new measures are aimed at drinks that are not covered by the sugar tax , which comes in next year , with companies paying up to 8p in duty on a can of fizzy drink . The small print How products have shrunk 2017 Doritos sharing bags Reduced 10pc - 200g to 180g 2017 Coco Pops large box Reduced 10pc - 800g to 720g 2016 & 2017 Maltesers Reduced 23pc - 121g to 93g 2016 Toblerone 400g bar reduced 10pc 400g to 360g 2016 Andrex pack of four toilet rolls Reduced by 8pc - 240 to 221 sheets . 2016 Sensodyne Total Care Extra Fresh Toothpaste Decreased 25pc - 100ml to 75ml . 2016 Terry 's Chocolate Orange Reduced 10pc - 175g to 157g 2015 Cadbury Creme Egg multipack Reduced 17pc - six eggs to five 2015 Tetley Tea 'blend of both ' 80 bags in box Reduced 6pc - 75 . 2014 Aunt Bessie 's Homestyle Chips Reduced 7pc - 750g to 700g 2014 Surf with Essential Oils washing powder Reduced 19pc - 2kg to 1.61kg 2014 Birds Eye Select vegetable bag Shrunk 8pc - 750g to 690g 2014 Domestos Spray Bleach Multipurpose Cleaner Reduced 7pc - 750ml to 700ml 2013 Hovis Best of Both loaves Reduced 6pc - 800g to 750g 2012 John West tuna Reduced 14pc - 130g to 112g 2012 Quality Street tins Reduced 18pc - 1kg to 820g
Brexit deadlock as Brussels demands more ; Europe 's chief negotiator warns of no deal on free trade without more details on Britain 's exit fee
NEGOTIATIONS between Britain and the European Union yesterday ended in deadlock , with the two sides deeply divided over the price of Brexit and the future role of the European Court of Justice in policing the divorce deal . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , warned that unless Britain caved in to its demands to provide more information on the financial settlement , there could be no discussion of a UKEU free-trade agreement . At a joint press conference with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , in Brussels , Mr Barnier raised the spectre of Britain crashing out of the EU without a deal . `` We want an orderly withdrawal and an orderly withdrawal means accounts must be settled , '' he said . `` Clarification of the UK position is indispensable for us to negotiate and for us to make progress . '' A free-trade agreement could grant tariff-free access to the single market after Brexit , while allowing Britain to put curbs on immigration from the EU . Neither side is prepared officially to talk figures for the Brexit bill yet , but the EU is thought to favour a ( EURO ) 100billion payment . Mr Davis said the UK would meet its financial obligations but that the EU also had obligations to Britain . During four days of highly complex talks , British officials refused to provide the EU with details of which of the EU 's financial demands it would meet until the EU provided legal `` chapter and verse '' on its demands . At the press conference , Mr Barnier said the EU had provided `` detailed legal analysis of these commitments '' , but British officials disputed this . The two sides are now effectively deadlocked . It emerged yesterday that Mr Barnier had told the House of Lords EU Select Committee there would be `` an explosion '' of outrage across Europe if Britain refused to honour its commitments.The second major obstacle to progress is which court would have jurisdiction over the rights of EU citizens . Mr Barnier insisted yesterday that the European Court of Justice must have jurisdiction over any agreement on EU citizens ' rights after Brexit . That would mean judges in Luxembourg continuing to have influence in Britain , which is unacceptable to Britain . Asked by The Daily Telegraph to name another country that accepted foreign jurisdiction on its territory , Mr Barnier was unable to answer . `` This is not a political point , it is a legal one , '' he said , `` Only the court can interpret EU law . For us it is court case law that must continue and the court that must continue to rule over this process . '' Britain argues that citizens ' rights would be enshrined in the Brexit withdrawal agreement . That would be `` binding '' in international law and could not be changed after Brexit by MPs in Westminster . The EU insists that unless `` sufficient progress '' is made on the bill , Ireland and citizens ' rights , it will not begin discussions on Britain 's future relationship with the EU , including trade talks .
If you thought 2016 was a year of revolution , just wait for 2020 ; British voters are getting angrier over Brexit - if Theresa May betrays us , there will be an earthquake
As this year of political revolution draws to a close , the prospects of the European Union as 2017 approaches could hardly be bleaker . There is no doubt that Brexit is the worst thing ever to happen in the history of the Union . But right across the Continent , further political opposition is on the march . It is quite astonishing that in Italy the Five Star Movement , led by popular stand-up comedian Beppe Grillo , is now constantly above 30 per cent in the polls . In France , Marine Le Pen looks set to win the first round of the French presidential election and , while she is not favourite to win the decisive second round , events of 2016 show that it would be foolish to say that it is entirely impossible . Even in Holland , the controversial Geert Wilders leads the polls with an election due in the spring of next year . The greatest threat to the EU economically would be a further run on the Italian banks , and some clever financial minds think that Chancellor Angela Merkel may yet have to bail out Deutsche Bank ahead of the German elections next autumn . In many ways , the comment that Donald Trump made to me when I first met him - that Brexit was a smart thing to do - looks correct . We may well have just escaped from a building that is catching on fire . Despite all of this , though , the process of Brexit would appear not to be going anywhere at all . Increasingly , I am beginning to feel that Prime Minister Theresa May 's reassuring early words about `` Brexit means Brexit '' in July this year are not amounting to very much in the way of action . The contradictions that we hear from Cabinet ministers every single week make this Government look rudderless . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , has apparently been briefing foreign ambassadors that he personally is in favour of the European free movement that he campaigned against at the referendum . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , openly questions whether we will leave the Single Market . Even David Davis , the hardline Brexit Secretary , has appeared to suggest that we may have to continue paying membership fees for access to the Single Market . It seems to me that we are heading towards a move to the Norwegianstyle compromise over Brexit . There is no doubt in my mind that a majority of MPs in Parliament want us to remain in the European Economic Area , with all that it implies . I fully expect that the Supreme Court will uphold the previous judgment on Article 50 , and now Jeremy Corbyn 's Labour Party has made it clear that it wants to try to use any parliamentary vote to bind the Prime Minister to keeping us in the Single Market . A Norwegian-style outcome would not be what we voted for in the referendum on June 23 , and I sense that among the 17.4 million people who voted for Brexit , frustration is moving towards anger . The one beneficiary of all of this will not be Lib Dem leader Tim Farron , despite his party 's one-off victory in the Richmond by-election . It will be Paul Nuttall , who has taken over from me at the helm of Ukip at a very fortuitous time . Ever since the Danes were forced by Brussels to reverse their referendum decision on the Maastricht Treaty nearly 25 years ago , the European political elites have thought they would always be able to overcome any setbacks that voters had the temerity to inflict on their beloved project of integration . To date , they have been successful , with a referendum in Ireland on the Nice Treaty being reversed and referendum decisions in France and the Netherlands wilfully ignored . Earlier this year , the Dutch voted against an EU Association Agreement with Ukraine but have been told that their wishes will be disregarded . Here at home , in the past few weeks , we have seen an attempt to change the terms of what we voted for . We keep being told , day in , day out , that we did not vote to leave the Single Market and that the British people did n't know what they were voting for . And yet , if you look at what every single leading campaigner of both the Leave and Remain camps said , it could not have been clearer that a vote to leave included the Single Market . In the face of growing pressure against Brexit from the Labour Party , the Liberal Democrats , the Scottish Nationalists and a growing number of Tories , I believe that the Prime Minister is failing in her duty . We have seen this before . As home secretary , she would repeatedly talk tough on immigration , only to preside over huge numbers of people continuing to come to the country . While I would n't expect her to completely reveal her hand , I would have expected some leadership on this issue . Even when we do invoke Article 50 we may find the going tough . As for the moment , there are many in Europe who appear to put their blind faith in this failing project above the argument of economic logic that they need us more than we need them . I think there will be growing calls among Leavers for us to abandon the Article 50 route altogether . After all , the numbers coming into the UK from the EU continue to rise , as shown in the migration figures released last week . We are still spending a net £30 million a day to stay part of the club . However loud the voices get to repeal the 1972 European Communities Act , this option will undoubtedly find little favour in Parliament . So for those of you who are now close to boiling point , I am sorry to say you will have a long time to wait . If , as I now expect , we reach the spring of 2019 and find that our demands in the historic referendum have not been met , then I think something quite dramatic could happen . However docile British voters may appear to be , I think that this issue is the one on which a really big change could happen and a major realignment of the British political system could occur . If people think that 2016 was a seismic year , I think 2020 will be even more dramatic . I could , of course , be entirely wrong on all of this and perhaps our Prime Minister will get a grip on her divided Cabinet colleagues and , in the course of the next week , tell us clearly what she intends to do . But I am not holding my breath . FOLLOW Nigel Farage on Twitter @ Nigel_Farage ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Mundell rules out special deal for Scotland after Britain leaves EU
SCOTLAND will not get a `` special deal '' when the UK leaves the EU but nor will any other part of the country , David Mundell said yesterday as Nicola Sturgeon provoked a row over the new Brexit hotline the Prime Minister has set up for her government . The Scottish Secretary told MSPs there would be a `` single agreement for the whole of the United Kingdom '' adding that the SNP 's suggestion that particular areas , such as the City of London , are getting preferential treatment over Scotland is `` absolutely wrong '' . However , he said there could be `` differential '' arrangements within the UK deal for some sectors , such as the financial services industry , which is vital for the Scottish and London economies . Mr Mundell also used an appearance before a Holyrood inquiry into Brexit to urge SNP ministers to work with the UK Government and insisted he would be present at a new Brexit committee when Scotland 's interests are discussed . Ms Sturgeon complained that it took David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , 36 hours to call back one of her ministers after he used the new hotline for the first time on Tuesday . The First Minister told MSPs : `` There is now a telephone line we can call , it 's just currently not very hot . '' Her claim was flatly denied by UK Government , which said the Scottish Government had asked for the call to take place on Wednesday . The Scottish Secretary 's latest intervention further undermines Ms Sturgeon 's claim Scotland could stay in the single market even if the rest of the UK leaves . Prof Michael Keating , one of the country 's foremost constitutional experts , has told The Daily Telegraph this is impossible . Speaking at Holyrood 's Europe committee , Mr Mundell warned MSPs to be sceptical of reports that particular sectors would get special treatment . But he added : `` That does n't mean that within that agreement there ca n't be specific issues that would relate to Scotland , Wales or Northern Ireland . There wo n't be a Scotland-only agreement , or a Wales-only agreement , or a Northern Ireland-only agreement . '' Nissan yesterday announced it would build the new Qashqai in Sunderland thanks to UK Government `` support and assurances '' but Mr Mundell insisted there are no plans for a special Brexit deal for the car or financial services industries . Mr Mundell said he would attend a new Brexit cabinet committee when it meets in early November to discuss access to the single market . He also said he could not `` envisage '' the introduction of border controls in Scotland for ferries from the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland . Ms Sturgeon told First Minister 's Questions yesterday that Mike Russell , her Brexit Minister , had used the UK Government 's Brexit hotline for the first time just before midday on Tuesday but had to wait until after 6pm on Wednesday for a response . A Department for Exiting the European Union spokesman said : `` This is not correct . The Scottish Government asked for a call to be arranged for [ Wednesday ] morning and the Secretary of State spoke to Mike Russell later in the day , as soon as his diary allowed . ''
This is a woman 's Government , and will be all the more effective for it ; The supposedly soft work of social mobility matters more than the Brexit Boys ' macho posturing
For a woman whose very career puts her commitment to equality for women beyond question , Theresa May 's Cabinet appointments raise some intriguing questions about what actually matters in politics and who is responsible for the things that matter . One thing that is clear is that David Cameron 's chums do not matter much to Mrs www.May.No prime minister can avoid having enemies , but the lucky ones get to choose their foes . Mrs May has chosen the Cameroons , the gilded set that surrounded her predecessor . She reckons that George Osborne , Michael Gove and friends can make trouble for her , but not pose a mortal threat to her Government . She 's probably right , too . For all their talents , the Cameroons are few and have fewer loyal followers . Never ones for the mundane logistics of political organising , they cultivated no activists and instead of earning loyalty by showing loyalty they bought it with jobs or the promise of jobs . No , Mrs May knows that if anyone can cause her less trouble in the Conservative Party , it 's the Brexit Boys . That 's why a woman who has put so much effort into promoting women in politics has put three of the Conservatives ' mightiest swordsmen in charge of getting us out . The most famous is the Foreign Secretary . Boris Johnson will play a part in seeking the best exit deal - though uncharacteristically , perhaps , not the lead role . That part goes to David Davis , the awfully titled Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union . The third musketeer is Liam Fox , already talking up a storm as International Trade Secretary . Mr Davis 's greatest liability in the job is that for all his reputation as a bruising operator at Westminster , he is regarded as unserious and unreasonable by many of those he will have to negotiate with . His greatest asset , meanwhile , is that he is regarded as unserious and unreasonable by many of those he will have to negotiate with . Reasonable men strike reasonable deals . Unreasonable ones strike outrageous ones . Just ask Recep Tayyip Erdogan : the Turkish president jails journalists and kills Kurds , but the EU still does deals with him . Remember that realpolitik when you hear patrician Europeans insisting the EU can not compromise on its values to strike a Brexit agreement . In politics , there 's always a deal to be done . Westminster conspiracists suggest Mrs May is setting the three big Leavers up for a fall , hoping they botch it . Not so . She 's not daft , the PM . She knows she stands and falls with Brexit : any failure is www.hers.No , the reason Mrs May has given these three alpha males the job is to bind them to its results : whatever Brexit looks like , it will be theirs . The Remain-voting PM will not be blamed by Leavers for the way she carries out their instructions . It 's already received wisdom at Westminster that Mrs May has created her Government as two distinct ministerial teams with two distinct missions : a crack squad of Leave-voting He-Men to do the heavy lifting of Brexit , and a smiling band of One Nation moderates to do some nice stuff about social justice and fairness and unicorns - and never the twain shall meet . Implicit in that is the assumption that Brexit is more important than social reform , though that actually reflects the amour-propre of the ministers and the rather macho outlook of Westminster : diplomacy , defence , high politics and strategy , fields still dominated by men , are accorded greater status than social policy , a `` softer '' field where women are more at home . Why has Mrs May , committed to promoting women , given the big , important jobs to men , and left the women to do the fluffy stuff of making Britain feel fairer and more meritocratic , and Conservatives look like agents of that fairness and meritocracy ? In fact , the two teams have the same goal : to assuage the anger expressed in the EU referendum . And the European task of Mr Davis , Dr Fox and Mr Johnson ( all of whom , incidentally , have important things to say about social mobility ) is actually the less important of the two . For many of the 52 per cent who chose Brexit , voting to Leave was about a rational assessment of the EU and its effects on their lives and their finances and their country . Those are the voters Mr Davis and his new comrades must satisfy with the best possible Brexit . But here 's an awkward fact that only a few politicians have yet accepted : for some voters , the sort of deal we strike with the EU does n't really matter . As Andy Haldane of the Bank of England ( a man surely too interesting to remain a central banker ) has noted , many poorer Britons have seen no direct economic benefit from any of the solid GDP growth in the UK since the recession ended : a larger population and gains skewed to the better-off meant that even as the cake got bigger , their slice stayed the same . These angry `` left behind '' voters , who swung the referendum result , are now the most powerful and unpredictable force in British politics . If anyone can deny the Tories a majority at the next election , it 's them . And for people left out of economic growth , who cares what Brexit means for GDP and productivity and trade ? That 's why Mr Osborne 's economic doom failed to move them before the vote , and that 's why whether Mr Davis gets Norway-minus , Canada-plus or Singapore-sigma is largely irrelevant to them . Good Brexit or bad Brexit , neither will make as much difference to the lives or outlook of the `` left behind '' as policies that make it easier for their kids to get a good job and buy a house . The three Brexiteers will wave their swords and cry havoc and they 'll get more attention as a result . But the work of Justine Greening will probably matter more to the lives of voters who have no time for the games of politicians . Likewise , Westminster obsesses over Nick Timothy , Mrs May 's joint chief of staff , fêting him as the most important man in the country - and all but ignoring Fiona Hill , also chief of staff ( the first woman to hold the post ) and just as significant a figure in our national life . In politics as in life , the macho men will make the noise , but it 'll be the women - and perhaps a few men untroubled by the insecurities that are part and parcel of machismo - who get on with the stuff that really www.matters.Be in no doubt : this is a woman 's Government , and all the better for it . FOLLOW James Kirkup on Twitter @ JamesKirkup ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
'I needed a knife in violent Brexit Britain ' BODY : A French student who took a knife to a nightclub has walked free after magistrates accepted he was scared living in Brexit-seeking Britain . Phillippe Roubert , 20 , claimed he needed the knife to protect himself from `` violent '' streets over fears `` foreigners '' were subjected to attacks . Exeter magistrates ' court took a lenient course of action after accepting his fears in the aftermath of the Brexit vote were understandable . Roubert had tried to take a butterfly blade into the Unit 1 club in the city on Dec 11 last year but was stopped by door staff . He told police he was scared by stories of how dangerous the streets of Britain could be and how Brexit had fostered a climate of xenophobia . Deborah Minett , his solicitor , said stories of violent Brexit Britain concerned him and the `` knife offered him some reassurance on the back of some press reporting and views he held wrongly '' . Roubert , who admitted having a knife in a public place , was given a conditional discharge .
Canada or Switzerland ? The pros and cons of two Brexit options BODY : Boris Johnson says he will resign as Foreign secretary over Brexit if Theresa May decides to signal her interest in a `` Swiss-style '' arrangement with the EU in her keynote speech on Friday in Florence . Alongside Michael Gove , his fellow Cabinet Brexiter , Mr Johnson stepped up his argument with the Prime Minister , saying he favours an EU deal along the lines of Canada 's . He made clear some of the things he does not want Britain to drive for in his essay for The Daily Telegraph last Saturday , writing that `` we would not expect to pay for access to their markets any more than they would expect to pay for access to ours '' . So , why is he putting his career on the line like this ? I 've taken a look at the differences between the `` Canada plus '' option and the `` Swiss-style '' method favoured by such as the Chancellor Philip Hammond , as away to ensure Britain delivers on what the people voted for last year . The appeal of Canada 's deal Canada enjoys preferential single market access under the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) it signed with the EU , which comes into force from tomorrow . The deal eliminates most trade tariffs , without obliging Canada to accept issues , such as free movement , which Brussels likes to force on trade partners . Any downsides ? The services sector is only partially covered by Ceta , so copying and pasting it as the basis for a Brexit deal would not give UK financial services the same access they currently enjoy . This is why supporters refer to the iteration Britain would have as `` Canada ( or Ceta ) plus '' , indicating they accept that the deal would have to go further . What about Switzerland ? The Swiss are neither in the EU nor the European Economic Area , but participate in the single market . Switzerland not only has to pay for access , coughing up a net annual fee of ( EURO ) 12 per capita , but it does n't even get full access for its banking sector and other parts of the services sector . Bear in mind that the service sector makes up almost 80 per cent of the UK 's economic output . Switzerland is also obliged to accept free movement , which means that it has struggled to control the influx of migrants into the country . The Swiss have tried to bring in curbs on immigration , as their voters demanded in a referendum , but they were forced by Brussels into backing down in order to keep their single market access . Which version is a truer Brexit ? Neither Canada nor Switzerland are in the EU . They are also not in the bloc 's customs union , so either model would see Brexit fulfilled in spirit , as Britain would end up outside the bloc and able to take charge of its trade policy . However , there is a price to pay in order to emulate Switzerland : Britain would not be able to control its borders without approval from Brussels and would be bound into paying for continued access to the single market . Few Brexit voters would have backed Leave in order to see that happen . That is why Mr Johnson is putting his neck on the line in his fight for a free trading nation which is the master of its borders post- Brexit . He would know that many Brexiters would have voted for that rather than to be perpetually yoked - as the Swiss are - to Brussels . Asa Bennett 80 Percentage of the UK 's economic output generated by service sector ( EURO ) 12 What every Swiss citizen pays per year for access to the single market 80 Percentage of the UK 's economic output generated by service sector
Brexit needs a vision as much as a plan BODY : Not so long ago , the key debate around the Cabinet table was what Brexit should look like . Now the discussion is all about the transition period , and what it should look like . This is progress of a kind , though not necessarily the sort that those who voted to leave the European Union want to see . Many suspect that transition will become permanent , despite protestations from the Chancellor , Philip Hammond , and the International Trade Secretary , Liam Fox , that it will end by the next election in 2022 . Others worry that by creating a system that effectively shadows EU membership from outside , transition is laying the way for a final deal almost indistinguishable from what went before . And while ministers kick such crucial proposals around , what is the Prime Minister 's view ? We should learn more when she returns to her desk tomorrow . After more than three weeks off , she should be refreshed . And her presence is needed . For while it is good to see some detail on vital issues like customs and Ireland , the EU is responding with a dead bat . The key issue at stake for its team , predictably enough , is money . The reality is that , following an election in which the margin for shepherding Brexit legislation through Parliament has been significantly reduced , Britain 's negotiating position has been weakened . Therefore when Michel Barnier , the EU 's Brexit negotiator , demands that a `` financial settlement '' has to be concluded first , it may be that Whitehall is preparing to concede the point . If so , and a deal is on the cards , it would be best for some political preparation to be done for what may be the largest single piece of state expenditure since the banks were bailed out . Ultimately , this means the case for Brexit must be made again . The best way of doing that is for the Government to define its vision of the future , to formulate where it hopes negotiations will end - not just how it can get them under way - and to make it clear that ultimately , if we are not satisfied , we are prepared to walk away with No Deal . There may be Cabinet unanimity that a transition deal is needed . But there seems no accord on what it is for : to smooth away Brexit cliff edges , or to kick the can down the road ? It must be the former . That original question can not be avoided . What should Brexit Britain look like ? Instead of filling a vacuum , every Government move , every statement , must now fill a purpose - and fulfil Britain 's destiny .
Scotland Liam Fox demands meeting with BBC over Brexit 'bias '
LIAM FOX has demanded a meeting with the BBC director-general after accusing the broadcaster of `` biased '' coverage of Brexit . The International Trade Secretary wrote to Lord Hall to say the corporation had `` wilfully '' ignored positive stories about Brexit . He also accused the BBC of preferring interviews with pro-EU commentators , predicting disaster as a result of Brexit , to speaking to Leave campaigners . Dr Fox wrote : `` I can not recall a single time in recent times when I have seen good economic news that the BBC did not describe as 'despite Brexit ' . '' In his letter , seen by The Daily Telegraph , Dr Fox claims there is a `` clear pattern of unbalanced reporting of the EU economy '' . Dr Fox , who is in Washington DC for the latest stage of talks with the US about a post-Brexit trade deal , says reporting has undermined his efforts to strike agreements . He says that on July 6 the BBC chose not to report the annual foreign direct investment figures published by his department , even though his team called the BBC 's economics , business and political desks to flag up the story . He wrote : `` These figures are an important indicator of the attractiveness of the UK to foreign investors , yet the BBC turned down the opportunity to publish the story or take interviews . The figures just so happened to show a record number of projects in the UK from foreign investors . '' On July 7 , he says , he alerted the BBC to monthly trade statistics showing exports had risen by 10.8 per cent , but the BBC ignored it and ran a piece about the widening trade deficit . PA BBC/ OVERS/ A spokesman for the BBC said : `` We do not recognise the characterisation of our coverage outlined in the letter , but the BBC is happy to talk with politicians , as we do on a regular basis . '' JEFF 'I can not recall a time when I have seen good economic news that the BBC did not describe as `` despite Brexit '' '
May to build bridges with Macron as officials fail to agree Brexit talks start date
THE start of formal Brexit talks was delayed yesterday in the wake of the political uncertainty caused by Theresa May 's disastrous election result . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , yesterday met Oliver Robbins , the most senior civil servant in David Davis 's Brexit department , but the two men failed to reach an agreement on a start date for talks . Mr Barnier last night urged Britain not to waste any time in coming to the table for Brexit talks . `` My preoccupation is that time is passing , it is passing quicker than anyone believes because the subjects we have to deal with are extraordinarily complex , '' he told The Financial Times . `` I ca n't negotiate with myself . '' Mr Barnier said the EU would approach the talks with `` no spirit of revenge '' but `` no naivety either '' . He said he wanted negotiations to be completed by November 2018 to allow time for the agreements to be ratified in British and European parliaments to meet the schedule for the March 2019 exit date , which he said should not be pushed back . Mrs May will this evening start trying to rebuild her authority when she visits Emmanuel Macron , France 's new president , in Paris . The Prime Minister hopes to make an ally of Mr Macron before the formal opening of Brexit negotiations . The pair will discuss counter-terrorism in the wake of the recent attacks in London before heading to watch England play France in an international football friendly . The trip to Paris was planned weeks before Mrs May lost her majority in the election , but could not have come at a more welcome time for the Prime Minister . Mrs May and Mr Macron will announce joint plans to fine social media companies such as Facebook , Twitter and Google if they fail to remove extremist content from their websites . She will hope to use the meeting to build significant bridges ahead of Brexit negotiations after Mr Macron 's predecessor , François Hollande , threatened to `` punish '' the UK . There are fears Mr Macron , an ardent pro-European who is fresh from a landslide victory , could harden France 's already tough stance on Brexit . Speaking ahead of the visit , Mrs May said : `` We are united in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil . '' Brexit talks were due to open on Monday next week but Mr Davis , the Secretary of State for Leaving the European Union , said yesterday they are now likely to take place later in the week . Mrs May needs to publish her Queen 's Speech , which will set out her legislative programme , before she starts the negotiations . Angela Merkel signalled yesterday that the triumph of Mr Macron 's new centrist party in the first round of France 's parliamentary elections paves the way for deeper EU integration . The German chancellor congratulated the French president on `` a strong vote for reforms '' as a Franco-German working group draws up proposals for closer eurozone cooperation , to be presented next month . The two leaders agreed last month to draw up a road map for greater EU integration that could entail treaty changes , previously considered a taboo . A joint push to relaunch the EU and the eurozone by the currency bloc 's two largest economies could generate unstoppable momentum for ambitious reforms . But the expected landslide victory for Mr Macron 's party in the final parliamentary poll on Sunday may also mean tougher Brexit negotiations . The French and German leaders want to maintain the timetable for Britain 's exit from the EU , clearing the way for them to shape the bloc 's future . Proposals by Mr Macron for a joint eurozone budget , parliament and finance minister initially raised fears in Germany that Berlin could be forced to pay for struggling countries that resist reform . But Mrs Merkel said her government was ready to discuss Mr Macron 's proposals after he denied German media reports that he was in favour of turning the national debts of eurozone countries into shared eurozone debt . Germany 's deputy finance minister , Jens Spahn , said yesterday that Berlin was open to the idea of a eurozone finance minister , provided the role and responsibilities were clearly defined . Mr Spahn , a senior member of Mrs Merkel 's centre-Right party , said Germany was also willing to increase its funding for European investment projects . He expressed the hope that Mr Macron will enact reforms to boost economic growth in France . Mr Macron 's expected parliamentary majority will strengthen his hand in a showdown with France 's militant trade unions as he loosens rigid employment laws to end economic stagnation . The labour reforms were a cornerstone of his election campaign . The rout of the Socialists after Mr Hollande 's disastrous five-year presidency clears the way for a raft of business-friendly policies . The former banker , who has redrawn the French political landscape at the age of 39 , plans to push through his labour reforms by presidential decree before September , a move likely to spark street protests by unions . 'We are united in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil '
Poisonous Brussels made May boil over ; Election 2017 The Telegraph Election 2017A week after Downing Street dinner turned sour , PM returns fire on the mocking EU bureaucrats
THE EU 's great betrayal started outside Number 10 with a Judas kiss from Jean-Claude Juncker , and it was in the same spot , at almost the same hour one week on , that Theresa May 's anger finally boiled over yesterday with the most extraordinary speech of her premiership . Mr Juncker , president of the European Commission , was welcomed with open arms in Downing Street by Mrs May on April 26 , and he had appeared in good spirits when he left later that evening . Their talks about Brexit , he said , had been `` constructive '' while his fellow dinner guest Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , described the meeting as `` cordial '' . There had been time for a few jokes and a friendly chat with Mrs May about her passion for hill-walking , a shared interest with Mr Barnier . Seven days later , however , Mr Barnier was turning Mrs May 's rambling hobby against her with a hectoring and vaguely sinister allegory about the Brexit talks . Mountain walkers , he said , had to `` learn a certain number of rules '' , such as taking one step at a time `` because sometimes you are on a steep and rocky path '' . Using language akin to a TV mafia villain , he warned that hikers had to beware of `` accidents '' that might befall them , like falling rocks . He also insisted that the Brexit `` divorce bill '' was non-negotiable and that Britain could face `` legal '' consequences if it did not pay up in full . It was just the latest in a series of what Mrs May yesterday described as `` threats '' from EU politicians and officials that had begun the day after that fateful Downing Street dinner . Mrs May had been joined at that meal by David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and the Brussels delegation included Martin Selmayr , Mr Juncker 's powerful chief of staff . The EU delegation was all smiles as they left Number 10 , and Mrs May was seen throwing her head back with laughter as Mr Selmayr made a parting joke . Once they got into their limousines , however , the mask dropped . Mr Juncker was quickly on the phone to the German Chancellor Angela Merkel , accusing Mrs May of `` megaphone diplomacy '' and of being `` deluded '' and living in `` another galaxy '' . The day after the dinner , Mrs Merkel used a speech to the German parliament to suggest that `` some in Great Britain '' ( translation : Mrs May and Mr Davis ) were living under the `` illusion '' that they could keep the same rights as member states after Brexit . Mrs May bit her tongue but before the weekend was out the Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung ran a lengthy and detailed account of the Downing Street dinner , suggesting that Mr Juncker left Downing Street `` 10 times more sceptical '' about the possibility of a Brexit deal than he had been before , and that Mrs May had told him Britain was not obliged to pay `` a penny '' of the divorce bill . Mr Selmayr , who is German , immediately became the prime suspect for the leak . The article painted his boss Mr Juncker as the strong man of the talks , and belittled Mrs May as a naive negotiator . Downing Street insisted it did not `` recognise '' the account , and Mrs May dismissed it as `` gossip '' but inside Number 10 , the mood was starting to simmer over what was seen as a brazen stitch-up . There was more to come . Michael Roth , Germany 's finance minister , took to Twitter on Monday to say `` the British government must abandon [ the ] myth that all British will be better off post-Brexit '' . The next day Guy Verhofstadt , lead Brexit negotiator for the European Parliament , mocked Mrs May 's negotiating skills by using her `` strong and stable '' campaign slogan . He said : `` Any Brexit deal requires a strong and stable understanding of the complex issues involved . The clock is ticking - it 's time to get real . '' Tuesday 's Daily Telegraph revealed a plot by EU officials to block an early deal on migrants ' rights and shift the blame on to Mrs May . The only hint of her irritation with Mr Juncker came in a BBC interview when she briefly deviated from her script to say that Mr Juncker would find her `` a bloody difficult woman '' . By now Mrs May had formed the opinion that Germany and the EU were trying to influence the election by undermining her , no doubt hoping to reduce her vote and thus weaken her hand . The dam holding back the Prime Minister 's anger finally burst yesterday after Mr Barnier set out the EU 's negotiating position , which appeared to be more a series of orders to Mrs May to step into line . Mr Barnier said the consequences of Britain leaving without paying would be `` explosive '' . A landslide victory for Mrs May in the General Election `` will not change anything as regards the position and determination of the European Union '' and it was `` high time '' for negotiations to start because `` the clock is ticking '' . Then came his final flourish as he smugly patronised the hill-walking Prime Minister by advising her to `` learn to put one foot in front of the other '' . For Mrs May , enough was enough . As she left for Buckingham Palace , reporters were briefed that she would make an unscheduled speech outside Downing Street . It would be `` punchy '' , aides promised . That turned out to be the understatement of the election campaign . 'He advised the Prime Minister to learn to put one foot in front of the other . Enough was enough '
Juncker : Britain will come back into the fold ; Brexit is not the end , says EU chief as top negotiator suggests Britons could keep European citizenship
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER has said he hopes Britain will one day re-join the EU , striking a conciliatory note before Theresa May triggers Article 50 . The President of the European Commission said that he believes that Brexit could lead not to the death of the European Union , as some have predicted , but to its `` rebirth '' . Mr Juncker 's comments came after Guy Verhofstadt , the chief negotiator of the European Parliament , called for British citizens to be allowed to retain the benefits of EU membership after Brexit . Mr Verhofstadt , a former Belgian prime minister , said that individuals should be allowed to keep rights such as the freedom to travel and vote in European elections . His remarks came at the end of a turbulent two-day EU summit that exposed deep divisions among the remaining 27 EU member states , who have squabbled openly about the future direction of the bloc after Britain 's departure . Mr Juncker said : `` The day will come when the British will re-enter the boat , I hope . Brexit is not the end of the European Union , nor the end of all our developments , nor the end of our continental ambitions . `` The Brexit issue is encouraging the others to continue , unfortunately without the British . '' Mr Juncker 's comments masked fierce disagreements between core EU states , led by France and Germany , which want to revive a `` two-speed '' Europe , and smaller members such as Poland , Romania and Hungary , which fear that they could be left marginalised and disadvantaged . The long-simmering tensions were forced into the open when Poland refused to sign off the summit 's formal conclusions after the other member states defied its attempts to block the re-election of Donald Tusk - Poland 's former prime minister - to the presidency of the European Council . While Germany and Mr Juncker are pushing for new EU projects , such as a beefed up common defence policy , Poland is demanding `` less Europe '' , including radical reform of EU institutions such as the European Commission . Warsaw believes the body is too bloated and too bossy , and warned after the summit that Europe will `` not survive '' without significant changes . The leaders of the 27 EU states that will remain after Brexit will try to narrow their many differences before a meeting in Rome on March 25 to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the EU 's founding treaty . Mr Verhofstadt said he hoped to convince European leaders to allow Britons to keep certain rights if they were to apply for them on an individual basis . `` That Britain goes out of the EU is a tragedy , a disaster , a catastrophe - you name it , '' he told BBC Radio 4 's Today programme yesterday , echoing many voices in Europe who still harbour hopes that Britain will pull back from the brink when the consequences of Brexit become clearer . `` All British citizens today have also EU citizenship . That means a number of things : the possibility to participate in the European elections , the freedom of travel without problem inside the union , '' Mr Verhofstadt continued . `` We need to have an arrangement in which this arrangement can continue for those citizens who on an individual basis are requesting it . '' Legal experts said that EU citizenship could only be extended to non-EU citizens if the EU treaties were to be revised - a very unlikely prospect in the near term - but that the EU and its member states could unilaterally extend some equivalent rights to UK citizens if they wanted to . Mr Verhofstadt first proposed the `` associate '' scheme in January but said it was now an emotional response to the thousands of letters he had since received from British citizens who did not vote for Brexit and did not wish to lose their relationship to Europe . Asked whether the UK would welcome the opportunity for its nationals to retain some of the benefits of EU citizenship after Brexit , No 10 said it was `` not something that we have ever proposed or said that we are looking at '' . `` We will go into negotiations and discuss the ideas put forward by the EU and its various institutions , '' said a Downing Street spokesman . Poland condemned Britain 's refusal to offer its support in its efforts to prevent the re-election of Mr Tusk , casting a shadow over UK efforts to enlist the country during Brexit . `` Where was the UK in Brussels ? '' said Witold Waszczykowski , the Polish foreign minister . 'Brexit is not the end of the European Union , nor the end of ... our continental ambitions '
Our Brexit Bill needs no amendment ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : At first glance , the amendment to the EU ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill in the House of Lords giving Parliament a `` meaningful vote '' on a Brexit deal may look innocuous . After all , Britain has voted to restore the primacy of its own Parliament , so why should that Parliament not decide on the Brexit deal ? That is the argument that advocates will make for the amendment , which may well be endorsed in the Upper House and conceivably by the House of Commons next week , since a number of Conservative MPs are said to be minded to support it there . Yet that argument is flawed and this amendment should not pass . The flaws are both practical and principled . The practical flaw is found in the effect this amendment would have on Brexit negotiations . It is no secret that some EU leaders still believe that Britain can be persuaded to reverse its decision to leave ; the EU , after all , has a history of trying to overturn democratic votes , even referendum decisions , a contempt for the electorate that partly explains why the integrationist project is failing . If those leaders believe that the British Parliament could reject any Brexit deal and instead continue our membership , they will have a strong incentive to offer the worst deal possible . The principled objection to the amendment is that it misinterprets the referendum vote and its meaning . Britain has indeed voted to restore national sovereignty , freeing itself from EU rules and returning to a situation where the laws and decisions that affect the British people are made by politicians accountable to the British people . But that does not mean that Parliament must now govern : that is the job of ministers . The proper arrangement is that ministers make decisions and then account for those decisions to the representatives of the British people in Parliament . That is what should happen on the Brexit deal . In truth , the bid for a `` meaningful vote '' for Parliament is simply a ruse , an undeclared attempt to defy and eventually reverse the instruction the people gave at the referendum . The same is true of the argument by the Liberal Democrats and others that the deal should be put to a second referendum . If the Remainers really want to force the question over the final deal to a vote , perhaps the proper forum is , as Lord Hague suggests opposite , a general election . Whenever that election comes , we are confident the electorate will strongly endorse Mrs May 's handling of our EU exit .
40 Tory rebels ready to support Corbyn on Brexit ; Europe 2016 ; Labour leader 's motion to force publication of May 's plan 'supportable ' , says ex-Conservative minister
UP TO 40 pro-European Conservative MPs are prepared to rebel against the Government and back a move by Labour to force it to publish its plan for leaving the European Union , a former minister has said . Labour will tomorrow table a motion in the Commons to attempt to force Theresa May to publish the plan before Brexit negotiations are formally triggered in March . Downing Street sources made clear the Government will not support the motion because it believes that revealing its negotiating position would be the `` best way to get the worst deal '' . Mrs May yesterday accused the Liberal Democrats and Labour of `` frustrating the will of the people '' and failing to back `` team UK '' by plotting to delay or overturn Brexit . Nick Clegg , the former Liberal Democrat leader , said at the weekend that his party is prepared to vote against triggering Brexit negotiations unless it is given guarantees on Single Market access and a second referendum . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , has said that he will seek to amend any bill on the Article 50 process to withdraw from the European Union in order to guarantee worker 's rights . The Prime Minister 's spokesman said yesterday : `` While others are seeming to make clear that they want to frustrate the will of the British people by slowing down the process of leaving and trying to tie the Government 's hand in the negotiation , the Government is getting on with respecting what the British people decided and making a success of Brexit . '' The motion , tabled by Mr Corbyn , demands that the Government set out its broad aims for Brexit and appears carefully crafted to attract as much Conservative support as possible . It acknowledges that there `` should be no disclosure of material that could be reasonably judged to damage the UK in any negotiations '' . Anna Soubry , a former employment minister , told BBC Radio 4 's World at One : `` I have read the motion . I ca n't see anything in it that I do n't approve of and could n't support . `` I have never voted against my Government , I have always been very loyal , but this transcends party politics . The contents of that motion are eminently supportable . '' She suggested that up to 40 Conservative MPs could back the motion unless the Government published its own alternative . Pro-European sources in the Tory party suggested the number is likely to be closer to 20 , which is still significantly more than the Government 's majority . The Government yesterday announced that it will `` replicate as far as possible '' Britain 's trade commitments to EU nations `` in order to minimise disruption to global trade as we leave the EU '' .
Stop treating Brexit like a plague of boils ; Tories in Manchester Conservative Party Conference Johnson rails against 'zombie ' Corbyn 's 1970s ideology and attacks the Remainer 'pessimists '
BORIS JOHNSON said Britain must stop treating Brexit like a `` plague of boils '' in a half-hour conference attack on the `` pessimists '' who `` make Eeyore look positively exuberant '' . His speech wandered off his foreign policy brief and touched on the economy , house building and education , added to mounting speculation about his leadership ambitions . But to quell the speculation he hailed the Prime Minister for her `` steadfast '' leadership . He was given a standing ovation by party activists who had packed the conference hall to hear the Foreign Secretary reserve his strongest criticism for Jeremy Corbyn , describing the Labour leader as a `` zombie '' and comparing John McDonnell to `` Pol Pot '' . He said an entire generation was suffering `` amnesia '' about the realities of socialism in the Seventies and had to fight again for a free-market economy . Brexit negativity The Foreign Secretary said the UK must stop treating Brexit as if it is `` an inexplicable aberration by 17.4million people . `` It is time to be bold , and to seize the opportunities , '' he said . `` And there is no country better placed than Britain . '' He singled out the Financial Times , saying : `` Every day a distinguished pink newspaper manages to make Eeyore look positively exuberant and across the world the impression is being given that this country is not up to it ; that we are going to bottle out of Brexit and end up in some dingy ante-room of the EU , pathetically waiting for the scraps but no longer in control of the menu . '' He said no country was better placed than Britain to `` seize the opportunities '' presented by Brexit . Corbyn is Caracas The Foreign Secretary condemned Jeremy Corbyn as a `` Nato bashing , Trident scrapping , would-be abolisher of the British Army '' . He said Mr Corbyn 's `` first instinct '' in the wake of any international disaster was to try to blame British foreign policy . `` He says he still admires Bolivarian revolutionary socialism , '' Mr Johnson said . `` I say he 's Caracas . '' He added : `` It is a disgrace - and I can tell you there are many Labour MPs who feel appalled that their party is still led by this man . '' Mr Johnson accused Mr Corbyn of `` talking this country down '' with his `` ludicrous and vacillating '' policy on Brexit . `` In the customs union one week , out the next , in the single market , out the next , '' he said . `` In out , in out . Faster than one of those members of the shadow cabinet who gets sacked before she knows she has even been appointed . `` A kind of manifestation of Heisenberg 's uncertainty principle . It would be disastrous . '' Spectre of socialism Mr Johnson acknowledged that for an entire generation , references to socialism in the Seventies were meaningless . He said : `` We think they get the reference but unfortunately going back to the Seventies sounds to too many people like a massive joint revival concert by David Bowie , Led Zep and the Rolling Stones . They have forgotten that we had to fight and win battles of ideas and in a way that is entirely understandable - because our victory has been so comprehensive . '' He said Labour 's manifesto , including £200billion worth or renationalisation , represented `` a display of economic masochism that would do incalculable damage to the future of our children '' . He said : `` We want a country with a government that works for everyone . Corbyn wants a Britain where everyone works for the government . '' He added : `` This battle of ideas is not lost in memories of the Seventies . It is back from the grave - its zombie fingers straining for the levers of power and that is why we can not rest . '' Domestic policy The Foreign Secretary said that despite its `` illustrious battle honours '' the Conservatives now had to `` win the battle for the future '' . He said that the Tories must not `` junk our gains '' and `` attack the market economy '' but make it work better for everyone . The party must `` make it work better for the low paid '' with a national living wage and build hundreds of thousands of homes for those `` who worry their kids will never find a home to own '' . He said that , above all , the party must help those struggling by `` driving benefit reforms '' and increasing employment . `` Our one nation conservatism that , for all its faults , an open free-trading and thriving market economy is the only sustainable way to create the wealth we will always need to help the poorest , '' he said . Nation 's debt to May After a week in which Mr Johnson has been repeatedly accused by his Cabinet colleagues of undermining Theresa May , the Foreign Secretary hailed her for winning the election . He said : `` She won more votes than any party leader and took this party to its highest share of the vote in any election in the last 25 years and the whole country owes her a debt for her steadfastness in taking Britain forward as she will to a great Brexit deal . '' He said that the whole Cabinet was behind Mrs May after her Brexit speech in Florence : `` Based on that Florence speech on whose every syllable , I can tell you the whole Cabinet is united . '' Britain after Brexit The UK will be `` freed to stop being negative '' , Mr Johnson said , and would be able to extol the virtues of free trade . He later said that Brexit will have a `` galvanising effect '' on the UK because `` we wo n't be able to blame Brussels anymore '' . He said : `` Yes we are leaving the EU - but as the PM has said in her Florence speech we can create a deep and special partnership built on free trade . But success will be achieved not by allowing the UK to retreat from our global role but by reinforcing that role . '' Foreign policy The Foreign Secretary said that Britain was `` big enough to do amazing things '' . He highlighted the work of British soldiers in Nigeria helping local forces `` defeat the numbskulls of Boko Haram '' and the work of British ships helping stop illegal migration from Libya . He also highlighted the role of British soldiers in Estonia , congratulating them `` on resisting the honey traps allegedly placed in their way by Russian intelligence '' before adding : `` At least they said they had resisted . '' Jokes on colleagues He could not resist a poke at colleagues . The Northern Powerhouse meant jobs in finance , academia , journalism and the arts , all `` held by George Osborne '' he said , and described Sir Alan Duncan as the `` Mount Rushmore of wisdom '' . 'It is time to be bold and seize the opportunity . And there is no country better placed than Britain '
Frankfurt defeats Paris in EU bank battle ; French starting to doubt that damaging the City of London is in their longterm interests after all Frankfurt 's rise stokes fears of German bank dominance
FRANKFURT is sweeping aside rivals to become the dominant financial centre of the EU after Brexit , a triumph that threatens to entrench German hegemony and profoundly upset the internal balance of the EU system . As Paris falls far behind in the quest for post-Brexit spoils , it subtly alters the strategic calculus for French leaders . There are mounting doubts over whether it is really in France 's longterm national interest to see the City of London seriously damaged . Germany 's top bankers told a highlevel forum in Frankfurt that the city had already won the post-Brexit prize as Paris , Amsterdam and smaller financial hubs are mostly left with crumbs , consolidating its hegemonic position as the locus of the European Central Bank and the eurozone 's monetary machinery . Carsten Kengeter , head of Deutsche Borse , said the Hessian city promises to be the `` massive winner '' following British withdrawal from the single market , warning that Paris can not even count on securing euro clearing business as it leaves London . `` The decision remains open , '' he said . Global banks and financial institutions are already working on the assumption that the British Government is willing to sacrifice parts of the City to achieve its Brexit objectives on immigration , a policy choice of enormous implications . `` Anything other than a bone-hard Brexit would be a surprise , '' said Hans-Walter Peters , chairman of the German banking federation . `` Sadly there are those sitting in London who are relishing victory , because Brexit is what they wanted . '' The lobby group Frankfurt Main Finance said it expected roughly 10,000 bankers to migrate to the city . Four Japanese banks have already plumped for Frankfurt . Goldman Sachs is to double its presence with 200 extra staff , and Citigroup is basing its eurozone broker-dealer operation on the Main . Most banks are shifting 200 to 300 staff each , though it could be much higher in a snowball effect . The pace is expected to pick up briskly in 2018 . John Cryan , the head of Deutsche Bank , told the forum earlier that speculation over who would win the post-Brexit business was pointless . `` I ca n't fully understand this debate because , as I see it , the race had already been won before it even began , '' he said . A major financial centre requires a complex eco-system and the right mix of taxes , regulation and market breadth . `` There is only one European city that can fulfil these requirements and that city is Frankfurt , '' he said . Mr Cryan said London 's infrastructure is unique and can not easily be duplicated . It handles the lion 's share of debt and equity securities issued in Europe . Roughly 40pc of global currency trades are booked in London , as are two thirds of all interest rate derivatives in euros . Within the eurozone , the real battle is not between Paris , Dublin or other centres , but whether Frankfurt will retain Europe 's financial business , or whether it will leave the EU altogether and go to Singapore or New York . The emergence of Frankfurt as the pre-eminent player is unsettling for the City of London . A recent report by consultants Oliver Wyman suggested that financial job losses could perhaps be confined to between 35,000 and 40,000 , so long as the exodus was scattered around the eurozone . `` At present , none of the other European banking centres seem set to replace London as a pre-eminent global financial services hub , '' it said . `` Should a new EU hub emerge , banks would be quick to reorient their operations towards that location . '' Yet it is also unsettling for France and other EU states that fear the emergence of an over-mighty Germany that disturbs Europe 's delicate equilibrium , ultimately to the point where it threatens the survival of the EU itself . Jonathan Fenby , head of European research at TS Lombard and author of a book on French politics , said German ascendancy was an `` existential problem '' for the French psyche . The French hark back to the powersharing concordat between Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer that deliberately restrained - or masked - German strength . `` They still like to think that Germany should be the economic engine while France is in the political driving seat . Obviously this is unworkable and it is very difficult for the French to swallow , '' he said . Charles Grant , from the Centre for European Reform , said France had won very little Brexit business so far , despite an aggressive bid backed by the government , and led by Christian Noyer , the former governor of the Banque de France . Paris has since switched from being an ultra hardliner on Brexit talks a few months ago to a leader of the `` soft '' camp in recent weeks . France 's change in tone has surprised the UK Government . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , said over the weekend that France had been refreshingly co-operative in the latest Article 50 talks . 40pc The proportion of global currency trades that are currently booked in the City of London , according to estimates
Davis leads army of bureaucrats into EU lair
BRITAIN deployed nearly a 100 negotiators to Brussels yesterday in a bureaucratic show of force that saw our Brexit negotiating team outnumber their EU counterparts two-to-one . After months of goading from the European Union that the UK was failing to fully engage , the 98-strong team of officials from across Whitehall arrived for the first substantive face-toface talks at the European Commission . The deployment was lost in the main image of the opening day of talks , however , after David Davis and Olivier Robbins , the UK 's top Brexit officials , were photographed facing Michel Barnier in a meeting room but without any documents . Taken minutes before Mr Davis jetted back to London for a Parliamentary vote , the EU 's top negotiators struck stern expressions behind their thick sheaves of paper , while the British team grinned for the camera but with their side of the table empty . The image provoked a deluge of comment on social media about the lack of preparedness for the www.talks.UK staff later insisted the photo was taken before they had unpacked their bags . `` We have less than 20 months of Brexit talks left , yet David Davis has skulked back to the UK after just half a day , '' said Tom Brake , the Liberal Democrat Brexit spokesman . `` He did n't have any position papers with him because this government has no agreed Brexit position . '' Labour was also critical of Mr Davis who spent less than three hours in Brussels , including a one-to-one meeting with Mr Barnier to discuss the objectives of the week , which officials described as `` friendly '' . `` Mr Davis can hardly say this is the time 'to get down to business ' and then spend only a few minutes in Brussels before heading back to Whitehall , '' said Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary . Before the British negotiators got down to business , starting with a `` line by line '' rebuttal of the EU 's demand for a gross ( EURO ) 100billion financial settlement , they were given a rousing pep talk by Mr Robbins . `` Ollie was very clear . 'This is the biggest thing any of you will ever do in your career ' , he said . 'So let 's get it right ' , '' reported a source who was present . Mr Davis 's returned to London to vote on a Private Members ' Bill in the Commons , which provided a reminder of the Government 's precarious majority . Labour has promised to double the number of such Bills in this Parliament . The Brexit talks will this week centre on the three major issues : EU citizens ' rights , the border with Ireland and the so-called Brexit Bill . Mr Barnier has said `` sufficient progress '' must be made on these three dossiers in order to progress on to talks over trade and the future EU-UK relationship . Sources on the UK side expect the most difficult of these to be money , with British negotiators refusing to discuss what Britain might pay until the European side explains the legal rationale for demands the UK side considers outlandish . Across town , meanwhile , Boris Johnson was attending a meeting of EU foreign ministers , taking time out to josh with Anders Samuelsen , his Danish counterpart , about the prospect for trade after Brexit , after the Danish foreign minister arrived in a camper van from which he intends to follow the Tour de France cycle race this summer .
Close trade will secure our special relations
It has been just over 70 years since Winston Churchill introduced the phrase `` special relationship '' to describe the intimate bond between the United States and the United Kingdom . Despite its longevity , even the best relationships require work . In this moment - with a new and unconventional president in my country and growing political , economic and security challenges in the UK - that work necessitates a discussion about how we approach issues like Brexit , the economic relationship between our countries , and the growing threat of terrorism . But first , what the special relationship is not . While our unique and beneficial association has endured through 12 US presidents and 14 British prime ministers , it is not principally a relationship between two elected leaders . Even Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher found their relationship strained by such things as the war in the Falklands . I have experienced the special relationship through three distinct lenses : first as a student studying at Edinburgh , second as majority leader in the US House of Representatives , and now as the vice-chairman of a US-based investment bank with offices and extensive business in the UK . What makes the relationship special is the closeness of our people and our shared belief in principles of self-government , free enterprise , and human freedom and dignity . The US is strengthened when the UK is strengthened , which is why we both need a Brexit that provides certainty and greater economic opportunity for the UK . While we may share common goals , the task of concluding a successful Brexit belongs to the UK 's leaders . The US government should offer support in the Brexit negotiations , but must recognise that , at times , the best support may be in the form of space for UK and EU leaders to manoeuvre . In the US , we must do a better job of ignoring the noise of the day and instead remain focused on the overriding objective : a successful conclusion to Brexit . While UK officials are negotiating , business leaders on both sides of the pond must continue to do what we do best : look for opportunities for greater business engagement between the US and UK firms . Even with the political uncertainty around Brexit , there are ample opportunities for investment and growth . At the appropriate time , our elected leaders should further cement the economic ties between our two nations with a robust trade agreement , which through the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barriers can serve as a model for the rest of the world . Goals for a US-UK trade agreement must include easing market access - especially for service industries - strengthening investment procedures , including through appropriate dispute resolution mechanisms , facilitating cross-border data flows , and greater co-operation on the protection of intellectual property . The reduction of non-tariff barriers , especially in government regulation , between the US and Europe , is a major goal of the now-stalled Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ( TTIP ) . There is a tremendous opportunity to enhance the economic ties between the US and the UK via a trade agreement that achieves for our two countries the goals of TTIP - namely greater regulatory co-operation and standard setting , including in the financial services sector . In the same speech that Churchill coined the `` special relationship , '' he also introduced the phrase `` iron curtain '' . Much of what animated that speech and our special relationship was our shared security interests . While we no longer confront the threat of Soviet aggression , our two countries have been forced to confront the dangers of terrorism . These are challenging times for the British and American people . But stronger economic and security ties will cement the special relationship in the same way it did for prior generations , and it will endure . Eric Cantor is the vice chairman and managing director at Moelis & Company , and former house majority leader and US representative for Virginia 'There is a tremendous opportunity to enhance the economic ties of the US and UK '
Yellen and Draghi warn of 'significant ' Brexit repercussions ; Bankers ' concerns come as Jaguar Land Rover estimates leaving EU could cut profits by £1bn a year
THE two most powerful people in central banking have given their strongest warning yet on the impact of a Brexit vote , as leading Wall Street bank Morgan Stanley warned that a British decision to leave could push the world towards recession . Janet Yellen , chairman of the US Federal Reserve , and Mario Draghi , the European Central Bank president , warned that Brexit could have deleterious effects for the global economy . Ahead of tomorrow 's landmark referendum , Ms Yellen warned that a withdrawal from the EU `` could have significant economic repercussions '' , during testimony in front of the US Senate banking committee . She cautioned that Brexit `` could usher in a period of uncertainty '' , and potentially a period of market volatility that could worsen financial conditions in the US and added that there was a risk of flight by money managers into the perceived safety of US assets , driving up the dollar 's value . Separately , Mr Draghi warned that it was `` very difficult to foresee the impact and various dimensions of how the vote in the UK will impact markets and the economies of the eurozone '' . The Italian said that `` it would be dif-ficult to speculate about one outcome , we 're trying to be ready to cope with all possible contingencies '' . He insisted that the central bank had `` done all the preparation that is necessary '' and explained it had made plans to stabilise jittery markets , if the need arose . Ms Yellen admitted that the fallout after a Brexit vote was `` by no means certain '' and a US recession sparked by Brexit is `` not the most likely case '' . It came as Morgan Stanley economists told clients to prepare for the possibility of a global recession if the UK votes to leave the EU behind . A Brexit result would be likely to push global growth below 3pc , the bank 's analysts said , pushing the world `` into the danger zone for a global recession '' , on Morgan Stanley 's definition of GDP growth below 2.5pc . The Wall Street bank said `` a vote to leave could cause protracted political uncertainty in Europe , creating negative spillovers for the rest of the world '' . The warnings echoed that of Nouriel Roubini , the economist known as `` Dr Doom '' who predicted the US financial crash of 2007/8 . Earlier in the day he said that Brexit could tip the UK economy into a recession . Mr Roubini 's comments were countered by the Vote Leave campaign , with a spokesman saying : `` The British public have had enough of this incessant scaremongering from people who have a vested interest in keeping the UK in the EU . '' Meanwhile , it emerged Jaguar Land Rover 's profits could take a £1bn a year hit if Britain votes to leave the EU . The car company is understood to have conducted an internal analysis of the likely impact of a Leave vote . JLR produces over 500,000 vehicles a year - almost a third of the UK 's annual car output - and is likely to suffer through higher trade tariffs as import and export deals agreed through the EU unwind . The variety of comments , and a new poll showing the referendum remains almost neck and neck , led the FTSE to modest gains , closing up 22.55 points , or 0.36pc , to 6,226.55 as investors turned cautious . Ben Wright ; John Napier : Page 2 2.5pc Morgan Stanley 's global growth rate for GDP below which a recession is called . It claims Brexit could trigger such an event
British Airways owner 's profits take off in spite of Brexit threat and terrorist attacks
IAG 'S fortunes have been dampened by the recent Brussels terrorist attacks and the risk of Brexit to the airline company 's outlook . British Airways ' owner reported that profits stood at ( EURO ) 124m ( £97m ) in the first three months of the year , compared with a loss of ( EURO ) 37m in the same quarter a year earlier . However , signs of distress over the coming vote on the UK 's membership of the EU knocked 4.7pc off IAG shares yesterday . Willie Walsh , IAG 's chief executive , admitted that despite a `` good performance ... in what is traditionally the weakest quarter '' for IAG , the possibility of Brexit was a threat to the business . `` There is probably a case to be made for Brexit to have an impact , '' he said . `` Certainly anecdotally , you hear of US corporates slowing investment to consider what Brexit could mean . '' IAG shares are expected to fly if Britain votes to remain in the European Union on June 23 , as the decision would be likely to boost economic growth compared with the alternative and preserve easy travel to and from the political union . Despite signs that the UK will vote to remain , Damian Brewer , an RBC Capital Markets analyst , said investors ' concerns over the impact of the referendum are serving as `` a deterrent to new investment '' . The performance of the FTSE 100 company beat the best estimates of City analysts , with revenues of ( EURO ) 5.1bn , more than 2pc stronger than anticipated . Mr Walsh said that last month 's revenues were `` affected by the timing of Easter and the Brussels terrorist attacks '' . The IAG boss noted that the impact of the attacks was continuing into the second quarter . The company said that , `` as a result , IAG has moderated its short-term capacity growth plans '' . IAG plans to increase seats by 4.9pc , rather than a scheduled 5.2pc rise , for 2016 . IAG , which is the parent company of Aer Lingus , Iberia , and Vueling , said that despite the weaker-than-anticipated start to the year , it still expected to deliver operating growth `` similar '' to that of 2015 for the year as a whole .
Scotland 'Russian bots ' behind thousands of tweets on Scots referendum
NEARLY 400,000 Twitter posts about Scottish independence were posted by fake accounts , many thought to be linked to Russia , according to new research . Hundreds of automated accounts , known as `` bots '' , sent tweets over an 18-month period between May last year and September this year . Experts said yesterday that it was likely many , if not most , were linked to Russian attempts to disrupt democracy in western Europe . News of the tweets emerged days after two studies suggested Russian-controlled Twitter accounts posted thousands of pro-Brexit messages before last year 's EU referendum . Researchers at Swansea University last week unveiled research that claimed thousands of suspect Russian accounts were tweeting extensively about Brexit in the run-up to last year 's vote . The academics told The Sunday Post that , when they investigated their database of tweets for posts about Scottish politics , there were more than 2.2million containing at least one of the key terms - `` Scotland '' , `` Scottish '' , `` Sturgeon '' , `` indyref `` , `` scotref `` and `` SNP '' . A total of 388,406 were sent by bots , according to the experts . Sasha Talavera , a professor of finance at Swansea University , said : `` Like the work on Brexit and the US elections we carried out , this shows the influence of the bots in this area . '' The research saw spikes in activity from humans and bots on two days - on June 23 last year , the day of the Brexit vote , and on March 13 this year , when Ms Sturgeon announced plans for a second independence referendum . A sample of the bot-produced tweets showed most had a pro-Brexit or pro-independence theme . Ben Nimmo , of the Washington-based Atlantic Council 's digital forensic research lab , said : `` It is entirely plausible these tweets came from Russia . We know the Scottish independence vote was divisive and the model deployed by the Russians is to target geo-political events around the world where they can encourage division . '' Russia has repeatedly denied interfering in last year 's US presidential election and British politics . 'The Russians target geo-political events where they can encourage division '
Fears for patient safety as Brexit threatens free flow of medicines
BRITAIN 'S medicines bill could jump by £100m a year if pharmacies are not able to source cheaper drugs from the continent after Brexit . Pharmacists currently buy the bulk of their medicines from UK wholesalers , but look to suppliers in mainland Europe for a minority to make savings . Now the Healthcare Distribution Association ( HDA ) , an organisation representing firms that supply 92pc of the NHS 's medicines , has warned that failure to agree a smooth exit from the EU could jeopardise patients . Its members include giant Alliance Healthcare , the sister company of high street pharmacy chain Boots . In a submission to MPs on the health select committee , which is gathering evidence on the potential impact of Brexit , the HDA warned it could lead to supply problems and health risks . The HDA said that `` disruption to the cross-border flow of medicines has the potential of placing patient safety at risk '' . It warns a disorderly Brexit could lead to customs controls and added administrative hurdles slowing the supply of medicines to patients . The UK bought £26.4bn of drugs from overseas while exporting £25.1bn in 2015 , the most recent year for which data is available , making it a net importer . Access to skilled labour was also a concern raised by the organisation . It noted that across the healthcare sector - from research scientists , to pharmacists - highly qualified workers were often sourced from EU countries . Ensuring that the UK maintained a parity of professional standards with EU nations after Brexit was crucial in order to ensure that EU workers could still practise in the UK with ease , the HDA warned . There were even risks that pharmaceutical manufacturers `` may choose not to market their product in the UK at all '' if faced with new , country-specific red tape , due to the associated costs and relatively small population compared to that covered by the broader European licensing regime . Concerns have been growing in Britain 's healthcare industry in recent months at the lack of progress on Brexit . Last week GSK , Britain 's biggest drug maker , warned it expected to start incurring costs from preparing for Brexit as early as this year , including on plans for duplicate medicine testing centres in the EU and preparing for separate drug licensing regimes . Emma Walmsley , GSK chief executive , called for a transition period of `` at least two years '' to be finalised `` as soon as possible '' . £26.4bn The value of medicinal drugs imported to the UK from overseas in 2015 , compared to exports of £25.1bn in the same year
Scotland Flights could halt without Brexit air deal , says Hammond ; Chancellor warns of risk to airports and airlines if Britain and Europe fail to forge new aviation accord
FLIGHTS between the UK and the European Union could all be grounded on Brexit Day if Britain leaves without a deal , Philip Hammond has claimed . The Chancellor said that while highly unlikely , it was `` theoretically conceivable '' that flights could be suspended on March 29 , 2019 . Negotiations between Britain and Brussels remain deadlocked because of disputes over the Brexit divorce bill , migrant rights and the Northern Ireland border . Mr Hammond told the Treasury select committee yesterday : `` It is theoretically conceivable that in a no-deal scenario there will be no air traffic moving between the UK and the European Union on the 29th March , 2019 . `` But I do n't think anybody seriously believes that is where we will get to . On that specific point it is very clear that mutual self-interest means that even if talks break down , even if there is no deal , there will be a very strong compulsion on both sides to reach agreement on an air traffic services arrangement . '' The UK 's largest airports , including Heathrow , Gatwick and Manchester , have previously warned that flights to Europe could stop if there is no deal on aviation in the wake of Brexit . The EU Open Skies agreement , which was introduced in the Nineties , currently provides rules for airlines and airports of member states . It allows flights between any airports in the EU . The agreement has enabled the development of low-cost airlines in the UK such as easyJet and Ryanair , and seen passenger numbers flying within Europe triple to nearly a billion a year . Britain will have to negotiate a new treaty with the EU after Brexit to ensure flights take off . The failure to secure an agreement so far has led to increasing concern in the industry . A spokesman for Thomas Cook , Britain 's second-largest holiday firm , said : `` We are selling holidays for the post-Brexit world , so we are preparing the business to operate in that environment . We do expect some form of agreement on aviation , but we now need urgent clarity from government . '' The Chancellor said leaders of the 27 other EU nations had to recognise the `` need for speed '' in agreeing a transition period of two years to follow the official date of Brexit in March 2019 . He said a transition agreement is a `` wasting asset '' whose value will decline the later it is reached , as businesses had to take investment and relocation decisions in advance . Mr Hammond said : `` It has a value today , it will still have a very high value at Christmas and early in the New Year , but as we move through 2018 its value to everybody will diminish . `` I think our European partners need to think very carefully about the need for speed in order to protect the potential value to all of us of having an interim period that protects our businesses and citizens and allows investment and normal business activity - contracting and so on - to carry on . '' He said the EU 's reluctance to move on to talks about future relations with the UK after Brexit is `` astonishing '' . `` The most important question , which is what is our long-term relationship with the European Union going to look like , has not yet even begun to be discussed , '' he said . `` We have made the running in this ... let 's sit down around a table and have a chat . That 's all we are saying . '' 'We do expect some form of agreement on aviation , but we now need urgent clarity from government '
Malta PM : Brexit disastrous
MALTA 'S prime minister has branded Brexit a `` disastrous creature '' that the European Union should have seen coming but did nothing to stop . Joseph Muscat appeared to rebuke other EU leaders over their handling of British demands for reform in Brussels before the referendum . Those reforms in areas such as immigration were watered down by the EU , damaging David Cameron 's campaign to keep Britain in the bloc . Mr Muscat was speaking at the European Parliament in Strasbourg . Malta has just finished its six-month term as holders of the rotating presidency of the EU , which coincided with the triggering of Article 50 and the first round of Brexit negotiations . `` Our presidency had also to deal with Brexit . This disastrous creature which all of us should have seen coming but none of us acted to stop , '' he told an audience including Jean-Claude Juncker , European Commission President . Mr Muscat praised the `` excellent collaboration '' between the Maltese presidency and the EU institutions dealing with Brexit . `` But then again what are we praising here ? The terms of a painful divorce which millions of citizens will have to go through ? '' He previously warned Britain it could expect no special favours from Malta . Just 30 MEPs attended the debate , drawing strong criticism from Mr Juncker . Editorial Comment : Page 15
Scotland Davis and EU slam the door on any hope of soft Brexit
DAVID DAVIS and the European Union last night quashed hopes for a `` soft '' Brexit as formal negotiations on leaving the EU finally got under way in Brussels . The Brexit Secretary confirmed Britain would be leaving the customs union and the single market , in a move designed to scupper any parliamentary plots to water down the terms of the UK 's withdrawal from Europe . His counterpart , Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , also confirmed that Britain would leave the single market and the customs union . Such a unified public declaration of the intention to press ahead with a `` hard '' Brexit sends a clear message to Remainers in Parliament who still hope membership of the customs union and the single market is up for grabs . Mr Davis said Britain would seek a free trade agreement and a customs agreement with the EU , but added : `` We need to bring back to Britain control of our laws and control of our borders so we will be leaving the single market . Similarly we will be leaving the customs union . That 's the only way we can develop our free trade arrangements with the rest of the world and that is a major upside for Britain . '' Mr Barnier said : `` The United Kingdom is going to leave the European Union , single market and the customs union . '' Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , is the most prominent of several Cabinet members who would prefer Britain to stay in the customs union , which would prevent the UK from striking its own trade deals outside the EU . Mr Barnier and Mr Davis disclosed that they hope to reach a deal on migrants ' rights by the end of October , but trade talks will not begin until agreement on migrants , the Brexit `` divorce bill '' and the Irish border has been reached . Mr Davis denied that the Government had abandoned its demand for parallel talks on trade and the terms of withdrawal , saying `` nothing is agreed until everything is agreed '' . But Mr Barnier said : `` I am not in a frame of mind to make concessions . The United Kingdom has decided to leave the European Union , it is not the other way around ... the consequences are substantial . '' The pair said that the issue of Northern Ireland 's border with the Republic of Ireland had taken up the most time in their first day of talks . There were also disagreements over the `` divorce bill '' , as EU officials said no agreement had been reached on the need for Britain to pay anything . Meanwhile The Daily Telegraph has learnt of a plot by Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats to use the debate over tomorrow 's Queen 's Speech to topple the Government . The opposition parties intend to table an amendment to the Queen 's Speech that would demand easier access to the single market and a crossparty Brexit Commission to reach a broad consensus on the terms of Britain 's withdrawal . They hope to tempt so-called `` remoaners '' on the Tory benches into voting in favour of the amendment , which would strike a potentially fatal blow to Theresa May 's authority . The last time a Government was defeated over a Queen 's Speech was in 1924 . Reports : Pages 6 , 12-13
Anti-Brexit Left line up to create a new party if Corbyn gets humiliated ; Clegg and Cable call for unity against the Tories if May achieves crushing election victory
LABOUR and Liberal Democrat candidates are plotting to unite and form an `` anti- Brexit force '' after the election as they lay the grounds for a new party . Nick Clegg , the former deputy prime minister , said over the weekend that centre-Left parties in the UK were `` duty bound to work together '' . Sir Vince Cable , the former business secretary who is seeking a return to Parliament on June 8 , has suggested a Conservative landslide would spark the birth of a new party . He said Labour would face a `` bloodletting '' in the wake of a humiliating defeat as he predicted there would be `` serious conversations '' about creating a viable alternative to Theresa May 's Conservatives . Sir Vince will today join Clive Lewis , the former shadow business secretary , to address the launch of a campaign aimed at building alliances in an attempt to stop Tory candidates in marginal seats . It also emerged that allies of Tony Blair were drawing up plans for a new party in an effort to combine the forces of anti-Brexit Labour , Liberal Democrat and Green politicians . Mr Clegg told a conference on Brexit in Westminster : `` You can not restore the genius , the elixir , the necessity of competition to the British democratic system without non-Conservative anti-Brexit forces working effectively together . `` For any of us who do n't feel that either of those options are the kind of future that we want - of Scottish nationalism on the one hand and an increasingly angry Ukip-lite English nationalism at the hands of the Conservative Party - it 's not a choice , we are duty bound to work together . '' Sir Vince told Pienaar 's Politics on BBC Radio 5 Live that Labour 's future `` is in great doubt '' as he suggested a new party could be formed in the aftermath of a massive victory for Mrs May . He said : `` There will be serious conversations about where British politics goes and how you create an alternative to the Conservatives which ... is centrist , centre-Left , pro-business , practical , offering an alternative to what is potentially a very damaging form of Conservatism . '' Much of the speculation surrounding the formation of a new party has focused on the role Mr Blair could play after the former Labour prime minister said Brexit had given him a `` direct motivation '' to return to front-line politics . A source who used to work for Mr Blair told The Sunday Times : `` People are waiting to see just how bad the damage is on June 9 . They will look at the results and say , 'Is this horse a dead horse or can it still be revived ? ' Some people have already come to the conclusion that it ca n't and therefore something else will have to be born . '' Senior figures from Labour , the Lib Dems and the Greens will today address the campaign launch of the Progressive Alliance which is focused on doing deals to stop Conservative candidates winning seats . The Tories have estimated that more than 30 deals have already been done . Patrick McLoughlin , the party chairman , said : `` All over the country Green and Liberal Democrat candidates are doing their utmost to put in power a coalition of chaos that would be led by a weak , shambolic Jeremy Corbyn . '' But a Labour spokesman said : `` This is desperate rubbish from the Tories , making things up to try and deflect from their own failures . `` Labour does n't and wo n't do deals . We 're fighting to win in every seat . '' People are waiting to see how bad the damage is . They will say , is this a dead horse or can it be revived ? '
Scotland Blair 's EU campaign insulting , says Boris ; Ex-PM calls for new movement to take place of Labour and make the case against Brexit
BORIS JOHNSON yesterday accused Tony Blair of `` insulting the intelligence '' of the British public after the former Prime Minister urged people to `` rise up '' against Brexit . Mr Blair yesterday attacked both the Government and Jeremy Corbyn 's Labour as he warned that the UK was heading for `` Brexit at any cost '' . Speaking at the same London location where David Cameron announced his plan to hold an EU referendum , Mr Blair also warned that Brexit had strengthened the case for Scottish independence . Although stressing that he was opposed to Scotland leaving the Union , he warned that independence was `` now back on the table , but this time with a context much more credible for the independence case '' . Addressing the issue of Brexit , Mr Blair said voters had the `` right to change their minds '' . He pledged to form a cross-party movement to fight leaving the EU , although he insisted he was not trying to build a new political party . Mr Blair reserved his strongest criticism for Mr Corbyn , saying the `` debilitation of the Labour Party '' that he once led is now a `` facilitator '' for Brexit . He spoke as a new ICM poll found that 68 per cent of all voters , and a majority of Remain voters , now want the Government to get on with implementing the EU referendum result . Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said : `` We heard all these arguments last year . Not a thing has changed . I think it is insulting the intelligence of the British people to say they got it www.wrong.Be in no doubt that the people of this country were told all sorts of claptrap about the economic consequences of leaving the EU . The very opposite has happened . `` As for Tony Blair , whatever his merits as a former Prime Minister this is the guy who would have taken our country into the euro with what would have been catastrophic consequences , this is the guy who dragooned the UK into the Iraq war on a completely false prospectus . '' Speaking earlier at Bloomberg in London , Mr Blair said : `` Yes , the British people voted to leave Europe , and I agree the will of the people should prevail . I accept right now there is no widespread appetite to rethink . `` But the people voted without knowledge of the true terms of Brexit . As these terms become clear , it is their right to change their mind . '' He had criticism for Theresa May as he continued : `` Nine months ago she and the Chancellor [ Philip Hammond ] were telling us that leaving would be bad for the country , its economy , its security and its place in the world . Today , it is apparently a 'once in a generation opportunity ' for greatness . '' Mr Blair said he was setting up his movement in the `` absence of an opposition which looks capable on the polls of beating the Government '' . He added : `` The debilitation of the Labour Party is the facilitator of Brexit . I hate to say that , but it is true . What this means is that we have to build a movement which stretches across party lines ; and devise new ways of communication . '' ENTERTAINMENT EMPICS `` It came as Baroness Chakrabarti , the shadow attorney general , told the BBC 's Question Time programme on Thursday that she expected peers of all parties to water down the Brexit Bill in the House of Lords PETERS/ DOUG Analysis : Page 4 SNP praises Blair speech : Page 4
Scotland Sturgeon backs away from Article 50 battle ; SNP retreats on Brexit constitutional battle
SCOTTISH POLITICAL EDITOR NICOLA STURGEON has effectively admitted that the triggering of Article 50 is a matter for Westminster by refusing to follow the formal parliamentary procedure for MSPs to give or withhold their consent , the Conservatives have claimed . The First Minister insisted that a purely symbolic vote at Holyrood this afternoon on whether Brexit should proceed was one of the most important in the parliament 's history . But the Conservatives said she had backed away from a previous promise to table a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) , the formal device used for the Scottish Parliament to give permission for Westminster to legislate in devolved areas . John Lamont , the party 's chief whip , said she had declined to do so because she knew that the triggering of Article 50 was outside Holyrood 's competence and accused her of trying to `` manufacture grievance out of nothing '' . He said SNP ministers were `` grandstanding '' on the issue after the Supreme Court ruled that an LCM was not needed before the triggering of Article 50 . MPs overwhelmingly voted by a margin of 489 to 114 last week to allow the Prime Minister to start Brexit negotiations . It is expected that Ms Sturgeon will use the result of this afternoon 's vote , in which MSPs are likely to overwhelmingly oppose proceeding with Brexit , as a propaganda tool in her case for a second independence referendum . In another boon for the SNP , the debate has further exposed major divisions in the Labour Party after Kezia Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 Dugdale , the Scottish party leader , announced that her MSPs would vote to oppose triggering Article 50 in direct contravention of Jeremy Corbyn 's stance at Westminster . The SNP 's motion being debated this afternoon states that MSPs agree with all but one of Scotland 's MPs that the UK Government 's Brexit Bill should not proceed and complains there has been no `` effective consultation '' with the three devolved administrations . It also attacks Theresa May 's government for refusing to guarantee that EU nationals can stay in the UK , failing to provide details about the implications of withdrawing from the single market and providing no assurance there will be a relevant parliamentary vote on the eventual deal reached . But Mr Lamont said he was `` somewhat surprised '' that no LCM had been tabled after Mike Russell , the Scottish Brexit minister , `` promised '' to publish one less than a fortnight ago . `` Could it be that the Brexit minister was wrong ? '' he asked . `` Could it be that the Scottish Government have n't submitted an LCM because they know it 's outwith the competence of this Parliament , despite all their grandstanding ? '' He concluded : `` This is an important point because it shows the Scottish Government 's default position is to try to manufacture a grievance out of nothing . '' He also lambasted Labour for falling for a Nationalist `` stunt '' pretending that Holyrood has a say . Ms Sturgeon would have faced major political embarrassment if her LCM had been blocked by Ken Macintosh , Holyrood 's presiding officer , who would have had to rule whether it was within the parliament 's powers in the wake of the Supreme Court ruling . But the First Minister said a symbolic debate and vote was `` a chance for our national parliament to reaffirm the voice of the people of Scotland and make clear that , as a nation , we oppose the catastrophic hard Brexit now being pursued by the Tories at Westminster '' . Referring to her threat of a second independence referendum , she said : `` If the Scottish Parliament votes against triggering Article 50 and the UK Government ignores Holyrood , then people across Scotland will be right to start thinking about how our national interests are best served . '' Ms Dugdale said Scottish Labour accepts the UK is leaving the European Union but will vote against the triggering of Article 50 because it does not agree with Mrs May 's blueprint to leave the single market and control immigration . Her party tabled an amendment to the SNP motion calling on the Nationalists not to use Brexit as an excuse for a second independence referendum . Mr Corbyn imposed a three-line whip on his MPs to vote for Brexit in the Commons last week but 47 , including Ian Murray , Labour 's only Scottish MP , rebelled against him . A UK Government spokesman said Holyrood was `` free to debate any issue it chooses '' but noted that the Brexit Bill `` relates to reserved matters '' .
Scotland Sturgeon 's threat watered down ; First Minister appears to backtrack after hint soft Brexit could see plans for vote on separation shelved Sturgeon backtracks on separation vote 'she knows she would lose '
NICOLA STURGEON has signalled she is ready to take a snap second independence referendum `` off the table '' in the event of a soft Brexit . The First Minister said that if there was a way of protecting Scotland 's interests inside the UK , then she was `` up for trying to do that '' . She has claimed repeatedly since the Brexit vote last year that a new vote on breaking up Britain was `` highly likely '' , but appeared to row back on her `` indyref2 '' threats in a radio interview . She indicated she was willing to put aside her preferred option of independence in Europe in the short term - within the `` timescale of Brexit '' - if a suitable compromise could be reached . Her remarks prompted calls from opposition parties for her to shelve a new vote `` altogether '' , and claims that her change of tone was the result of the fact that she knew she would lose a second vote on separation . The comments follow a series of polls showing Scots are not ready for a new vote , with one this week suggesting more than six in 10 voters are opposed to a snap referendum in 2017 . However , Ms Sturgeon also agreed later in the day with a comment on Twitter suggesting a new vote currently seems more likely than any deal to keep Scotland in the single market . Ms Sturgeon has claimed her government was the only one in the UK to put forward comprehensive plans on how to move forward . She added that the Prime Minister did not appear to have a Brexit negotiating position , saying : `` Anything from Theresa May that tells us something we do n't know is a step forward . `` It frankly beggars belief that so many months on from the referendum we still do n't know answers to basic questions . I hope before too much time elapses we have a clear negotiating strategy from the Prime Minister . '' Her proposals for a soft Brexit , published in December , would involve working with others to keep the UK in the single market , and , if that could not be done , exploring ways of keeping Scotland in the single market while protecting trade across Britain . She said the second option would require additional devolution and claimed there was a `` lot of consensus '' on some of the issues in question , such as giving Scotland powers on immigration . She added : `` So I 've in a sense been willing , and am willing , to put aside my preferred option of independence in the EU to see if we can explore a consensus and compromise option . '' Asked on the BBC 's Good Morning Scotland programme if another independence referendum would come off the table in the event of a soft Brexit , she said : `` I am never going to stop arguing for independence , I think Scotland will become independent and I think that is the direction of travel , but we are talking at the moment in the context of the Brexit vote . '' She added : `` What I 've said is , if we can find a way of protecting Scotland 's economic interests , of protecting our democratic interests in the UK , then I am up for trying to do that . Am I going to stop arguing for independence or believing in independence ? Am I going to stop believing Scotland is on a journey to independence ? `` No . But we are talking here in the particular context and timescale of Brexit . `` And I am putting these proposals forward in good faith , I 'm deliberately saying put my preferred option to one side , and asking people if we can find a consensus and compromise option . '' The Scottish Conservatives said the remarks only suggested shelving separation plans temporarily , and had not removed the risk of causing more uncertainty to people and businesses across the country . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , added that the First Minister 's comments on the BBC 's Good Morning Scotland programme were in stark contrast to her reaction the day after the Brexit vote last June , when she instructed civil servants to start drafting plans for another independence referendum . Ms Davidson added : `` Nicola Sturgeon has spent six months trying desperately to use Brexit as a way of increasing support for independence . She 's failed . `` The First Minister knows that if another referendum on independence was called tomorrow , she 'd lose . `` Polls show fewer and fewer Scots agree with her separation obsession , and support for the question being asked again has collapsed . `` We are being left in the worst of all possible worlds . `` Scotland is kept in limbo as Nicola Sturgeon tries to find an escape route after marching her troops to the top of a mountain , but still keeping the threat of a second referendum on the table as a possibility for the future . '' Iain Gray , for Scottish Labour , said Ms Sturgeon could clear up any doubt about her intentions by `` ruling out another referendum altogether '' . He added that the vast majority of Scots would prefer the SNP to address the crisis in the NHS and `` clean up the mess '' Nationalist ministers had made of education . 'Sturgeon has spent six months trying to use Brexit to increase support for independence . She 's failed '
Baldrick proves to be a cunning opponent by getting the better of the Prime Minister ; Sketch
It seems unbelievable , looking back , but TV cameras were n't allowed into the Commons until 1989 . That 's ridiculously recent . Before then , unless you had the privilege of a seat in the Commons gallery , you had no way of seeing what your elected representatives were up to . Now , though , everyone can watch them . Including the people those elected representatives are talking about . Who can then make headlines themselves by responding . Take yesterday at Prime Minister 's Questions . Jeremy Corbyn told Theresa May that her catchphrase `` Brexit means Brexit '' was meaningless , and that she reminded him of Baldrick from Blackadder - because her `` cunning plan '' was to `` do nothing '' . Mrs May responded by noting that the actor who played Baldrick , Tony Robinson , is a Labour supporter who has said Mr Corbyn is a hopeless leader . So who should pop up on Twitter moments later but Robinson himself - to shoot back at Mrs May by tweeting `` Baldrick means Baldrick '' . Prime ministers in the old days had it so much easier . Anthony Eden may have had to deal with the Suez crisis , but at least he did n't have Arthur Askey heckling him while he did it . Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of yesterday 's PMQs was that Mr Corbyn asked about Brexit . Though it 's by miles the most important political issue of our time , at PMQs he generally gives the impression that the whole thing has somehow passed him by , and that he would rather ask about butterfly farming in southern Bolivia or government policy on bicycle clips . So credit to the Labour leader for asking about Brexit this time . I suppose it would be ungrateful to complain that he failed to ask the obvious question . Yesterday morning The Guardian had a front-page story that reported that during the EU referendum campaign , Mrs May had admitted to bankers in the City that , in the event of Brexit , companies could leave Britain . She told them : `` I think there would be firms and companies who would be looking to say , do they need to develop a mainland Europe presence rather than a UK presence ? '' These days , of course , now that she has anointed herself the high priestess of Brexit and cuts short all criticism with an icy reminder of `` the will of the British people '' , she would never suggest something so heretical . Mr Corbyn , therefore , could have put her on the spot by saying , `` Mr Speaker , in May the Prime Minister said that Brexit would mean companies moving abroad . Now she supposedly thinks they wo n't . Was she making it up then - or is she making it up now ? '' Then again , maybe Mr Corbyn was n't in a position to ask that particular question . After all , he can hardly accuse someone of being an unconvincing Brexiter , when he himself has always made such an unconvincing Remainer . In which case , I suppose he had little choice but to take Baldrick 's advice . And do nothing .
So , how will Brexit affect the game ? Try 'Football Manager ' ; Sport Football ; Video game chief tells Alistair Tweedale it was a tall order to build in forecasts for an EU exit
Miles Jacobson is frank about what he is up against : `` As far as I know this is the first time a computer game has tried to predict the future of a country . '' This would always have been a busy time of year for the man in charge of Sports Interactive , the makers of the phenomenally successful Football Manager series of video games . A new instalment is released on Nov 4 , but the period leading up to the 2017 edition has been made particularly complicated by the biggest political decision taken in this country since the Second World War . While the rest of the world waits to see how the Government approaches the triggering of Article 50 , Jacobson and his team have built a Brexit simulator into this year 's game , which models some of the consequences of the UK leaving the European Union . The world outside football is not something that had previously been incorporated into Football Manager , a game so comprehensive that some clubs are now using it as a resource to help scout players . But Brexit , says Jacobson , was too big to be left out : `` We usually try and keep politics out of the game , because nobody wants it rammed down their throat . But we were left with an interesting situation this year when the people of Britain voted to leave the EU , and it would n't have felt right to leave that out . It 's something we had to reflect in the game . `` So we sat down with the research guys and started to plan how we might put it in . '' The consequences for sport of leaving the EU could be farreaching , and Jacobson has had to establish what might happen . `` I always read the party manifestos before a general election , '' he says . `` Preparing for the Brexit aspect of the new game has taken a lot of research , too : a lot of reading , a lot of talking to politicians and people in football . '' It soon became obvious that the possible ramifications in football were almost endless , and also constantly changing . `` Of course , none of us know what will happen , '' says Jacobson . `` It changes on a daily basis . We know Article 50 will be invoked before the end of March , but we do n't know how long negotiations are going to take . They could take two years , but there could be a general election within that time . `` The first option for the game was to have just one scenario and that would be it , Brexit done , but it 's not possible to come out with one outcome , and it wo n't be until all the negotiations are done . `` As a result we 've decided to go down another route , and have included every possible outcome in the game , using artificial intelligence and percentage chances to make every game different . '' In game , players of Football Manager 2017 will be alerted , at some point between two and 10 years in , that trade negotiations have begun , and a year later a news bulletin will detail the extent of Brexit . There are three main scenarios : 1 . Soft Brexit - free movement of workers remains ; 2 . Footballers are granted the same special exemptions that are currently given to 'entertainers ' . This means it is easier for them to obtain work permits , and it will not have a huge impact on player movement from the EU ; 3 . Hard Brexit : similar rules to those which currently apply to non-EU players are adopted for all non-UK players . It is this third option that would see the biggest effect on game play .
Polls point to a dash of leavers ' regret , but to mention it would be treason ; Road to Brexit
No doubt about the story of the day . A Conservative councillor from Surrey called Christian Holliday ( can that really be his name ? What do his friends call him ? Easter ? ) has actually started a petition to make supporting UK membership of the EU a treasonable offence . Well , I suppose that 's one way to uphold democracy : suppress democracy . I do n't know whether Mr Holliday was watching live coverage of Parliament yesterday , but if so , he will have been scandalised . In Westminster Hall , MPs were debating Brexit . And one of them - Geraint Davies , the Labour MP for Swansea West - was committing treason left , right and centre . On June 23 , declared Mr Davies , voters had made `` a dreadful mistake '' . The EU alone , he said , would dictate the terms of our exit , leaving us with no choice but to take whatever we were given . Outside the EU , we 'd be so desperate we 'd sign up to any old trade deal , no matter how rotten . Before it was too late , concluded Mr Davies , the referendum must be rerun , so that voters could , in his charming phrase , `` take a more considered view '' . But even if the referendum were n't rerun , the result from June 23 , he maintained , had only been `` advisory , not mandatory '' . Paul Scully - the pro-Brexit Tory MP for Sutton & Cheam - politely reminded Mr Davies that during the referendum campaign the Government had promised to do whatever the voters decided . `` Well , sadly for myself and for the country , '' said Mr Davies , `` I 'm not in the Government . '' Never mind in the Government . If he does n't look out , he 'll be in the Tower of London . A pro-Brexit Tory , Philip Hollobone ( MP for Kettering ) , chided Mr Davies for his `` unremitting doom and gloom '' . Why , said Mr Hollobone , he was being so negative about Brexit , he sounded as if was presenting `` the business section of the Today programme '' . A comforting thought for Mr Davies there . At least he wo n't be lonely in his cell . He 'll have the entire staff of the BBC in there with him . A fellow heretic , Patrick Grady ( SNP , Glasgow North ) , dared to suggest that Mr Scully 's support of Brexit was illconsidered . If Mr Scully despised Brussels red tape so much , he asked , could he reveal which specific EU law he was most looking forward to seeing the back of ? Mr Scully mulled it over . `` What I 'm really looking forward to , '' he decided , `` is taking back control . '' He did n't actually cite a specific EU law , but perhaps he takes the patriotic view that all EU laws are equally bad . Sadly , however , it seems that not all his countrymen are so steadfast . A poll of 10,000 voters by the British Election Study found that six per cent of Leavers regretted their decision . Were this swing reflected in a rerun of the referendum , Remain would win . Let 's hope it does n't come to that . It would be awful to see the British people ignoring the will of the British people .
It will take ages before we are able to work out Brexit 's impact
How is the UK economy performing since we voted to leave the European Union at the end of June ? The answer is that we do n't really know - and wo n't for some time . The figures we have so far present a very incomplete picture . Retail sales appeared to hold up well in July , while CBI surveys indicate resilient manufacturing orders and output - possibly helped by a weaker pound . Inflation picked up slightly but it remains very low , at 0.6pc . However , the fall in sterling is starting to push up the cost of imports . As these higher costs feed through to consumers , they could well put a brake on spending growth - as we saw when the pound fell sharply after the financial crisis . We are clutching at straws , however , if we make too much of these very early and fragmentary pieces of information . We still have no comprehensive official figures covering any period since the referendum for industrial production , GDP , employment , investment , broader measures of consumer spending and overseas trade . It is far too early to draw any substantive conclusions about the economic impacts of the Brexit vote . When will we be able to do so ? The analysis we conducted at PwC before the referendum suggested that there are three key areas of likely impact - and the timescales to assess them stretch from about six months after the referendum result to a decade or more . The most immediate impact is political and economic uncertainty . This was particularly acute at the beginning of July after the Prime Minister resigned and the leadership of the country was adrift . The formation of a new government under Theresa May has stabilised the political situation - though the direction of policy is still unclear on many issues , not least the timing and content of future Brexit negotiations with our EU partners . A degree of uncertainty could also persist during these negotiations - from next year onwards . However , based on the contacts with business that I have had over the summer , most companies seem prepared to take time to assess the full implications of the Brexit vote . They have absorbed the initial shock of the EU referendum vote and are now in `` wait and see '' mode . Day-to-day business carries on as normal , but there may be a more cautious approach to big strategic investments in the UK . I do not find it surprising that retail sales are holding up in the aftermath of the Brexit vote . Uncertainty will affect consumers mainly through its effect on jobs and investment - and it will take a while for these to feed through to individual spending decisions . We will need to see at least three to six months of data before we draw even provisional conclusions about the impact of Brexit uncertainty on jobs , investment and consumer spending . The second key time horizon is when negotiations about the UK 's relationship with the rest of the EU are taking place between 2017 and 2019-20 . Over this period , we will become clearer about how close our trade relationship is with the European Single Market , not just generally but in key sectors like manufacturing and financial services . If it is possible for the UK to strike a deal with other EU members which largely preserves our access to European markets in manufacturing and key services , this will be a good Brexit outcome - not just for the UK but for the rest of Europe . But it is also possible that the negotiations become confrontational and unproductive . We will not know much about this until Article 50 is triggered next year . The third time horizon we need to think about is the long term - how strong economic growth will be in the 2020s and 2030s in a UK outside the EU . Here , there are two alternative visions of the future for the UK outside the EU . Many - like myself - who argued for a Remain vote worry that the longterm economic impact of Brexit is quite likely to be negative . In the past 30 to 40 years , the performance of the British economy benefited from membership of the European Economic Community and the EU . The UK turned around from being the `` sick man of Europe '' in the 1960s and 1970s to becoming one of its better performers from the 1980s onwards . Our closer relationship with European markets played an important part in this improvement in economic performance , as new investment was attracted to the UK - for example in the car industry . The alternative view is that there is now a big world of opportunity in rapidly growing markets such as China , India , Africa and South America - and UK economic growth could be boosted by forging stronger trade links with these countries and regions . The challenge here will be our ability to gain access to these markets on good terms . That will not be sorted out until we have completed our negotiations with the EU and established a new relationship with the World Trade Organisation , the guardian of global trade agreements . In summary , therefore , we may learn more about the short-term impacts of Brexit over the next six months or so . But the more profound effects will be felt over years and decades . Previous experience suggests we should not be surprised if it takes a while for even the short-term impacts of the Brexit decision to feed through to the UK economy . In the early 1990s , it took one to two years before high interest rates pushed the economy into recession . Even though the first tremors of the global financial crisis were felt in 2007 , the economy did not move decisively into recession until late 2008 . I 'm keeping an open mind on the economic impact of Brexit . By the end of this year , we should be clearer on the effects of heightened uncertainty on the UK economy . But the other economic impacts will take years and possibly decades to unfold . In the meantime , however , consumers and businesses would be wise to adopt a `` wait and see '' approach , and not rush to either a negative or excessively positive view . Decisions which have yet to be taken and discussions which have not yet started will have a crucial impact on the full economic consequences of Brexit . Andrew Sentance is senior economic adviser at PwC 'Most companies seem prepared to take time to assess the full implicaitons of the Brexit vote '
UBS backs City supremacy , but urges quicker progress on Brexit
UBS , the Swiss investment bank , has said it wants London to remain Europe 's financial hub and it will try to keep as many staff in the City as possible after Brexit . Speaking to Bloomberg TV at the World Economic Forum in Davos , Andrea Orcel , UBS 's investment banking head , said the Zurich-based bank wanted to keep `` as much as we can in the UK '' . The bank favours having a strong European financial centre to `` balance '' New York , Mr Orcel said , adding that global banks had clustered in London historically to save costs and were reluctant to move out . However , he warned that `` everybody has a plan on how to redeploy and relocate '' staff and said banks needed to see progress on Brexit trade talks - including an agreed transition period - by March at the latest . Mr Orcel said : `` Now we are beyond maximum time so all investment banks need to take a view and need to start executing , so March is really the deadline '' . UBS has centralised much of its European operations in London , including moving more than 5,000 staff to a purpose-built `` groundscraper '' at 5 Broadgate . In its results earlier this month UBS revealed it would start to implement Brexit contingency plans early this year , with around 200 roles reportedly earmarked for relocation . Several investment banking bosses in Davos this week have urged the UK to make quicker progress in Brexit trade talks . Jamie Dimon , the JP Morgan chief executive , and Lloyd Blankfein , the Goldman Sachs boss , told the BBC that City jobs would go without a deal . Mr Dimon warned that more than 4,000 UK jobs at the US bank could relocate over the longer term . Mr Blankfein said that some steps already taken by his bank to prepare for Brexit were `` not going to be undone '' . Other European financial hubs including Paris , Frankfurt , Dublin and Amsterdam have started courting City firms in the hope they will relocate staff to their city . Bruno Le Maire , the French finance minister , told Reuters in Davos that Paris could overtake London . `` There will be a new leader after Brexit , '' he said . `` I see the possibility for France to become in the coming years the most important financial centre in Europe , and the UK is in Europe . '' The Bank of England and EY , the consultancy , have warned that as many as 10,000 City jobs could go by March next year without a Brexit trade deal .
Scotland Absence of leadership on Brexit is a danger ; Head of fiscal watchdog warns of looming chaos if Whitehall is left in strategy vacuum ; Watchdog speaks out on Brexit strategy drift
THERESA MAY 's administration is putting a successful Brexit at risk by failing to show `` active and energetic '' leadership , the head of the National Audit Office ( NAO ) has warned . In an unprecedented intervention , Sir Amyas Morse said Whitehall departments were being left to `` struggle on their own '' with Brexit because of a failure of leadership and direction . He said Brexit poses the `` biggest challenge '' to the nation since the Second World War , but government could `` come apart like a chocolate orange '' unless departments were given more support . Sir Amyas also revealed that David Davis 's Brexit department failed to show him a plan for leaving the European Union despite his requests for one , and could only offer a `` vague '' explanation as to why it was unable to do so . `` Government will need to be fast and flexible and act in a unified way , '' Sir Amyas said . He added that he had serious doubts about the likelihood of a unified approach , saying : `` We have an issue here because of departmental government and what we do n't want to find is that at the first tap it comes apart like a chocolate orange . '' Sir Amyas 's remarks follow weeks of speculation about the Prime Minister 's ability to lead after the election defeat and plots to replace her at No 10 as well as fears of a rift between her and her Cabinet colleagues over Brexit strategy . Earlier yesterday Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , hit back at Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson 's declaration that the EU can `` go whistle '' if it thinks the UK will pay a large exit bill . Sir Amyas said the scale of the Brexit task was `` only just starting to click into people 's awareness '' and that leaving the EU meant ministers would not have `` space for legislating on other issues '' . He also highlighted fears that UK customs would descend into a `` horror show '' as Britain leaves the union because a new £150million system may not be ready in time and without it millions of trade transactions could be delayed and taxes lost . Critics warned the NAO 's report shows the Government does not have a grasp on how trade will work after the UK leaves the customs union , while Sir Amyas called on ministers to plan further in advance to provide `` insurance '' for UK taxpayers against the impact of leaving without adequate systems in place . HM Revenue and Customs has only allowed two months between the completion of the project to overhaul the customs system on the UK border and leaving the EU , which is not enough to be sure everything will work out in time , the NAO said . It also warned that the system has not been tested properly so ministers are uncertain that it will be able to cope with the number of declarations , which will rise from 55million to 255million after March 2019 . More than £700billion of goods crossed the UK border in 2015 , the NAO Continued on Page 5 Continued from Page 1 said , as it warned that getting the system right is `` critical to the UK 's economy and consumers '' . There is `` very little flexibility '' in the plans and the department in charge is not being given the support it needs to put back-up options in place , Sir Amyas warned . Explaining his unusual decision to intervene , he told reporters he `` would n't be speaking like this '' if he believed the coordinated support needed across government was in place . He added : `` The reason for emphasising these points is the Government really needs to recognise that . I notice in some of the public comments it 's starting to kind of lay off on the risk a little bit . `` We still think that the risk of not being ready on the day could be reduced by the Government taking a stronger and more unified line ; that 's the reason for saying this . `` The impact of Brexit is not going to fall evenly across the departments . '' Editorial Comment : Page 15
Lack of leadership putting Brexit at risk , says watchdog ; Watchdog warns of Brexit 'horror show '
THERESA MAY 's administration is putting a successful Brexit at risk by failing to show `` active and energetic '' leadership , the head of the National Audit Office ( NAO ) has warned . In an unprecedented intervention , Sir Amyas Morse said Whitehall departments were being left to `` struggle on their own '' with no direction . He said Brexit posed the `` biggest challenge '' to the nation since the Second World War , but government could `` come apart like a chocolate orange '' unless departments get more support . Sir Amyas also revealed that David Davis 's Brexit department failed to show him a plan for leaving the European Union , despite his requests for one , and could only offer a `` vague '' explanation as to why it was unable to do so . `` Government will need to be fast and flexible and act in a unified way , '' Sir Amyas said . He added that he had serious doubts about the likelihood of a unified approach , saying : `` We have an issue here because of departmental government and what we do n't want to find is that at the first tap it comes apart like a chocolate orange . '' Last night Labour said it would vote against Mrs May 's `` Great Repeal Bill '' unless she made significant concessions on issues such as workers ' rights . Also Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , hit back yesterday at Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson 's declaration that the EU can `` go whistle '' if it thinks the UK will pay a large exit bill . Sir Amyas 's remarks follow weeks of Continued on Page 5 Editorial Comment : Page 15 Continued from Page 1 speculation about Mrs May 's ability to lead after the election defeat and plots to replace her at No 10 as well as fears of a rift between the PM and her Cabinet colleagues over Brexit strategy . Sir Amyas said the scale of the task was `` only just starting to click into people 's awareness '' and that leaving the EU meant ministers would not have `` space for legislating on other issues '' . He also highlighted fears that UK customs would descend into a `` horror show '' as Britain leaves the union because a new £150million system may not be ready in time and without it millions of trade transactions could be delayed and taxes lost . However , a Government spokesman said ministers are `` alive to the task ahead '' . The criticism came as the Great Repeal Bill comes before the Commons today , in what Mr Davis called `` a major milestone '' . The Bill will convert EU law into UK law . Meanwhile , the Office for Budget Responsibility was also publishing a key policy paper today detailing the fiscal risks of Brexit .
Why does Hammond still seem to blame the voters for backing Brexit ? ; Analysis
There is a simple yet devastating reason why the Budget has descended into farce . It is now clear that the Chancellor , alone among this Government 's senior figures , has yet to accept , let alone embrace , the fact that Britain is about to leave the European Union , and decided instead to dedicate his energies at such a crucial time to going off on the irrelevant and explosive tangent . He invented a technocratic mission for himself - tweaking the tax status of the self-employed - rather than accepting that Brexit is the only game in town , and landed himself and the Government in its worst crisis to date . Philip Hammond 's lack of seriousness on the most important issue facing our country is genuinely disappointing . Yes , he backed Remain , but why is he taking so much longer than anybody else to adjust ? Why does he continue to give the impression that he continues to blame the voters for their supposed recklessness ? And why is he destabilising the Government and fuelling a potentially lethal rebellion just days before Article 50 is meant to be invoked ? What message does he think this is sending to EU negotiators ? No Chancellor who was truly focused on trying to make a success of Brexit could possibly have concluded that the best way of doing so was to declare war on a key part of the aspirational , self-reliant coalition that is the country and the Tory party 's www.future.No Chancellor who had truly bought into the Brexit project would have chosen to make zero provisions in his Budget for financing or upgrading the new IT , customs , immigration and trade infrastructure that we will need when we leave the EU , or even mentioned that the UK would soon be back in control of swathes of spending in areas such as agriculture . There was no mention , either , of the windfall to the public finances from the end of our annual payments , nor , for that matter , any discussion of a potential `` exit fee '' . Instead , the big priority was an esoteric side-issue . How could the Chancellor be so lacking in perspective ? It would have been premature to go into too much detail about the fiscal implications of Brexit , for sure : we do n't yet know what shape it will take , nor what deal , if any , we will strike with the EU . But the 2017 Budget , which claims to include forecasts for the public finances to 2021-22 , in effect pretends that Brexit is n't about to happen , apart from a few predictions relating to lower migration . It was almost as if Mr Hammond still hopes to be fighting a phony war , and that we wo n't actually be leaving . He certainly is n't meaningfully planning for our departure . Yet Brexit is happening , and it will change everything : in political , economic and historic terms , it is all that matters . The Government may wish to believe that it can still be defined by its approach to other issues , but all policies and all of the Government 's efforts must now be solely dedicated to making a success of our forthcoming return to self-government . Those of us who have always backed Brexit are far from deluded about the magnitude of the task at hand : we will be saddling our establishment , our government and our civil service with an immensely complicated task . We also desperately need a new , progrowth vision for the country that allows the economy to power ahead outside of the customs union and single market . And yet , instead of unveiling an epoch-defining Brexit Budget , or at least building the beginning of an agenda around it , the Chancellor chose to pretend that nothing was happening . He barely mentioned the B-word in his speech , deciding instead that the really important issue was the supposed long-term erosion of the UK 's tax base ( as if , for a Tory , a structural shift towards lower tax ought to be seen as a bad thing ) . This was a Budget for delusional Left-wing technocrats , the kind of people who are obsessed with `` progressive '' tax hikes and who spearheaded Project Fear , not one to prepare Britain for the radical change the Prime Minister has promised . The target audience seemed to be Blairite policy wonks , not Brexit Britain . Until Mr Hammond begins to feel he owns Brexit , these sorts of disasters will keep on happening . He needs to feel responsible for making our return to self-government a success ; yet he still sounds like a man who has been forced to take on a project he does n't really believe in . The Chancellor was hugely effective earlier this year when he threatened , to a German audience , that he would turn the UK into a Singapore-style economy with low taxes and a small state if the EU decides to slap protectionist tariffs on British firms . But how will anybody believe that he really means it after the fiasco of the past few days ? How can somebody who rejects supply-side economics be trusted to implement a radical , free-market agenda to steal business from Europe ? Even worse , this nonsense will weaken the Government domestically at a very dangerous time . The Budget ought to have been a show of confident strength ; instead it was a destabilising own goal which will just encourage those who want to overturn democracy . We 've had the Brexit ping , with pro-EU irredentists in the House of Lords defeating the Government on two amendments and sending the legislation back to the Commons ; now is the time for a decisive , crushing pong . To ensure that the upper house and , just as crucially , rebel MPs fall into line , it is essential for the Government to be able to dangle the implicit threat of a general election ( there are ways around the Fixed-Term Parliaments Act ) . Other punishments , such as the possibility of deselection , must also sound credible . Prior to the Budget , the Tories enjoyed a massive lead in the polls , so these were strong arguments . But such a threat now suddenly looks much less likely : why would the Government engineer an election when it has just alienated a big chunk of its base , including those in a large number of marginal seats ? And if a rebelliousness is in the air more generally , how will the Remainers be whipped back into their box ? All the good work of the past few months , and the astonishing opportunity delivered by Labour 's total , abject incompetence , could yet be for nothing . These are perilous times and the Chancellor 's disastrous , embarrassing Budget is now threatening to overshadow what ought to have been a glorious March for Theresa May 's merry band of Brexiteers . 'This was a Budget for delusional Left-wing technocrats , people who spearheaded Project Fear '
Judges blame ministers for creating void over Brexit ; Europe 2016 ; 2015 legislation on EU referendum was 'very carefully silent ' on what the effect of vote should be
MINISTERS could have avoided bruising court cases over Brexit if they had made sure the EU referendum was legally binding , the country 's foremost judges have said . Supreme Court justices who are deciding whether Parliament must have a vote on triggering Article 50 appeared mystified as to why the issue had been left open to debate . Lord Neuberger , the President of the Supreme Court , was among the judges who questioned why the Government failed explicitly to state in legislation that the result of the vote had legal effect , rather than just `` political '' effect . The court is hearing an appeal brought by the Government against a High Court ruling last month that Brexit can only be triggered by a vote in Parliament to leave the EU , meaning the result of the referendum was merely advisory , rather than final . The Government argues that Theresa May has the power to invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty - which gives notice of Britain 's intent to leave the EU - using a royal prerogative , without the need for a specific Act of Parliament . But Lord Neuberger said the 2015 legislation that provided for the referendum was `` very carefully silent '' on what the effect of the referendum should be . He pointed out that when a referendum was held in 2011 on whether Britain should adopt the alternative vote system at elections , the legislation clearly set out the fact that the result of the referendum would be legally binding . Lord Neuberger told James Eadie QC , counsel for the Government : `` You may say to yourself ... it is not for the court to say what the effect of the 2015 Act is , where Parliament has been very carefully silent , but to say that is a matter for Parliament . '' Lord Clarke , another of the 11 Justices hearing the case , said : `` Of course , it did n't have to be silent , did it ? I mean Parliament could have [ been explicit ] . '' Lord Neuberger added : `` It could have said it was advisory or it could have done what it did in the alternative vote legislation ... it could have said what it did . If Parliament means it to have a legal effect , it says so , whereas it does n't say so in the 2015 [ Act ] . '' Lord Reed said that `` holding a referendum is a political event , the significance of the outcome depending on things like the size of the turnout , the size and majority one way or another '' . He said that these were `` inevitably a matter of political judgment , which courts are not equipped to do '' . The judges implied that if the Government had worded the 2015 legislation more carefully , the matter would never had ended up in court . Lord Pannick QC , setting out the case for Gina Miller , the businesswoman who challenged the Government 's right to trigger Brexit without a Parliamentary vote , suggested it was a nonsense to suggest the 1972 Act that took Britain into Europe could ever be revoked without a new law being passed . He said the 1972 Act , which had `` constitutional status '' , made no provision for a prerogative power to be used to nullify it in the future , and it would be `` quite extraordinary '' if it were to be revoked by `` the actions of a minister acting without Parliamentary authority '' . However , Mr Eadie warned the judges that they would be setting `` a serious constitutional trap '' if they upheld the previous High Court ruling . He said : `` We submit that it would take the court over the line , a line which it has been assiduous to respect , between interpretation and judicial legislation . `` The courts would be imposing in effect a new control of a most serious kind in a highly controversial and , by Parliament , carefully considered area . '' The justices have emphasised that the appeal concerns an issue of law and does not address the wider political questions surrounding a departure from the EU . REUTERS WERMUTH/ Lord Pannick added that the `` political significance '' of the referendum vote was `` irrelevant '' to the legal battle . Mr Eadie conceded that if the Government lost the case , it would have to introduce a `` one line '' Act of Parliament to invoke Article 50 . STEFAN What is behind today 's vote ? How MPs will be forced to show their hand Q What has the Government done to change the course of Brexit ? A Theresa May has tabled an amendment which will force a non-binding Commons vote on whether Parliament agrees that the Government must trigger Article 50 by the end of March next year . Downing Street has also committed to presenting MPs with a Brexit `` plan '' after criticism from backbenchers . Q How does this affect the Supreme Court hearing on Article 50 ? A The Government is arguing in court that Mrs May should be able to use the royal prerogative to trigger Brexit negotiations , which does not require a vote in Parliament . However , today 's vote is not binding - meaning that technically it does not have any bearing on the Supreme Court case . Q What is the point of the court ruling if the Government has already held a Commons vote on Article 50 ? A Today 's amendment only states that Parliament `` should respect the wishes of the United Kingdom as expressed in the referendum on 23 June ; and further calls on the Government to invoke Article 50 by 31 March 2017 '' . Crucially , it does not by itself trigger Article 50 , but it will force Europhile MPs to say whether they will back the action . The Supreme Court will rule on whether Mrs May must seek a binding vote in Parliament before she tells Brussels that she has formally triggered Article 50 and that negotiations have started . If the Supreme Court rules against her , that Commons vote would give MPs an opportunity to block Brexit by voting against the Government . It means that Mrs May would need an Article 50 Act of Parliament , which would also have to be passed by the House of Lords . Q So what is the real point of today 's Commons vote ? A Although the vote will not make a difference legally , it is politically significant . It will force MPs to show their hand , making it very difficult for them to reverse their position and block Brexit if the Supreme Court rules against the Government . By the end of proceedings today , there will be a list of MPs who are willing to say they do not respect the decision of the British people to vote Leave in June . The Brexit Judgment Access to Telegraph Premium articles online is included free of charge for all of our print subscribers . Just log into the site for full and unlimited access . Not a subscriber ? Visit www.telegraph.co.uk/editions or call 0800 55 20 20 to select your package . Unparalleled events require unparalleled insight The road out of the European Union Will Britain meet its Brexit target of 2019 ? Parliament votes on motion challenging Commons to `` respect the wishes '' of UK voters , triggering Article 50 by March 31 . Dec 8 Closing arguments in Supreme Court , which will rule whether PM has power to trigger Article 50 using royal prerogative Jan 2017 Supreme Court expected to deliver its ruling on whether the process to start Brexit requires an Act of Parliament March 31 Deadline Mrs May has set for invoking Article 50 by notifying the European Council of Britain 's intention to leave EU Sept 2018 Date by which EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , Michel Barnier , wants to wrap deal on Britain 's exit from the Union March 2019 Date by which Theresa May wants her ministers for Brexit to complete negotiations with the European Union May 2019 ? Britain formally exits the EU , following ratification of Brexit by all other member states 'It is not for the court to say what the effect of the 2015 Act is ... that is a matter for Parliament '
Labour and Brexit ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : The House of Commons is not sitting today , so there will be no Prime Minister 's Questions and no chance for Jeremy Corbyn to ask Theresa May about her position on Brexit in the light of the legal challenge that could yet compel ministers to seek parliamentary approval before starting the Article 50 process of withdrawal . Even before the Scottish National Party 's absurd and self-aggrandising attempt to jump on the bandwagon , the court action was causing the Government no little worry , but the person who should be grateful for the Commons recess is Mr Corbyn . For while Mrs May has a clear position on the fundamental question of Brexit - she is committed to Britain leaving the EU - Labour has no such clarity . Indeed , it is impossible to say whether Labour would support or obstruct parliamentary moves to begin the Brexit process . Some Labour MPs , such as David Lammy , say they would vote against Article 50 , trying to overturn the referendum result . Labour 's Brexit spokesman , Sir Keir Starmer , says he will support Article 50 , but also hints that could be conditional on the Government committing to keep Britain in the single market . Mr Corbyn has said Labour could vote against Article 50 , but Tom Watson , his deputy leader , says that is not so . Even by the dismal standards Mr Corbyn has set , this is shambolic . Brexit poses vital questions , yet Labour 's position is utterly unclear . When the Commons returns next week , if Mr Corbyn wants to question Mrs May about her plans with even a shred of credibility , he should either explain Labour 's policy on Brexit - or admit it does not have one .
Brussels believes it can make Britain beg ; European states 'not on same page ' after Brexit
BRITAIN has become `` completely lost '' since the Brexit vote and can eventually be expected to `` plead '' for a deal when it realises the weakness of its position at the negotiating table , senior European Commission officials now believe . While publicly pressing for Britain to invoke Article 50 and begin divorce talks , officials in Brussels are taking growing satisfaction in what they believe is paralysis and disarray in Theresa May 's government , according to internal discussions seen by The Daily Telegraph . The spectacle of Mrs May rebuking David Davis , the Brexit minister , at Prime Minister 's questions for prematurely revealing the Government 's hand was taken as further evidence in Brussels that Downing Street does not have a coherent strategy for Brexit , according to one commission insider . Officials are also jubilant that the United States , Japan and India all gave Britain what one EU diplomat described as `` the cold shoulder '' at the recent G20 summit in Hangzhou , China , heeding Brussels ' demand that the country can not begin independent trade negotiations before Brexit . The revelations come as Europe attempts to stage a post-Brexit vote display of unity this week . Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , will deliver his `` State of the Union '' address on Wednesday followed by a meeting of all other 27 EU leaders in Bratislava on Friday . Mrs May has pledged not to trigger Article 50 until next year at least , but is likely to face rising pressure from European capitals if she does not act soon after the new year . The Prime Minister stuck to her guns this week during a visit to London by Donald Tusk , the European Council president , who hinted at rising impatience in EU capitals , saying that Britain should trigger talks `` as soon as possible '' . British officials concede privately that the Whitehall bureaucracy is still `` miles and miles '' from being ready to conduct detailed negotiations as it comes to terms with the new departmental structure created by Mrs May , although officials contend that Europe is equally in disarray . British negotiators are determined that the European Commission , with its more `` theological '' approach to issues such as free movement , must not be allowed to dominate the Brexit negotiations but wants them controlled by EU leaders who , Britain feels , may take a more pragmatic approach . However , the Commission hopes that divisions among the remaining 27 member states will enable the Brussels bureaucracy , with its mastery of the legal details , to insert itself more forcefully into the coming talks - a strategy that some analysts warned could backfire . `` Member states are n't on the same page following Brexit , and the commission clearly sees this space and wants to exploit it for its own ends , to push its agenda , '' said Mujtaba Rahman , managing director for Europe at the Eurasia Group risk consultancy . `` It 's a high risk strategy , and is likely to fail , further alienating Juncker from the member states . ''
Future will be brighter after Brexit , says May ; Tory leadership frontrunner insists she is no 'Remainer ' and can take Britain out of EU ; May challenges Leadsom to sign 'pledge card ' in run-up to leadership contest
BRITAIN will emerge from Brexit with a `` better , brighter future '' , Theresa May pledges today as she warns that the country faces `` tough times '' while it negotiates to leave the European Union . In her first interview since she and Andrea Leadsom were named as the final two candidates vying to become the next prime minister , Mrs May tells The Daily Telegraph : `` Politics could do with some bloody difficult women . '' The Home Secretary says that a female prime minister will bring `` honesty '' and a greater focus on `` delivery '' in Downing Street , as she suggests that men tend to treat politics as a `` game '' . She also appeals to people not to consider her as a `` Remainer '' after she campaigned to keep Britain in the EU , saying that she is `` very clear that Brexit means Brexit '' . She insists that she is not the `` new Margaret Thatcher '' , describing the former prime minister as `` absolutely unique '' . `` People love to draw parallels , but I just get on with the job and that is my philosophy , '' she says . Mrs May , the longest-serving home secretary in a century , topped the second-round poll of Tory MPs with the support of 199 out of 330 members . The decision on who will lead the country out of the EU and through negotiations with Brussels now rests with the 150,000 members of the Conservative Party . Mrs May adopts a more cautious tone than her rival about leaving the European Union , admitting that `` difficult times '' lie ahead despite the fact that she is `` optimistic '' for the future . Mrs May says : `` If I am prime minister , we will come out of the European Union and part of that will be control of free movement . But alongside that , it 's important to show how we can come through what will be , I think , some difficult times with a better , brighter future . '' She urges the party to drop the terms `` Brexiteers and Remainers '' , echoing the suggestion by Lord Hague last week that `` we are all Leavers now '' . She says : `` We have a job to do in making the best deal we can in coming out of the EU and I am very clear that I will deliver Brexit . '' She pledges to act on David Cameron 's election manifesto by making a Continued on Page 2 Interview : Pages 12-13 Editorial Comment : Page 23 Continued from Page 1 decision on Heathrow and pushing ahead with HS2 . Her approach contrasts with that of Mrs Leadsom , who has questioned the need for the HS2 railway line and criticised gay marriage as part of an appeal to the Tory heartlands . She also embraces Ken Clarke 's description of her last week as a `` bloody difficult woman '' . She says : `` We [ women ] just get stuck in . Politics is n't a game . The decisions we make affect people 's lives and that is something we must keep to the forefront of our minds . `` Women often focus more on delivery - what the outcome is going to be rather than what are the interactions people have in order to get there . I also think that right now people are looking for an honesty in politics . We could go through some tough times and we need to be honest with people about that . '' She admits she likes to keep her `` personal life personal '' but says she and her husband Philip `` dealt with '' the fact they could n't have children and `` moved on '' . `` I hope nobody would think that mattered , '' she says `` I can still empathise , understand people and care about fairness and opportunity . '' Mrs May today challenges Mrs Leadsom to sign a five-point `` pledge card '' as she calls for a `` clean campaign '' . It includes a pledge not to `` co-operate in any way with other political parties '' , including donors or members . Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader , and Arron Banks , the party 's donor , have said they support Mrs Leadsom as next Tory leader . Mrs Leadsom last week refused to rule out Mr Farage forming part of her Brexit negotiating team . It came as President Barack Obama dismissed claims that the special relationship is being put at risk by Brexit as `` hyperbole '' . He said that Brexit negotiations should not be `` protracted '' .
Davis U-turn after he says MPs might be denied vote on EU trade deal
DAVID DAVIS was under further pressure last night after he was forced into a climbdown for saying that Parliament may be denied a vote on a final trade deal before Brexit . The Brexit Secretary , who has already been accused by colleagues of delaying the Brexit bill , yesterday said MPs may not be given a vote in Parliament until after March 2019 . His comments prompted a furious response from pro-European Tory MPs , who said that a vote after Brexit would be meaningless and `` absolutely unacceptable '' . An hour later Theresa May contradicted Mr Davis at Prime Minister 's Questions , telling MPs she was `` confident '' they would get a vote before Britain left the EU . Mr Davis subsequently issued a statement clarifying that he `` expects and intends '' for there to be a vote in Parliament before Britain leaves . One Tory minister told The Daily Telegraph that Mr Davis has `` mentally checked out '' and `` does n't seem to care '' , amid claims that he could stand down after delivering Brexit in 2019 . A source close to the Brexit department said : `` The Secretary of State has always been clear , including in the House of Commons , that the vote will happen before departure . '' The row erupted after Mr Davis suggested that the EU may delay coming to a deal until the `` last moment '' . He told the Exiting the EU select committee : `` It 's no secret that the way the union makes its decision tends to be at the 59th minute of the 11th hour of the 11th day and so on , and that is precisely what I would expect to happen . `` If there is a time limit on a negotiation the union stops the clock . It assumes that it 's still at 11:59 until it is concluded , sometimes over the course of 24 , 36 , 72 hours thereafter , and that 's what I imagine it will be . '' Pressed on whether that meant a vote in Parliament on the deal could be after March 2019 , he replied : `` It could be , yes , it could be . '' However an hour later the Prime Minister contradicted Mr Davis . She said : `` I am confident because it is in the interests of both sides ... that we will be able to achieve that agreement and that negotiation in time for this Parliament to have the vote that we committed to . '' The Prime Minister 's spokesman subsequently said that Mrs May has `` full confidence '' in Mr Davis . Tory rebels will back an amendment to the EU withdrawal bill tabled by Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general , which states that there must a vote before the UK leaves the EU . Mr Grieve yesterday warned the Government that it will face legal action if it tries to leave without a vote . Anna Soubry , a pro-European Tory MP , said that Mr Davis 's suggestion that Parliament would be denied a vote before Brexit was `` absolutely [ and ] totally unacceptable '' . Mr Davis also warned that the UK must retain the option of leaving the EU without a deal until the last moment or Brussels will `` think they have got you over a barrel '' . It came as Sir Ivan Rogers , the UK 's former ambassador to the EU , said that Britain is being `` screwed '' in negotiations with Brussels . He said that Mrs May 's decision to trigger Brexit before resolving the timetable allowed the EU side to dictate the `` rules of the game '' . Nick Timothy : Page 19
The lady is not for turning as Tories aim to 'plough on ' with Brexit plans
There is no sign of retreat . Perhaps that will change but , for now , the Government position on Brexit appears to be `` plough on '' . There is an inexorable logic to this decision . The staunch Brexiteers in office are afraid of opening a can of worms by triggering any kind of leadership contest . They won the argument in Cabinet before the election and their best hope for executing it is to seize the initiative now , before their opponents can get organised . The problem with this strategy should be obvious . Brexit is n't a momentary decision or a single bill . It 's not like a box that can be closed one minute and opened the next . It is more like building an enormous cathedral over many years . The architects of one particular plan might be very keen to get started , but if they forge ahead without checking everyone is on board , their chance of success is extremely low . In Brexit 's case , the masons , carpenters and painters reside in Parliament . Brexit can not be implemented properly without passing laws . And whereas the definitive result of the referendum had pushed both chambers of parliament into a quiescent state , making them ready to fall into line in spite of their strong pro-Remain tendencies , the inconclusive election result has reawakened the spirit of rebellion . Many backbench Tories are uneasy with the Prime Minister 's plan and although Labour 's manifesto outlined a similar approach , that position commands little support among MPs . In short , the Government 's original plan has become unworkable . Many Brexiteers do not yet see it that way , imagining they might be able to ram a deal through Parliament by presenting it , at the last minute , as the only alternative to no deal at all . But because of the many new areas of law Britain plans to take back from Brussels , Brexit requires Parliament to pass a series of bills - on immigration , fisheries , agriculture and so on - and MPs can not therefore be held to ransom at the eleventh hour . The decision to press ahead obliviously is fraught with risk . Negotiators in Brussels will be entitled to question whether May can actually deliver any promises or concessions she offers , and will also wonder why they ought to give any ground when it 's not clear if Parliament would vote through any deal . This heightens the risk of the talks collapsing . For businesses , this is a nightmarish cocktail of political risk . Everything suddenly seems to be back on the table , from a `` hard '' Brexit with no deal to none at all . Those hoping that Brexit can now somehow be averted are ignoring the toxic electoral politics of such a move but , equally , Brexiteers who think nothing changed last week are in for a surprise . The simplest way out of the current mess would be for Theresa May to seek a transitional arrangement that buys more time for both politics and business to adjust . She would probably have had to do so anyway , because it is unlikely that a comprehensive trade agreement could have been finalised in the next 18 months . Her shaky support at home makes a transitional arrangement even more important as a way of creating parliamentary consensus and protecting the economy from an unnecessarily sudden shock . There is only one obvious , readymade template suitable for a transition : joining the European Economic Area . This would not yet allow the Government to deliver on its immigration promises , but would set Britain on a smooth path out of the EU while we get our house in order and negotiate the finer details of whatever our new relationship is . Joining the EEA would require the permission of its current non-EU members - Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein - but assuming they can be persuaded , it is the obvious halfway house . Shunning the EEA and seeking just to join the European Free Trade Association , as some Brexiteers advocate , is n't actually much simpler than going for a fully complete Brexit , because in order to maintain full market access it would be necessary to negotiate a lot of bilateral agreements with the EU , as Switzerland has done . EEA membership , by contrast , is relatively straightforward . It allows unfettered market access in return for an agreement to obey whatever regulatory diktats come out of Brussels . Britain would get back control of home affairs and could request , separately , to remain part of the customs union until we are ready to sign our own , new trade deals and work out a new tariff schedule . Before any Remainers get too excited by the prospect of this watered-down Brexit , however , it should be made clear that EEA membership is not a permanent solution , as a permanent arrangement it is the worst of all worlds , requiring obedience to Brussels but allowing no input into its rule making . The fact that it denies the Government the ability to control immigration will also be unacceptable to voters in the long-run . It makes sense , therefore , to set a clear time limit on the transitional arrangement . Five years , extendable by mutual agreement , should allow enough time to work out a proper long-term trade agreement between Britain and the EU , while giving businesses and investors time to understand and adjust to the changes . Most Brexiteers understand that Brexit can not be pulled off in the blink of an eye . Their fear that it might never happen does not , however , justify a headlong rush into the unknown when there are better ways to approach it . Voters have forced the Government 's hand and it is no longer possible for May to set her own pace and priorities . Parliamentary involvement might be annoying and inconvenient , but there is now no way around it . The Government will negotiate more effectively if it recognises its new situation at the outset , rather than facing a crisis later when it ca n't deliver on its promises . 'Everything suddenly seems to be back on the table , from a hard Brexit with no deal to none at all '
'No deal is better than a bad deal ' ; MPs given vote on outcome of talks but Britain will not remain
THERESA MAY yesterday warned the European Union she will walk away from the negotiating table unless its leaders accept her demands , as she set out her plan for Brexit for the first time . The Prime Minister announced that Britain would leave the single market and effectively depart the customs union - and then told European leaders that any attempt to `` punish '' Britain for its stance would be `` an act of calamitous self-harm '' . She said she would rather do `` no deal '' than one which is a `` bad deal for Britain '' and said that any attempt by the EU to harm the UK would cause her to change the country 's `` economic model '' by lowering tax and cutting regulation to compete with Brussels . European leaders gave a cautious welcome to Mrs May 's speech . Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council , said Mrs May 's demands were `` realistic '' . `` Sad process , surrealistic times but at least more realistic announcement on Brexit , '' he wrote on Twitter , adding that the 27 remaining EU states were `` united and ready to negotiate '' after Article 50 is invoked . François Hollande is understood to have told Mrs May that he wants Brexit negotiations to begin as soon as possible , while French diplomatic sources described Mrs May 's comments as `` useful clarification '' . Germany 's foreign minister welcomed Mrs May 's decision to give `` a bit more clarity '' about her ideas for Brexit . Frank-Walter Steinmeier said : `` Almost seven months have now passed since the referendum on Britain 's membership of the European Union . The British Government has still to formalise its desire to leave . `` We therefore welcome the British Prime Minister 's speech in which she outlined her Government 's ideas on the exit and finally created a bit more clarity about Britain 's plans . '' Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , today hails the speech as setting out a `` powerful and ambitious vision '' . Writing for The Daily Telegraph , he says that Mrs May has set out a clear plan that can work for both Britain and the EU . The value of the pound soared as Mrs May delivered her speech to members of her Cabinet and European ambassadors , seeing its biggest daily rise against the dollar since 2008 . Mrs May revealed her 12-point plan for Brexit in a speech yesterday in Lancaster House - the venue for Baroness Thatcher 's `` Europe open for business '' speech arguing for single-market membership in 1988 . The Prime Minister said that Britain will quit the European single market but seek a `` bold and ambitious '' freetrade agreement to allow it to continue doing business with its 27 former partners without having to pay `` vast '' sums into EU budgets . She effectively announced that Britain will leave the customs union , allowing it to secure freetrade deals across the world with countries such as the US and India . However , Mrs May said she still wanted to ensure `` frictionless '' crossborder trade , but had an `` open mind '' on whether that should be done through associate membership or a completely new customs agreement . She promised to control Britain 's borders and create an immigration system that `` serves the national interest '' and relieves pressure on schools and housing supply . And she said that both Houses of Parliament would get a vote on the final deal with Brussels , thus setting up a battle with Remain-supporting MPs and peers in the months ahead . Mrs May made clear to EU leaders that she will not allow them to attempt to force a Brexit deal that damages Britain 's economy . In comments that drew comparisons with Lady Thatcher 's 1984 demand for `` our money back '' as a rebate , Mrs May said : `` Britain wants to remain a good friend and neighbour to Europe . Yet I know there are some voices calling for a punitive deal that punishes Britain and discourages other countries from taking the same path . `` That would be an act of calamitous self-harm for the countries of Europe . And it would not be the act of a friend . '' She added : `` Britain would not - indeed we could not - accept such an approach . And while I am confident that this scenario need never arise - while I am sure a positive agreement can be reached - I am equally clear that no deal for Britain is better than a bad deal for Britain . '' Her threat is a marked contrast with the approach taken ahead of the referendum by David Cameron , who repeatedly refused to say he would walk away and support Brexit if EU leaders did not offer Britain a good deal . However , in comments designed to calm her counterparts across Europe , she also insisted she does not support `` greater unravelling of the EU '' . Mrs May said she expected `` compromises '' on both sides during the twoyear negotiation . She said she was committed to immigration controls , free trade with European markets and the freedom to strike deals outside the EU . `` We do not seek membership of the Continued on Page 5 Continued from Page 1 single market , '' she said . `` Instead we seek the greatest possible access to it through a new , comprehensive , bold and ambitious free-trade agreement . '' Making immigration control her negotiating `` red line '' , Mrs May said : `` Brexit must mean control of the number of people who come to Britain from Europe . And that is what we will deliver . '' She announced that MPs and peers will be given a vote on the final deal reached with the EU in Article 50 talks , due to be triggered by the end of March . Remain supporters , including Nick Clegg , immediately said they would be prepared to vote down the deal in Parliament . Labour sources also made clear that they are not ruling out voting against the deal . However , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , later told the Commons the vote would not be an opportunity for MPs to prevent Brexit , as defeat for the Government would not mean Britain staying in the EU but leaving without a deal . Lord Bridges of Headley , a Brexit minister , also advised peers to `` tread carefully '' over the temptation to vote against the final Brexit deal reached between the UK and European Union . Senior Conservatives praised Mrs May 's speech . Mr Johnson said it was a `` fantastic '' address and said that it was a `` very , very exciting vision for this country '' . Peter Bone , a prominent Eurosceptic campaigner , said that Mrs May 's speech was the `` best by a British prime minister on Europe - ever '' . Carolyn Fairbairn , the CBI directorgeneral said businesses would welcome the clarity offered by Mrs May . Ms Fairbairn warned that ruling out membership of the single market had `` reduced options for maintaining a barrier-free trading relationship '' and said companies would be `` concerned about falling back on damaging World Trade Organisation rules '' if the UK crashed out of the EU without a deal . Labour reacted with confusion to the speech , with shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer claiming Mrs May 's remarks had made clear she was not pursuing a `` hard Brexit '' while Jeremy Corbyn , the party leader , claimed she wanted to make a `` bargain basement tax haven on the shores of Europe '' . Tim Farron , the Liberal Democrat leader , said : `` Theresa May has confirmed Britain is heading for a hard Brexit . She claimed people voted to leave the single market . They did n't . She has made the choice to do massive damage to the British economy . ''
Europe will lose the plot if it seeks to punish UK for Brexit , warns Irish prime minister
EUROPE is in danger of `` losing the plot '' if it obsesses over punishing Britain in the forthcoming Brexit negotiations , the Irish prime minister Enda Kenny warned yesterday , predicting that the UK-EU talks could become `` quite vicious '' . Mr Kenny told an all-Ireland forum on Brexit that the British decision to leave the EU presented Ireland with the `` most significant economic and social challenge of the last 50 years '' , and that some EU members wanted to punish Britain for leaving . `` The other side of this argument may well get quite vicious after a while , because there are those around the European table who take a very poor view of the fact that Britain decided to leave , '' he said . But he also warned that Europe needed to take a pragmatic , long-term view of the UK divorce talks or risk damaging itself . `` Europe 's got to decide for itself in these negotiations where it wants to be in the next 50 years , and if it becomes obsessed with what the United Kingdom might , or might not , get then Europe itself loses the plot , '' he told the conference in Dublin . Ireland has expressed deep concerns about the economic and political impacts of Brexit , warning that a `` hard '' Brexit would cause a disproportionate economic shock to Ireland and also threaten to unravel the Good Friday Agreement that ended the Troubles in Northern Ireland . Mr Kenny warned that Ireland might not have long to prepare for Brexit since Theresa May , who has set a deadline of the end of March to invoke Article 50 , could do it earlier , in December , January or February . He added that he had agreed with Mrs May that there would be `` no return '' to the borders of the past and a continuation of the Common Travel Area that has enabled free travel between the UK and Ireland since 1923 . `` Neither I , nor the Prime Minister , desire to limit the freedom of people on both sides of the Irish Sea to trade , live , work and travel freely across these islands . Therefore we have agreed that the benefits of the Common Travel Area be preserved , '' Mr Kenny said . However politicians and industry experts warned that if the UK demanded draconian curbs on EU free movement , as Mrs May has previously hinted , then other EU member states may not be prepared to allow Ireland and the UK to grant each other special status denied to Poland or Hungary . Separately , economic advisers to Angela Merkel 's government called for Germany to intervene to prevent Brexit from going ahead . `` An exit of the United Kingdom from the EU would not only mean an economic loss , but above all a bigger political loss , '' the Council of Economic Experts wrote in their annual report , adding the best outcome of forthcoming talks would be to avert Brexit . However , Mrs Merkel has already made clear that the referendum result must be respected . 'The other side of this argument may well get quite vicious after a while '
May 's warning to EU leaders : you will sign a deal that 's right for us ; PM hits back at nations threatening to make Brexit 'very painful ' for the United Kingdom
THERESA MAY has delivered a sharp rebuke to EU leaders threatening Britain ahead of Brexit negotiations , warning them that they `` will sign up to a deal with us '' . The Prime Minister hit back at her counterparts after they said they will make Brexit `` very painful '' for Britain to ensure the UK is worse off outside the bloc . A number of Eastern European nations have warned they will threaten Britain 's Brexit deal unless their citizens are given full access to live and work in the UK , something government sources say will not happen . Mrs May will today address the UN and defend the Brexit vote , saying that the British people did not back Leave because they want to `` turn inwards or walk away '' . She will also warn world leaders that the referendum shows that voters want `` a politics that is more in touch with their concerns '' . Robert Fico , prime minister of Slovakia , said yesterday that member states intend to make it `` very difficult for the UK '' and said Britain is `` bluffing '' when it says it can get a good Brexit deal . However , Mrs May dismissed those comments and said the 27 other EU members will sign up to `` the deal that 's right for the UK '' . Addressing the warnings made by EU leaders and asked whether it is a sign that they will refuse to do a deal with Britain , Mrs May said : `` The 27 will sign up to a deal with us . We will be negotiating with them and we will be ambitious in what we want to see for the United Kingdom . `` But I think a good deal for the UK can also be a good deal for the other member states because I believe in good trading relations and I want the UK to be a global leader in free trade . '' The Prime Minister added : `` I had very constructive meetings with [ Mr Fico ] when I was doing my visits earlier in the summer . `` We 're going to be in a negotiation with the 27 members of the European Union about the relationship we will have with them when we leave the EU . `` I 've said what I want to see is the deal that 's right for the UK . I think that will also be a deal that 's good for the member states of the European Union . This is not just about us - it 's actually about relationships and trading within that European arena . '' Mrs May last night met some of America 's most powerful business leaders amid concerns that they could be preparing to move their European bases out of the UK in the wake of the Brexit vote . The Prime Minister attended a reception with executives from companies including IBM , Morgan Stanley , Goldman Sachs and Amazon . Speaking ahead of the meeting , she said that she would tell them that she wants to hear what their concerns are over the Brexit vote . American executives want assurances that the rights of their employees based in Britain will be protected once the UK leaves the EU . Mrs May said : `` What I 'll be talking about with both American and British business leaders is about how we can encourage that trade and investment between the two countries . '' She also appeared to criticise comments by Liam Fox , the international trade secretary , who described British businesses as `` fat '' and `` lazy '' , saying `` we all put things in different ways '' .
It 's time to invoke Article 50 and get on with the Brexit negotiations ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - I agree with Sir James Dyson , who believes that we should quickly sign Article 50 - and then get on with our Brexit negotiations ( Business , September 14 ) . Most of those who voted to leave the European Union did not want a long period during which we would continue to pay into the EU and have to abide by all its rules . If `` Brexit means Brexit '' , can someone explain why people such as Sir James are being ignored - and why the process has to take some years ? Roger Payne London NW3 SIR - Herman Van Rompuy , the former European Council president , has predicted that Brexit negotiations may not begin until after the German elections next year . I was not aware that our departure was dependent on the elections of any one of the remaining 27 constituent sections of the supranational state . Stephen J Bedford Kidderminster , Worcestershire SIR - If Britain is truly leaving the EU , then it seems only fair that we should no longer be a part of the single market . To ask for such special status after leaving is unreasonable . Britain needs a bespoke trading deal , as an independent and sovereign state . Jack William Ruddy Blandford Forum , Dorset SIR - I like the idea of Britain forming a `` Canzuk '' alliance ( Comment , September 14 ) with Canada , Australia and New Zealand . We have a common language , as well as shared cultural values and levels of development . This alliance would make much more sense than the one we had with the EU - an idea whose time has passed , and perhaps never really came . What a powerhouse we would be , and how well-placed for influencing the world : Canada contiguous with the United States and close to South America ; Britain a platform to Europe ; and Australia and New Zealand close to east and south-east Asia . James Wilson London W2 SIR - Jean-Claude Juncker used the phrase `` galloping populism '' when discussing the EU and Brexit . Did he mean `` democracy '' ? Michael Lavelle Scaynes Hill , West Sussex SIR - Mr Junker is in denial . The `` existential crisis '' that he describes in the EU predates Britain 's referendum . Blaming Brexit is merely an attempt to divert attention from the way that the EU is failing as a state . The twin rocks of Greek-led Mediterranean insolvencies and uncontrolled immigration will ensure the collapse of the myopic Brussels bureaucracy . I suspect that , if Mr Junker and his colleagues continue on their rigid course of `` ever-closer union '' , the demise of the EU can not be far off . Tim Cunis London SW14
Banking giants robust enough to survive a chaotic Brexit ; Carney urges swift action on Brexit after latest stress tests
BRITAIN 'S major lenders are robust enough to survive a chaotic Brexit but the Government must act quickly to minimise disruption to trillions of pounds of contracts , the Bank of England has said . Regulators on Threadneedle Street gave the UK 's seven biggest lenders a largely clean bill of health after subjecting them to their toughest `` doomsday '' round of annual stress tests yet . But they asked the lenders to set aside a further £6bn in capital against the `` worst case scenario '' of a global downturn coinciding with a disorderly Brexit , with the warning the requirement could go up again early next year . The extreme stress test scenario included a slump in both world and UK GDP , a dive in the value of the pound , and house prices falling by a third . All but two lenders passed outright , with RBS and Barclays failing to clear the Bank 's higher so-called `` systemic '' hurdle . But the Bank said the duo would pass if it re-ran the tests today using their improved capital buffers since the end of last year , although Barclays would have the least wriggle room , in part due to its higher projected losses in consumer credit because of its large credit card business . For the first time since starting the stress tests in 2014 the Bank did not demand any of the banks improve their capital positions . But the dividend policies of the banks again came into sharp focus . The report showed that in the stress test scenario the banks , which also include Lloyds , HSBC , Standard Chartered and the UK arm of Santander , stopped paying out a dividend within three years . Building society Nationwide expected to continue paying around £100m a year through deferred shares . Joseph Dickerson , analyst at Jefferies , said that as a result of the stress tests he did not expect Barclays to offer large payouts to shareholders `` in the near term '' , whereas Asia-focused lender Standard Chartered - which was given remedial action by the Bank after last year 's stress test - could be expected to `` return to ordinary dividends '' next year . Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank , said the stress tests showed `` the banking system can continue to support the real economy even in the unlikely event of a disorderly Brexit '' . He added : `` It 's a big call . We 're putting our money where our mouths are . '' While he said the tests were not specifically designed to simulate a hard Brexit , he noted they `` encompass the risks that could arise '' . Mr Carney stepped up his calls for swift action on Brexit , urging politicians on both sides of the Channel to pass legislation to resolve potential conflicts on cross-border contracts , including £60bn worth of consumer insurance policies and £26 trillion of derivatives . He also repeated his call for a swift transition deal of `` at least 18-24 months '' . Commenting on the combination of risks facing the UK financial system , Mr Carney said that while there were `` pockets of risk '' such as rising consumer credit , `` aside from Brexit '' he considered them to be `` standard '' . Rob Smith , banking partner at KPMG , said six of the seven lenders racked up higher loan losses in this year 's stress test than last time round , with `` over half `` of these losses in consumer credit . There was no further news on risks in consumer credit , beyond the £10bn requirement issued by the Bank for extra capital in the summer . The BoE suggested the bulk of the banks ' capital buffers would still be above any increased threshold , having tripled over the last decade to 16.7pc on average . £6bn The additional capital the Bank of England has asked lenders to set aside in case of a global downturn and disorderly Brexit
House prices forecast to fall after Brexit vote
HOUSE prices will fall next year as the uncertainty surrounding Brexit takes hold , but far less than the Treasury 's gloomy warning before the EU referendum . In its first post-Brexit forecast , estate agency Countrywide said that house prices will fall 1pc across the country in 2017 , before rising by 2pc in 2018 . It added that house prices would rise by just 2.5pc this year as the market cools in the second half of 2016 . In December 2015 , with a Leave vote far from certain , Countrywide forecast that house prices would rise by 4.5pc in England and Wales during 2016 and 2017 . However , Countrywide said that the cooling market was not just down to uncertainty about Brexit . It also highlighted the impact of stamp duty increases on the top end of the market . It added that the chronic lack of supply of homes would continue to keep prices from falling further . Separate data from the Mortgage Advice Bureau showed that fewer homebuyers applied for mortgages in July than in June , as nervous buyers held off making major investments in the wake of the Brexit referendum . The number of purchase applications fell 5.9pc compared with June , representing a sharp turnaround for a market which had been growing strongly . The number of homes for sale fell to a record low last month as sellers decided against raising `` for sale signs '' amid fears that house price growth is slowing , or even going into reverse in expensive areas such as central London . On the commercial side of the property market , companies are increasingly looking to short-term office contracts as a way of riding out the uncertainty in the UK 's economy , according to providers . Regus , which is the world 's largest provider of flexible office space , said inquiries had risen 10pc month-onmonth in July , which chief executive Richard Morris attributed to companies being more cautious . By taking workspace as they need it , companies can scale their operations up or down as the economic conditions dictate . Traditional office space tends to have a minimum lease of five years , making it more difficult to pull out of contracts .
Slowing economy after Brexit could force Bank to raise interest rates , warns Carney
INTEREST rates may have to rise in the face of a slowing economy if Britain votes to leave the EU , according to the Governor of the Bank of England . Mark Carney warned that policymakers would have limited space to stimulate the economy after a Brexit vote because a sharp slowdown in growth could be accompanied by a spike in inflation . Mr Carney also said that mortgage costs for homeowners could rise even if the Bank cut rates to boost demand . Sterling climbed almost 1pc against the dollar to $ 1.46 yesterday after polls and betting markets showed a clear lead for an EU Remain vote . Mr Carney said policymakers ' responses to a Brexit vote would depend on the strength of `` countervailing forces '' on the economy . While a Brexit vote `` on balance '' would `` reduce '' the Bank 's current expectation that rates will rise , Mr Carney warned that `` in this case '' , a drop in the pound after Brexit might do `` too much of the work '' in stimulating the economy by making UK exports more competitive . This , in combination with a potential shock to supply , `` might reduce the likelihood or degree of stimulus that would be appropriate , '' he said . `` It is not as simple as : the economy slows , therefore rates get cut . '' It came as George Osborne suffered a double blow yesterday after official figures showed public borrowing , at £7.2bn in April was higher than expected , while the previous year 's deficit was also larger than first thought . The Office for National Statistics also revised up total borrowing in the 2015-16 financial year to £76bn - £2bn higher than previously estimated and above the £72.2bn projected by the Office for Budget Responsibility in March .
May to use EU-Canada pact as template for trade deal
THERESA MAY will pledge to use a trade deal already agreed by the European Union and Canada as a basis for a new bilateral arrangement after Brexit . The Prime Minister will make the pledge when she flies to Canada and the US on a three-day visit from today . She has used the promise of `` global Britain '' making its own tariff-free trade deals to sell the benefits of Brexit to voters . Saying that an existing EU trade deal will form the template for Britain 's post-Brexit arrangements will sound alarm bells with some Leave campaigners , who argue that `` copy and paste '' trade deals go against one of the major reasons for leaving the EU . Ministers have also said they want the EU 's trade deal with Japan - which is yet to be completed - to form the basis of Britain 's post-Brexit trade deal with Asia 's economic powerhouse . In talks with Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau , Mrs May will make it clear that she wants the UK to agree a deal with Canada as soon as possible . It would be based on the EU/Canada deal that took seven years to negotiate and formally takes effect from Thursday this week . The deal - known as CETA - eliminates 98 per cent of all Canadian tariffs between the EU and Canada . Mrs May will also say that Britain will act `` as champions for free trade that delivers for all parts of society '' .
EU regulator backtracks on drug industry Brexit warning
THE European Union 's drugs regulator has admitted Brexit guidance issued last week that experts warned could cost the UK pharma sector hundreds of millions of pounds to implement was only a `` worst case scenario '' . The European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) - one of two prized EU regulatory bodies currently based in the UK that is expected to move to the Continent - issued a paper last week detailing how firms should prepare for Brexit . In it the regulator advised UK-based pharma companies to move hundreds of roles and functions to an EU member state ahead of Brexit in order to maintain their existing rights to sell medicines in the common market . The paper also warned that the UK faced a sharp hike in regulation and stringent checks on medicine exports from March 30 , 2019 . Trade body the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry ( ABPI ) , which lobbies for the 60,000-strong sector , criticised the EMA for only outlining one scenario , `` the hardest of hard Brexits '' . It warned the guidance posed a risk to UK pharma jobs and public health , and would cost `` hundreds of millions of pounds '' to take up . The EMA has subsequently clarified that the paper was preparation for a `` worst case scenario '' where no early deal for the pharma sector is struck . The ABPI warned last week the paper highlighted the `` critical importance '' of politicians , regulators and companies working to strike an early compromise deal . Dr Virginia Acha , executive director of research , medical and innovation at ABPI , said : `` [ Before Brexit negotiations have even begun ] It seems premature to advise companies to prepare only for an outcome where the UK is isolated from the European system . ''
Banks will need transition deal on Brexit to avoid sudden fall over cliff edge , lobby group warns
LONDON and Brussels have been urged to strike a Brexit transition deal by one of Europe 's top financial lobby groups amid concerns that banks will be unprepared for the UK 's secession . The two-year deadline for Britain to negotiate terms for EU departure is too soon for banks , investors and regulators to prepare for the new rules that will come into force after Brexit , the Association for Financial Markets in Europe ( AFME ) warned . Just a week after Theresa May triggered Article 50 , the influential group has called on politicians in Britain and the EU to quickly agree on an extra transition period to ensure financial markets are not plunged into turmoil . `` Affected market participants and supervisors will clearly need more time to prepare effectively for Brexit than the two years provided for by the Article 50 process , '' AFME said . `` Overall it can be argued that banks will require a three-year implementation period following the completion of the Article 50-exit negotiations . '' The 40-page AFME report advised : `` It will be vital to give an early indication that a transitional arrangement will be agreed upon as part of the exit negotiations . '' The fate of the City of London will be central to Brexit talks . International banks such as Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan use London as their base for European operations and have already warned that they will have to shift jobs to one of the 27 remaining EU member states to protect their operations . HSBC , Europe 's biggest bank , has said it could move up to 1,000 jobs to France . Brexit `` is likely to be particularly challenging in wholesale banking , given the high concentration of Europe 's market capacity in the UK and the high share of cross-border business currently conducted from a UK base , '' AFME cautioned . Setting up new businesses in the EU , obtaining licensing , offices and new staff , and installing technology would all take longer than two years , it said . The City 's biggest fear is of a `` cliff edge '' effect caused by an abrupt end to existing rules and legal arrangements . `` The main risk is that after Brexit , a bank which had signed a contract may no longer have the required approvals to lawfully perform the services it had committed to , or could no longer access the necessary market infrastructure , '' AFME cautioned . The lobby group argued that a transition deal should include `` a bridging period '' until the new trade relationship is ratified and `` an adaptation period '' after that , which would enable phased adjustment to the new trade relationship '' . 3 years The extra time , on top of the two-year deadline under Article 50 , that banks could need to make the change
Tory MPs walk out as report criticises Brexit 'good deal or no deal '
TORY MPs have savaged a controversial report which criticised Theresa May 's Brexit plan , describing it as `` rushed , skewed and partisan '' . Conservative members of the Brexit select committee last week walked out after being presented with a report which criticised the Prime Minister 's claim that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' . The report , published today , warns that Mrs May 's claim is `` unsubstantiated '' and urges the Government to provide more clarity . The House of Commons ' Exiting the EU Committee called on the Government to conduct and publish an assessment of the consequences of leaving the EU without agreement on future trade relations . It said that , in these circumstances , Parliament must be given a vote on whether to accept the Prime Minister 's decision to leave without a deal at the end of the two-year Brexit negotiation process . The findings prompted a furious response from Eurosceptic members of the committee , with five voting against it and two abstaining . Dominic Raab , a Tory MP , said : `` The report was rushed , skewed and partisan . After two reports that had strong support , it 's regrettable that this one split the committee . `` That undermines its credibility and influence , but I hope and expect the committee will learn the right lessons , as we move forward . '' The MPs are particularly angry with Hilary Benn , the Labour MP and chairman of the committee , and have accused him of failing to consult them properly . John Whittingdale , another Eurosceptic Tory MP , said that the report was `` unduly negative '' . The committee last month heard David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , admit that no assessment had been made of the cost of leaving the EU without a trade deal and falling back on World Trade Organisation tariffs . `` Without an economic assessment of 'no deal ' having been done and without evidence that steps are being taken to mitigate what would be the damaging effect of such an outcome , the Government 's assertion that 'no deal is better than a bad deal ' , is unsubstantiated , '' the report said . It said parliament and the public have a `` right to the maximum possible information '' about the impact of failing to secure a deal , and the Government should conduct `` a thorough assessment of the economic , legal and other implications '' of all options under consideration . The committee challenged Mrs May 's insistence that she will offer only a `` take it or leave it '' vote to Parliament on any deal she achieves , stating it was `` essential '' that MPs also get a vote `` in the event that there is no deal '' . Mr Benn said : `` Leaving the EU without a future trade deal and in doing so defaulting to World Trade Organisation rules is no less an important decision for the UK 's economic future than the terms of any future Free Trade Agreement between the UK and the EU . `` It is therefore essential that such a step is not taken without Parliament having a vote on the matter . ''
Brexit 'bigger than the Union ' ; Two-thirds of public see leaving the EU as more important than Scottish independence , poll finds May attacks SNP 'muddle on muddle '
BREXIT is more important to voters than keeping the United Kingdom together , a poll for The Daily Telegraph has revealed . Almost two thirds of people agreed that Britain 's EU departure mattered more than stopping the UK 's break-up , while just 27 per cent disagreed . Furthermore , a majority of respondents said they would still vote for Brexit even if they knew it could trigger Scotland 's independence . The results indicate that UK voters agree with Theresa May that no independence referendum should be held until Brexit is complete . It also suggests there is no `` buyer 's remorse '' for pulling Britain out of the EU despite a dramatic week in which the UK 's future has been called into question . Theresa May yesterday pledged to fight `` heart and soul '' to keep the `` precious , precious Union '' together after the SNP demanded a second referendum.The Prime Minister has rejected a demand from Nicola Sturgeon , Scotland 's First Minister , for a vote before spring 2019 , when Britain is likely to leave the EU . Senior SNP figures yesterday repeatedly refused to rule out holding an `` advisory '' independence referendum - one which would not be legally binding but could build pressure on Westminster . However , it is thought more likely the party will pursue an intense campaign of marches , petitions and mass protests to whip up public opinion in favour of another referendum . An ORB poll of 2,000 British voters conducted on Wednesday and Thursday gives an insight into how the week 's events have affected their views . Asked whether they would still back Brexit `` even if I knew it could lead to the break-up of the UK '' , 51 per cent of voters agreed and 38 per cent disagreed . The rest said they did not know . There was also support for Mrs May 's stance that a Scottish independence referendum should not be held before spring 2019 . Almost 60 per cent thought that preparing for a referendum would undermine negotiations for Brexit , while just 22 per cent disagreed . Most UK voters also do not want Scotland to become independent . When asked if Brexit was more important than the potential break-up of the UK , a majority of voters in every British region except Scotland said yes . Mrs May yesterday dismissed Ms Sturgeon 's plans for a new independence referendum as `` muddle on muddle '' as she rejected the `` divisive , obsessive '' nationalism of the SNP . The Prime Minister in her speech to the Conservative Spring Forum in Cardiff defended the `` precious , precious Union '' and said she wanted the country to become more , not less , united . Mrs May told delegates : `` Our Party believes heart and soul in our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . The precious bond between four nations : England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . But that union is more than just a constitutional artefact . It is a union between all of our citizens , whoever we are and wherever we 're from . '' Ms Sturgeon said her `` intention '' was to get the legal powers from the Prime Minister to stage another vote and she would not outline possible Plan Bs to the Scottish people `` at this stage '' .
Heseltine sacked for rebellion over Brexit ; Conservative peer ousted as government adviser after backing Article 50 amendment in Lords
THE former Cabinet minister Lord Heseltine was sacked as a government adviser last night for rebelling over Brexit by backing an amendment to the Article 50 Bill in the Lords . The Conservative peer lost his position after the Government suffered a second parliamentary defeat in the space of a week , with peers demanding MPs be given a `` meaningful vote '' on the final Brexit deal before Britain 's withdrawal from the EU . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , last night accused peers of trying to `` frustrate '' the process of triggering Brexit and insisted the Government would overturn the latest amendment . Lord Heseltine said after his dismissal : `` This is entirely the right of the Prime Minister and I 'm sorry that the expertise which I have put at the Government 's disposal over the last six years has now come to an end . `` However , in the last resort , I believe , as I said in the House of Lords , the future of this country is inextricably interwoven with our European friends . It 's the duty of Parliament to assert its sovereignty in determining the legacy we leave to new generations of young people . '' His departure comes after Lord Tebbit , who served alongside Lord Heseltine in Margaret Thatcher 's Cabinet , told the Telegraph last week that his former colleague should be `` kicked out of the party he clearly loathes '' for trying to `` wreck the Brexit Bill '' . Theresa May is determined to throw out the amendment when the Bill returns to the Commons for its final reading next week . She believes her hand would be significantly weakened when she begins Brexit negotiations with the EU if Parliament had the power to stop her leaving without a deal . Mrs May 's existing position is that no deal is better than a bad deal , meaning she will take Britain out of the EU even if MPs reject the deal offered . Up to 20 Conservative MPs could vote in favour of the amendment , with rebels encouraging others to abstain . They include Anna Soubry , the former business minister , who believes a `` significant '' number of Tories might defy the whip . The Government has a `` Brexit majority '' of around 30 MPs , double its normal working majority , because it can count on the support of a number of MPs from other parties . The danger for Mrs May is that the Lords vote , in which the amendment was passed by 366 votes to 268 , could encourage Conservative MPs representing pro-Remain constituencies to abstain . Thirteen Tory peers voted against the Government as a new record was set for the number of peers taking part in a vote , at 634 . Downing Street insisted the vote would not derail the timetable for triggering Article 50 by the end of this month . It came after a vote last week in which the Lords added another amendment that would guarantee the rights of EU citizens living in the UK , regardless of whether British citizens living in the EU were given similar guarantees . Mr Davis said it was `` disappointing '' that the Lords had made further changes to the Bill . He said : `` It is clear some in the Lords would seek to frustrate that process , and it is the Government 's intention to ensure that does not happen . '' Ms Soubry said : `` I 'm hoping a significant number of colleagues who may not be able to vote against their Government would consider abstaining , and recognise that their lordships have considered the Bill carefully . `` What do these hard Brexiteers fear ? They wanted to restore parliamentary sovereignty , but suddenly they seem terrified of Parliament having a say , never mind sovereignty . ''
Brexit fades to insignificance set against other economic challenges
Investment , investment and investment . If there is one thing Phillip Hammond , the Chancellor , needs to focus on like a laser in next month 's Budget , it is this long standing deficiency in the UK economy . In our obsession with Brexit - what form it might take , whether it will be good or bad for the economy , or indeed the anxiety over whether it will happen at all in any meaningful sense - we 've tended to shove all other concerns to one side . The business of leaving the European Union threatens to become so all consuming that it eclipses everything else . Citizens can be divided into two extremes . For avid Brexiteers , there is the almost delusional belief that the mere act of exiting the EU automatically transforms economic prospects for the better ; the fact that the economy has so far defied warnings of Brexit invoked doom is taken as evidence that things can be even more glorious once formally freed from the dead hand of the Brussels machine . At the other extreme lie those who cling almost religiously to the view that because of the potential damage to trade with Europe , Brexit is almost bound to be harmful to the economy in the long run . For them , today 's consumption-led growth is just a case of pain delayed , bought largely on the `` never never '' of spending beyond our means . They are equally impervious to counter argument . Despite the futility of these predictions - it will be a long time before we know one way or the other , and in any case , the ultimate outcome depends crucially on how policy responds to Brexit - they have come to dominate economic debate to the exclusion of virtually all else . Brexit spells either disaster or sunlit uplands , take your pick ; fundamentally , the debate has n't changed since the heat of the campaign . It has fallen to the Institute for Fiscal Studies 's annual `` Green Budget '' - which attempts to assess the nation 's tax and spend choices - to provide its now customary , Eeyore-like reality check . Brexit or no Brexit , there remains a daunting array of economic challenges for the Government to address . These non-Brexit issues can be divided into three broad categories . First , there is the continued , harrowing legacy of the financial crisis . Despite real terms cuts in public spending of 10 per cent since 2009-10 - the longest and biggest fall in public spending on record - Britain is still running one of the largest Budget deficits in the world . What 's more , this shortfall seems substantially impervious to an increasing tax burden , expected shortly to rise above 37pc of national income for the first time since 1986-87 . As a percentage of national income , the national debt is also at its highest level since the mid-1960s , and is again one of the highest debt burdens in the industrialised world . In any case , by the IFS 's estimation , it will require a further £34bn of fiscal consolidation on top of that already planned to eradicate the deficit by the unspecific target date of some time during the next parliament . What then are the chances of the Government achieving this apparently ever receding goal ? Given the record so far , pretty much zero . The second challenge revolves around the costs of an ageing population . Since the financial crisis , the government has been relatively effective in keeping the lid on health spending , which in real terms is rising at its slowest rate since comparable records began in the mid-1950s . Because of cuts in other public services , however , it is continuing to rise quite sharply as a proportion of total spending . Unfortunately , this does n't much mitigate the evident sense of crisis in a health service stretched to breaking point . The unavoidable implication of the now intense demographic pressures on public spending is that the tax burden will rise further , just the opposite of what is required to ensure a competitive , post-Brexit economy . . The third concern revolves around still very depressed levels of productivity growth and business investment . Many of the pressures on the public finances outlined above could be relieved or even got rid of altogether by a return to pre-crisis levels of productivity growth , but there is no such miracle in the making , or if there is , it is very well hidden . Ministers are not entirely tin-eared . Even as it cuts back on day-to-day , current spending , the Government is increasing the share of the cake that goes to capital projects . I 'd add a hat tip to Sajid Javid 's proposals , outlined in a White Paper yesterday , to revive Britain 's shamefully poor levels of housebuilding . I doubt they are enough , but almost anything that confronts this key structural deficiency in the UK economy deserves some applause . Yet the big difference is going to be made in business investment , and on this front there is as yet little reason for optimism . To the contrary , Brexit has added a further level of uncertainty . Since the referendum , a number of big , high profile investment projects have admittedly been announced , both by overseas companies and British ones . Overall investment never the less remains subdued , both relative to precrisis levels and overseas competitors . As a country , we are still investing disgracefully little in our long term future , but continuing to spend as if there were no tomorrow . This has to change . The difficulty faced by the Chancellor as he squares up to these myriad economic challenges is that in order to succeed and attract the business investment needed to prosper in post-Brexit form , the UK will need to become one of the most business friendly economies on the planet . This necessarily requires sharp cuts in business taxation and regulation . At the same time , however , the Chancellor may need to increase most forms of personal taxation to meet the challenges of an ageing population . Politically , this is going to be an extraordinarily difficult trick to pull off . Theresa May has thankfully retreated somewhat from the antibusiness , anti-globalisation rhetoric of her early months as Prime Minister . But for a Government intend on doing something for the `` just about managing '' , axing business taxation at the same time as massaging it up for the humble citizen is not going to look good , not good at all . 'The tax burden is about to rise further , just the opposite of what is needed to ensure a competitive post-Brexit economy '
Corbyn 's Brexit silence angers Labour MPs
FURIOUS Labour MPs have threatened to rebel against Jeremy Corbyn amid claims he is refusing to speak up in favour of a soft Brexit because he stands to gain politically from Theresa May 's failure . The Labour leader reportedly blocked his spokesman from talking to the media after the Prime Minister failed to win agreement in Brussels to move on to trade talks . Now MPs are demanding Mr Corbyn comes out in support of staying in the customs union and have warned they will rebel against the party 's position in a Commons vote on the matter early next year if he refuses . The party is split on the issue , with the shadow Brexit secretary keeping customs union membership on the table , the shadow trade secretary warning it would be a `` disaster '' and the shadow chancellor ruling out single market membership after transition while the deputy leader has suggested Labour should back it . So far , Mr Corbyn has refused to commit to trying to remain in the customs union after the transitional period is over , with a spokesman only suggesting options should n't be swept off the table . One senior remain-backer told The Daily Telegraph that Mr Corbyn and John McDonnell , his shadow chancellor , `` do n't care '' about Brexit . They said : `` McDonnell and Corbyn are not natural pro-Europeans , they do n't care . They 're only interested in the politics of Brexit and they see everything through the prism of how do we get into No 10 . '' Labour sources believe Mr Corbyn and Mr McDonnell want a hard Brexit because it helps feed their anti-capitalist narrative .
High-end car makers seek assurance over Brexit terms
BRITAIN 'S global leadership with advanced technologies used in highperformance cars could be threatened unless it achieves a favourable Brexit deal , the industry has warned . The UK heads the world in low-volume , high-value car manufacturing , and a study by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders ( SMMT ) yesterday revealed that the sector - which includes sports cars such as Aston Martins , McLarens and TVRs , specialist vehicles such as electric taxis and luxurious bespoke vehicles such as Rolls-Royces - produced 32,000 vehicles last year . This is up 25pc on four years ago , and generated a turnover of £3.6bn in 2016 . According to the SMMT , on current trends , output may surge 60pc by 2020 , hitting an annual rate of 52,000 . However , the SMMT warned that , outside of the EU , British manufacturers developing new technologies might be hampered if they can not influence European regulations . However , industry chiefs presenting the report yesterday described the industry 's `` buccaneering '' spirit in the face of Brexit . Andy Palmer , chief executive of Aston Martin , said : `` There 's some good news in Brexit for our part of the industry . The weak pound means there 's pricing advantages , tariffs work both ways and that could shut out competitors such as Ferrari . '' He added that he expects a deal between Britain and the EU because of the UK 's reputation as the `` Treasure Island '' of Europe for the car industry , largely because of its appetite for cars . His thought were echoes by executives from McLaren , Lotus and TVR . `` We work in the luxury goods market , so if prices rise in the event of tariffs , well it 's not desirable but it is by no means the end of the world , '' said TVR chairman Les Edgar .
Scotland Scottish financial services look to move jobs to EU
SCOTLAND 's financial services companies are drawing up contingency plans to deal with the worst possible outcome of Brexit that could involve total restructuring of their operations , the industry body has warned MSPs . Scottish Financial Enterprise ( SFE ) said the two-year negotiating period to hammer out Brexit was `` unlikely '' to be long enough for the UK to agree its future trading relationship with the EU or to provide the `` lead time '' necessary for firms to reorganise . The trade body , which represents banks including the Royal Bank of Scotland and HSBC as well as companies such as Aberdeen Asset Management , Standard Life Investment and JP Morgan , said its members `` want to continue to service their existing EU customers and clients following Brexit , with as little disruption as possible '' . Although the SFE did not outline specific proposals , its intervention raises the prospect of separate EU bases for firms , with jobs being moved from Scotland to Europe . PA Earlier this month it emerged that RBS is in talks with the Dutch central bank to use the Netherlands as its EU trading base after Brexit . It plans to increase the number of staff at its Amsterdam unit from a `` handful '' to 150 . Scotland is home to the second largest financial services centre after London , with the industry north of the border employing 86,000 directly as well as supporting another 55,000 jobs . It is worth £8.6 billion to the Scottish economy . BARLOW/ JANE The industry 's main concern is Brexit ending the `` passporting '' arrangement which allows them to provide services throughout the EU as long as they are operating from a UK base . SFE 's submission said that companies `` want to keep as much of their activities in the UK as possible '' but they also want to continue servicing their EU-based clients . Regulators at the Prudential Regulation Authority ( PRA ) contacted firms in April this year asking for details of their contingency plans for Brexit `` covering a range of potential scenarios , including the most adverse potential outcomes '' . The submission said : `` Accordingly , financial services companies are putting in place contingency plans and structuring solutions on the assumption that various scenarios could apply . '' The SFE called for a transitional deal with the EU to ensure `` continuity for businesses and customers '' at the point of Brexit , providing a `` bridging period '' until a new trade deal could be agreed . A further `` adaptation period '' would be needed to allow firms to work out the implications . The SFE also warned that converting 12,000 European regulations and 7,900 statutory instruments into British law would be the `` biggest legislative challenge the UK has ever faced , both in its scale and complexity '' . It added : `` This challenge is compounded by the very tight timescale in which to deliver it . '' Derek Mackay , the SNP 's Finance Minister , said : `` This submission further highlights the danger posed by the UK Government 's extreme Brexit plans , which threaten jobs , investment and living standards . ''
Labour in chaos after Starmer says UK could stay in customs union after Brexit
LABOUR 'S Brexit plans descended into chaos yesterday after Sir Keir Starmer suggested the UK should remain in the customs union and try to negotiate a new form of single market membership outside of the European Union . The shadow Exiting the EU secretary said Britain will leave the EU as another referendum is `` not viable '' , but the option of retaining UK membership of the customs union `` should be left on the table '' . Both Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , and John McDonnell , his shadow chancellor , have insisted the party is formally committed to taking Britain out of the single market and the customs union . Britain will only be able to sign trade deals with other countries outside the EU if it also leaves the customs union . Sir Keir 's comments highlight the split at the heart of Labour over Brexit between Mr Corbyn , who is considered more Eurosceptic , and his predominantly pro-European shadow cabinet . The divisions over the issue are such that the policy was not set out fully in Labour 's election manifesto , which instead referred generally to `` retaining the benefits of the single market '' . During an interview on BBC 1 's Andrew Marr Show , Sir Keir said Theresa May had `` alienated our allies in Europe '' with her Brexit approach . He also said Britain could not stay in the single market in `` an unreformed , unchanged way '' . He said : `` You can only be a full member of the single market if you are an EU member and therefore it is obvious that we are looking for something else . `` The question is do we leave options on the table , and I 've said repeatedly - yes , let 's leave options on the table . '' Sir Keir acknowledged freedom of movement for people would end after Brexit but said membership of the customs unions should `` stay on the table '' . PA Asked whether Britain could stay inside the customs union , he said : `` Yes . '' He added : `` I think the Prime Minister has got us into a complete mess . She 's got no mandate here and she 's got no authority abroad and the negotiation starts tomorrow . `` Things have to change . Her approach so far has alienated our allies in Europe , it 's weakened our position with the EU and it 's actually got us into the worst possible starting position . '' Later , pressed over the party 's stance on Britain leaving the EU , John Mc-Donnell , the shadow chancellor , told Sky News yesterday : `` Once you leave the EU , formally you are outside the single market . But what we are trying to get is tariff-free access to the single market . `` I do n't care how we get it in terms of the structure as long as we get access to the single market tariff free and that means also we are not constrained by the existing rules of the single market and that 's obviously freedom of movement . `` The structures become immaterial to achieve the objectives . '' He has previously said the issue of single market will not be `` on the table '' in Brexit negotiations , adding that trying to retain membership would mean failing to respect the result of the EU referendum . Labour has struggled to nail down its position on whether Britain can stay within the single market , which could form a key part of the Brexit negotiations due to start today . Last week Barry Gardiner , the shadow trade secretary , also appeared to suggest the UK should try to negotiate a new form of single market membership .
Scotland Younger generation 'will reverse Brexit ' ; Senior figure blames Tory 'catfight ' for decision to leave and predicts UK will one day return to bloc
BRITAIN 's decision to leave the European Union was the result of a `` catfight in the Conservative party that got out of hand '' , a senior Brexit negotiator has claimed , as he predicted the next generation of Britons would take the UK back into the bloc . `` There will be a young man or woman who will try again , who will lead Britain again into the European family ... and a young generation that will see Brexit for what it really is , '' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's Brexit negotiator , said . He went on to claim that Brexit was caused by a `` catfight in the Conservative party that got out of hand - a loss of time , a waste of energy and a stupidity '' . His intervention came as the EU Parliament , sitting in Strasbourg , voted overwhelmingly in favour of the suggested `` red lines '' for the Brexit talks , as set out by senior figures in Brussels . The resolution demands that EU and UK citizens receive `` reciprocal treatment '' , that the final deal should not be a `` trade-off `` between trade and security , and that the UK pay costs linked to its withdrawal , the so-called divorce bill . It also says that the European Banking Authority and European Medicines Agency should be moved out of their London offices and transferred to an EU member state . The resolution was passed by 516 votes to 133 , with 50 abstentions , putting it well beyond the two-thirds majority needed . MEPs will get a final say on the terms of any deal brokered between the UK and Brussels , as will the 27 individual member parliaments . In the debate prior to the resolution 's adoption by the parliament , Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader and the MEP for South East England , accused EU leaders of behaving like `` the Mafia '' and holding Britain `` hostage '' with their divorce bill . `` You have been vindictive and nasty . You 're behaving like the Mafia , like we 're a hostage , '' Mr Farage said , adding : `` We 're not - we 're free to go . '' `` It 's exactly what I expected - they [ the EU ] see that £52billion divorce bill as simply settling the balance ... but they 're holding us to ransom . '' Jean Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , has suggested Britain pay the bloc around £50billion in liabilities from Brexit . But Mr Farage complained that `` we will have put in £30billion net by the time we leave , and now you want another 50 ... it just does n't work . '' When Mr Farage was later reprimanded by Antonio Tajani , the EU parliament 's current president and an Italian , for his Mafia jibe he amended his comparison to `` gangsters '' . He later admitted in an interview outside the parliament that he was `` not optimistic '' about the Brexit talks . Other senior MEPs showed few signs of backing down on their demands , with one parliamentary group leader warning that `` cherry-picking will not happen '' in the negotiations . `` A state outside the European Union will not have better conditions than a state inside the European Union , '' said Manfred Weber , the German leader of the centre-Right European People 's Party group in the parliament . Mr Verhofstadt refused to name a figure when asked about divorce talks at a post-debate press conference , insisting that `` we do n't start with the figure , we start with the principles '' . `` And if we can agree with the British Government on the principles ... then you apply the principles and you have a figure , '' the Belgian MEP added . `` We want to have a clear signal that the European Union is united , '' said Mr Weber . `` London must understand that no splitting up of the EU position is possible . '' 'You 've been vindictive and nasty , behaving like the Mafia , like we 're a hostage . We 're not - we 're free to go '
Sterling set to surge as fears over Brexit begin to fade ; Bank of America predicts rally in pound as markets focus on underlying strength of UK economy ; Bank of America warns EU vulnerable after 'hard Brexit '
BANK OF AMERICA has advised clients to prepare for a major rebound in sterling as markets become inured to each breathless twist in the Brexit saga and focus instead on the underlying resilience of the UK economy . The bank 's currency team said there may be one last leg down for the pound after Article 50 is triggered in March , probably hitting a three-decade low of $ 1.15 against the dollar before charging back up in V-shaped recovery later this year . `` The pound looks cheap . We think the start of the countdown to Brexit may prove to be the low and the opportunity to enter sterling long ( positions ) , '' said strategists Athanasios Vamvakidis and Kamal Sharma . `` We have no doubt that many political hurdles lay ahead for the pound in the years ahead , but we doubt that the markets will be in a perpetual state of panic over every Brexit-related headline . '' Sterling is likely to climb back up towards its post-Brexit `` equilibrium level '' of $ 1.35 to the dollar , and could possibly reach $ 1.40 , provided common sense prevails and Britain secures a transition deal with the EU to avert a cliff-edge shock for bilateral trade . Bank of America said the markets have essentially priced in a `` hard Brexit '' already . The pound would normally be `` much stronger '' based on the differences in interest rates and two-year bond yields that tend to drive currency markets . The real effective exchange rate ( REER ) is almost 20pc below its longrun average and now matches the his-toric lows seen at the depth of the global financial crisis . Robust job growth and a firm housing market may ultimately force the Bank of England to tighten monetary policy . Manufacturing is holding up . Sterling is highly-geared to the global trade cycle and Bank of America argues that this is at last recovering . Views in the City are starkly divided on the future of sterling , just as they are on the larger issue of Britain 's economic destiny as a global trading nation . But the view from America and Asia is broadly more positive than the handwringing jeremiads of Europeans caught in a cycle of pessimism . Stephen Jen from Eurizon SLJ Capital , a Taiwanese adviser to sovereign wealth funds in Asia and the Middle East , said Britain is ahead of the curve in understanding shifts in the global economy . The current narrative over Brexit will be overtaken by events as Europe 's own woes become clearer and withdrawal from the dysfunctional bloc will ultimately be seen as a shrewd move . `` Britain has a fantastic culture and economy ... I think sterling will end up being the Swiss franc on steroids , '' he said . `` What is extraordinary is that Continued on Page 3 Continued from Page 1 Britain and America have seen the best growth rates since the global financial crisis , yet they are the ones going through a political revolution . What they have understood is globalisation is a tussle between the owners of labour , the owners of capital , and the owners of technology , and they are facing up to this first , '' he said . Deutsche Bank and UBS are at the other extreme , forecasting sterling at or near parity with the euro this year as negotiations turn tetchy and companies start to move operations abroad . Interestingly , Bank of America has a warning for the EU side if it pushes for an extremely hard bargain . As a matter of pure politics , it would be easier for the UK Government to walk away from a punitive deal and blame the debacle on European intransigence . Britain would suffer the hardest hit in strict trading terms . But nation states are institutionally resilient . The eurozone would suffer less on paper , but the bloc 's fragile monetary structure and half-formed polity leaves it acutely vulnerable to any stress . The asymmetry of pain is very hard to estimate .
May : My 12-point plan for Brexit ; Quitting single market and taking control of borders will make us stronger , says PM May 's promise to take Britain out of single market will be welcomed by Eurosceptics
THERESA MAY will today set out a 12-point plan for Brexit as she promises there will be no `` partial '' membership of the EU `` that leaves us half-in , halfout '' . Mrs May will make her most significant speech since becoming Prime Minister in July and confirm that Britain will leave the single market and customs union after Brexit . In remarks that will delight Conservative Eurosceptics , she will pledge that Britain outside the European Union will be a `` great , global trading nation '' that is `` respected around the world and strong , confident and united at home '' . Mrs May will make regaining control of Britain 's borders one of the central themes of her Brexit strategy and will also say that the rights of UK expats will be protected . She will make clear for the first time that Britain will not seek a watereddown version of Brexit , something Remain campaigners are still pushing for . The Prime Minister will say Britain is quitting the single market and , although she will be less explicit on the issue of the customs union , her remarks will make clear that after Brexit the UK will no longer be a member . Her remarks will be seen as a direct rebuke to European leaders who have repeatedly claimed that Britain will have to compromise on freedom of movement if it wants membership of the single market or customs union . Donald Trump , the US presidentelect , said this week that Britain and America will get a new trade deal `` done quickly and done properly '' . Mr Trump also dismissed Nato as `` obsolete '' and said he believed the EU will break up in the wake of the Brexit vote . In comments that risk angering the incoming US president , Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , yesterday responded by saying that `` we Europeans have our fate in our own hands '' . The Prime Minister , in her speech at Lancaster House in London today , will say : `` We seek a new and equal partnership - between an independent , selfgoverning , global Britain and our friends and allies in the EU . `` Not partial membership of the European Union , associate membership of the European Union , or anything that leaves us half-in , half-out . We do not seek to adopt a model already enjoyed by other countries . We do not seek to hold on to bits of membership as we leave . `` The United Kingdom is leaving the European Union . My job is to get the right deal for Britain as we do . '' Mrs May 's speech will directly counter claims that she has no plan for Brexit . The four principles guiding the negotiation with Brussels will be `` certainty and clarity '' , `` a stronger Britain '' , `` a fairer Britain '' and `` a truly Global Britain '' , she will say . The Prime Minister will say that the Government has `` 12 objectives that amount to one big goal : a new , positive and constructive partnership between Britain and the European Union '' . As well as leaving the single market and customs union , Mrs May 's 12 objectives are understood to include gaining control of Britain 's borders , taking the UK out of the jurisdiction of the European courts , preserving the Union , maintaining workers ' rights and signing major free trade deals . `` And as we negotiate that partnership , we will be driven by some simple principles : we will provide as much certainty and clarity as we can at every stage , '' Mrs May will add . `` And we will take this opportunity to make Britain stronger , to make Britain fairer , and to build a more global Britain too . '' She will concede that the `` road ahead will be uncertain at times '' , but said the British people `` voted to shape a brighter future for our country . They voted to leave the European Union and embrace the world . `` And they did so with their eyes open : accepting that the road ahead will be uncertain at times , but believing that it leads towards a brighter future for their children - and their grandchildren too . `` And it is the job of this Government to deliver it . That means more than negotiating our new relationship with the EU . It means taking the opportunity of this great moment of national change to step back and ask ourselves what kind of country we want to be . '' She has pledged to trigger Article 50 , which begins formal Brexit negotiations , by the end of March . Tory Eurosceptics and senior Leave campaigners will welcome Mrs May 's commitment that Britain will quit the single market . With regard to the customs union , Mrs May will suggest that there could be scope for negotiating access for some sectors - such as the automotive industry - after Brexit . However , it will be clear from her words that Britain is leaving the customs union . Although she will not set out her plans for Britain 's post-Brexit immigration system , it is understood that she favours a work permit system , meaning EU migrants will only be able to come to the UK to live or work if they have a firm job offer . Mrs May will add : `` I want us to be a truly global Britain - the best friend and neighbour to our European partners , but a country that reaches beyond the borders of Europe too . A country that gets out into the world to build relationships with old friends and new allies alike . '' Yesterday , the IMF said that the UK economy grew fastest among all advanced economies in 2016 despite the Brexit vote and admitted that its forecasts before the referendum had been too pessimistic . It estimated that Britain 's economy grew by 2 per cent last year and predicted that it will now grow by 1.5 per cent - a major upgrade from its last forecast of 1.1 per cent made in October . ' [ I want us to be ] a country that gets out into the world to build relationships with old friends and new allies '
Metro Bank on brink of maiden profit as it dismisses Brexit fears
METRO Bank has shrugged off the Brexit vote to win more customers and boost lending , taking it to the cusp of reporting its first profit . Craig Donaldson , chief executive of the challenger bank , said it had so far felt no impact from the vote to leave the European Union . In the three months to the end of September , deposits jumped 66pc to £7.3bn compared with a year earlier and lending climbed 73pc to £5.2bn . That helped Metro , which opens its 44th branch this week , narrow its statutory quarterly net losses to £416,000 , from £10.7m in 2015 , and helped it swing to its first underlying pre-tax profit of £567,000 , which strips out certain expenses , including the cost of its stock market float in March . Mr Donaldson said Metro was on course to post a statutory profit during the final quarter of 2016 and a maiden annual profit next year , with both retail and business customers seemingly unfazed by Brexit . The bank enjoyed a record 68,000 increase in customer accounts to 848,000 in the previous quarter . `` In the early part of next year we 'll go through a million , which I think is a huge validation of what we 're doing , '' he said . `` Genuinely we 've seen no Brexit impact , if anything we 're winning more customers and we 're growing stronger . Business customers are genuinely just getting on with building their businesses . `` The only place where we 're seeing any impact is in house purchases over £3m in central London and I do n't think that 's got anything to do with Brexit , I think that 's much more to do with the stamp duty changes that came in in April . '' Quarterly revenues surged 78pc to £53.4m , while Metro 's net interest margin , the gap between interest paid on deposits and the loan interest it receives , edged up to 1.95pc from 1.93pc at the end of June . The lender was founded by American billionaire Vernon Hill six years ago to challenge the established high street banks such as Barclays and Lloyds . A review of the banking sector by the Competition and Markets Authority , which the challenger banks hoped would shake up the sector by making it easier for them to take market share , was branded a damp squib by many new entrants , including Metro , this year . `` It was a bit of a whitewash , I think that it 'll have added no value to the competitive landscape , '' Mr Donaldson said , adding that he would continue to lobby the Treasury and the Prudential Regulation Authority ease capital rules to make it easier for challengers to compete . Metro shares rose 1.4pc to £27.63 , valuing the lender at £2.2bn .
Scotland Corbyn rejects Sturgeon 's Brexit strategy ; Corbyn out of touch , says SNP leader
NICOLA STURGEON yesterday lashed out at Jeremy Corbyn after he rejected her plea to support staying in the single market , damaging her claim that there is a Commons majority for the plan . Speaking ahead of the publication today of a Scottish Government report on the economic impact of Brexit , the First Minister claimed there was a `` real opportunity '' to stay in the single market if Labour MPs supported the move . But moments later , the Labour leader at Westminster rejected her demand , saying he did not understand why she was focusing on the single market when Brexit meant leaving it . He made clear his disapproval of EU state aid restrictions , noting that the UK had a `` very different '' economy from small , non-EU countries such as Norway , which access the single market via membership of the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) . His rejection prompted Ms Sturgeon to accuse him of misleading people and being `` out of touch '' with the views of his own Labour supporters . His intervention has also undermined her report , as any single market blueprint would require Labour 's support . Ms Sturgeon had hoped this would relaunch her Brexit strategy after her ill-fated attempt last year at a second independence referendum . A study last week claimed her calls for single market membership had made `` little headway '' , with Scots opposed to freedom of movement and to adopting a different immigration system from the rest of the UK . It also showed waning support for independence , but Ms Sturgeon told The Andrew Marr Show on the BBC that she still intended to decide whether to call for a second independence referendum by the end of the year . She has previously said she would announce plans after the final shape of the Brexit deal was known this autumn but hoped the economic reality of Brexit would change people 's minds . Referring to today 's report , she said : `` I believe there 's a majority in the House of Commons for remaining in the single market if Labour gets its act together . '' In a direct challenge to Mr Corbyn , she said : `` Jeremy has to decide where he stands on all of this . I think most of his supporters will be deeply disappointed that he appears to be only slightly less in favour of a hard - and possibly the hardest possible - Brexit than the Tories are . '' But shortly afterwards , Mr Corbyn told ITV 's Peston on Sunday that he wanted a tariff-free trade deal with access to the single market . He added : `` I do n't understand why she would keep saying 'join the single market ' when leaving the EU means you leave the single market . '' That prompted Ms Sturgeon to lash out on Twitter , accusing Mr Corbyn of misleading people : `` Why does Corbyn insist on being so out of touch ? '' Today 's Scottish Government report examines three post-Brexit trade options : staying in the single market and customs union , a freetrade agreement , or reverting to World Trade Organisation rules . Arguing it was `` shameful '' the UK Government had not conducted similar analyses , Ms Sturgeon said all three would be damaging but staying in the single market would be least harmful . If she pressed on with an independence referendum , she hinted it could be held in the transition period that concluded in 2021 . John Lamont , a Scottish Tory MP , said : `` Nicola Sturgeon has no interest in securing a successful Brexit deal . All she cares about is a second referendum . '' Willie Rennie , Scottish Lib Dem leader , said : `` The last thing we need is the turmoil of independence . ''
Brexit plan gets airborne - then nosedives ; Analysis Either Mrs May is keeping the UK in line with Europe , or she 's selling NI down the river
AFTER 18 months of phoney war - of talking , positioning and negotiating behind the scenes - the rickety craft of Theresa May 's Brexit strategy briefly took flight yesterday , and then promptly nosedived back to earth . Within hours of Ireland 's state broadcaster reporting that the Prime Minister had agreed that the UK would ensure `` continued regulatory alignment '' between Northern Ireland and the EU , political gravity took over . If the game of leaking the compromise was to railroad Mrs May into signing off the deal at her lunch with Jean-Claude Juncker , it backfired spectacularly , exposing this most carefully worded of texts to more scrutiny than it could bear . Wrapped up in the language was a subtle compromise that officials had worked on for the best part of a month , and tried to be all things to all parties . The UK had not been forced to agree to Ireland 's initial demand for `` no regulatory divergence '' ; instead it was electing to use newfound freedoms after Brexit to maintain convergence . To Dublin the compromise gave clear reassurance that Northern Ireland would not diverge , obviating the need for a return to a hard border , while simultaneously giving Arlene Foster 's Democratic Unionists a promise that the `` alignment '' would only be in the sectors that were relevant to the Good Friday Agreement . It was at this moment that Brexit 's immutable logic took over , and inexorably over the course of the next few hours began to unravel the deal . Mrs Foster was emphatic that Northern Ireland must not be treated differently from any other part of the United Kingdom . The North , she said , could not become a regulatory exclave of the Republic , or the EU itself . But how then to square her demand for equality , with the idea that Northern Ireland was apparently being granted a soft Brexit that seemed to make it part of the EU 's single market and customs union in all but name ? Either Northern Ireland was being treated differently , which would imply an east-west border to monitor mainland Britain 's divergent trade policy after Brexit , or , contrary to everything we have been told by Mrs May , the UK was not diverging at all ? It could not be both . In trying to placate the DUP , Downing Street signalled that Mrs May was signing up to `` regulatory alignment '' for the whole of the UK but only in those areas that impacted the Irish border question , principally agriculture and electricity . But there lies the rub . If that is the case - and there are some 140 areas that have reportedly been identified as crucial for north-south cooperation in Ireland - how free , really , would the UK be to diverge with Liam Fox 's muchvaunted independent trade policy ? EU officials are privately very clear that the `` fudge '' on Ireland leaves little room for manoeuvre . The level of regulatory convergence required to avoid a hard border - and the east-west border that implies - is inescapable . So either Mrs May was signing up the UK to vast swathes of convergence with the EU , something Boris Johnson and free-trading Brexiteers have explicitly ruled out , or she was selling her DUP partners down the river with false promises . Clearly Mrs May hoped the reality of these conflicting positions could survive unnoticed at least until the EU had granted `` sufficient progress '' at the European Council in 10 days ' time , and she could claim a pre-Christmas victory at the end of a disastrous year . In the event , her gambit did not survive the afternoon . Such are the political horizons of a prime minister whose cabinet has not even held a substantive discussion on the shape of the UK 's future relationship with the EU . On today 's showing it is not difficult to see why .
Brexit progress only possible if Irish border issue is solved ; Brexit ; EU hands 10-day deadline to Prime Minister before it agrees to begin talks with the UK over a trade deal
THERESA MAY has 10 days to resolve the issue of the Irish border if she wants to make a Brexit breakthrough at a key summit next month , Donald Tusk warned yesterday . The Prime Minister met Donald Tusk , the President of the European Council , in Brussels as she signalled she is prepared to give ground on the Brexit divorce bill if the EU commits to trade talks . Mr Tusk said that a breakthrough at the European Council summit on Dec 14 is possible but will still be a `` huge challenge '' . He added that progress must be made `` on all issues , including on Ireland '' . British officials believe that the EU is likely to concede that `` sufficient progress '' has been made on citizens ' rights and the Brexit divorce bill , making the Irish border the biggest outstanding issue . Ireland yesterday threatened to block talks on the future relationship between the EU and the UK unless it was given `` credible answers and a credible road map '' to ensure there was no hard border . Simon Coveney , Ireland 's foreign minister , yesterday received assurances from Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , and Mr Tusk after meeting them in Brussels . Mr Coveney said : `` The truth is that if we see regulatory divergence between the two jurisdictions on the island of Ireland it is very hard to see in that scenario how you avoid hard border checks . `` I hope and expect that we can get that by December so that we can all move on . If we ca n't , then I think there is going to be a difficulty coming up . '' However , the Prime Minister has repeatedly made clear that the UK , including Northern Ireland , will leave the Single Market and the Customs Union after Brexit . She said yesterday : `` We [ the UK and the Republic ] have the same desire . We want to ensure the free movement of people and trade across the border can carry on as now . '' Tory Eurosceptics have warned the Prime Minister that she must not give any more ground . Jacob Rees-Mogg , a Eurosceptic MP , said : `` The EU can not expect the UK to continue to give into its absurd demands . The integrity of the United Kingdom is not up for negotiation . '' The issue is further complicated by the prospect of a snap election in Ireland which could derail Mrs May 's hopes of a breakthrough at the December summit . Leo Varadkar , Ireland 's prime minister , has backed his beleaguered deputy in a scandal that could topple his minority government at a crucial point in UK-EU discussions . Frances Fitzgerald , the Fine Gael Tanaiste , is resisting growing opposition party calls to quit over a controversy involving a bid to discredit a Garda whistleblower . Fianna Fail , which has a confidence and supply deal with Fine Gael , has said it will table a no-confidence vote against her next week - a move which could force a snap election . Mr Coveney said : `` Ireland does not need an election right now . We do not believe the country needs that in the context of some of the enormous decisions that will be taken on Ireland 's fu-ture in the context of our relationship with Britain at a summit in three weeks ' time . '' It came as Boyko Borissov , the prime minister of Bulgaria , broke ranks with the remaining 27 member states and predicted that Britain was heading for a hard Brexit . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , accused the European Union of behaving like a `` gang '' during negotiations by trying to punish Britain for Brexit . During their hour-long meeting , Mr Tusk set Mrs May an `` absolute deadline '' of Dec 4 for resolving the Ireland issue , when the Prime Minister travels to Brussels for dinner with Jean Claude-Juncker , the President of the European Commission . Editorial Comment : Page 27 'The EU can not expect the UK to give into its demands . The integrity of the UK is not up for negotiation '
Scotland Boris yields on Brexit divorce
BORIS JOHNSON and Michael Gove have agreed for the first time that Britain should increase its Brexit divorce bill offer above £20billion if the EU is prepared to make concessions in return . The Cabinet 's leading Brexiteers dropped their long-standing opposition to a promise of more money to the EU , paving the way for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , to break the deadlock that has so far prevented trade talks from starting . However , they and other ministers made it clear that no specific monetary offer should be made at this stage , with any extra cash to Brussels being dependent on Britain getting a good deal . The Government faced an immediate backlash from Leave-supporting Conservative MPs , who insisted the £20billion already offered was enough . One MP warned voters would go `` bananas '' if the offer was eventually increased to £40billion , as had been rumoured , while Philip Hammond was told that any tax increases in tomorrow 's Budget would be interpreted as taxpayers ' pockets being picked to pay for the Brexit bill . It came as Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , said the EU will reject any future free trade agreement with Britain if it involves the UK undercutting European regulations . The chances of agreeing a trade deal before Britain leaves the EU in March 2019 were also dealt a blow when Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , suggested she might have to call another general election after failing to form a minority government . Such a move could lead to months of uncertainty for EU 's most powerful nation . The Prime Minister spent two hours chairing a meeting of the 10-strong Brexit Cabinet sub-committee yesterday , at which no figure for the final Brexit divorce bill was discussed . But Whitehall sources said the ministers , who included Mr Johnson , Mr Gove and Liam Fox , the Brexit-supporting International Trade Secretary , reached a consensus over the need to tell the EU that more money will be made available as long as a good trade deal is on offer . One source said : `` Any offer would be determinant on the overall progress of the negotiations , so it 's not a case of 'take that money and bank it ' , because moving forward has to be done together . '' A Downing Street spokesman said : `` It remains our position that nothing 's agreed until everything 's agreed in negotiations with the EU . As the Prime Minister said this morning , the UK and the EU should step forward together . '' Mr Davis will pass on the news to Mr Barnier in the expectation that Brussels will agree to begin trade talks when EU leaders meet for a key summit in December . However , Robert Halfon , a Conservative MP and former minister , warned : `` If we start saying that we 're going to give £40billion to £50billion to the EU , I think the public will go bananas . `` I can not believe the public would accept such a huge amount when we need money for schools , hospitals , our housing and many other things . '' Jacob Rees-Mogg , a Tory member of the Treasury Select Committee , warned Mr Hammond that if he makes any tax increases in the Budget taxpayers will think they are being used `` to fund a blackmail EU settlement '' , which `` would not be in the national interest '' . Government sources last night played down reports that the Cabinet committee had agreed to allow the European Court of Justice to oversee the rights of EU migrants living in the EU permanently after Brexit . Meanwhile , Mr Barnier made it clear that any attempt to lure investment away from the EU would scupper a trade deal . He said that if Britain promised to adhere to EU standards Brussels would offer `` its most ambitious free trade agreement '' . Owen Paterson : Page 20 'If we start saying we 're going to give £40 billion to £50 billion to the EU , the public will go bananas '
Britain has a shortage of workers , but that may be a good problem to have ; Industry moans that Brexit is robbing it of staff . It has grown lazy on the back of high levels of immigration
Afew weeks ago there was a fuss about a sourdough pizza chain that was presenting itself as a casualty of Brexit . David Page , who controls Franco Manca , said his staff felt so `` bruised '' by the vote to leave that they might not return from their summer holidays . `` There will be a bigger competition for a lesser pool of staff , '' he warned . And worse : `` We may have to increase our bonus packages . '' Mr Page 's plight was reported as grim proof that the Brexit effect had set in , and was demonstrably bad for business . But to a great many who voted for Brexit , this was precisely what they had hoped for . There was a general sense that the EU , and the era of mass migration , was working out a little better for venture capitalists who owned pizzerias than it was for those who served pizza . If Brexit evened things up a bit , and forced bosses to pay workers more , would this be so bad ? Yes , profits might be squeezed . Yes , Franco Manca might end up charging more than £6.40 for a margherita . But , on balance , would this be such a disaster for the economy ? Mr Page is far from alone . Similar cries of anguish can be heard everywhere , for those with an ear to hear them . The Food and Drink Federation said yesterday that its members will be `` unable to feed the nation '' without these EU workers who are planning to go home . Lush , a soapmaker based in Poole , is offering to resettle its workers in a factory in Germany . It credits its success to the arrival of EU migrants in Dorset a decade or so ago and does n't want to think of a future without them . Even the car-makers say they are facing a crisis : they need 5,000 more skilled staff than they can find ( or import ) . In the Midlands , construction firms complain about a lack of bricklayers , carpenters and plumbers . The Royal College of Nursing talks of a 90 per cent drop in the number of European nurses registering since the referendum . There is hardly an industry that is n't raising the same cry : we 're running out of people - and Brexit is to blame . But this great exodus of EU workers is , as with so much Brexit hysteria , a myth . Yes , a lot of migrants do go home but this was always the case . Young people move to a country , work hard for a few months or years , save their money and then return . It 's a basic pattern of migration . Most of the Britons who went to find work in America in the 19th century sailed back after a while because they did n't want to up sticks forever . In fact the latest figures show the number of EU nationals in Britain ( my wife among them ) is at an all-time high and rising all the time . It will continue to rise for the foreseeable future . So the problem is n't Brexit , but something more serious . Britain , as a country , is beginning to run out of workers . You can blame David Cameron and Iain Duncan Smith : their welfare-to-work reforms were too much of a success . Unemployment now stands at the lowest level in my lifetime , and is falling still . As one minister tells me : `` There only are a few hundred people on the dole in my constituency , and I 've met them all . '' Britain is approaching what economists call full employment : joblessness sinking as low as can be reasonably expected . So if companies are panicking , this is why . For about a decade , British employers have never had to worry about this because they saw migration as the answer to almost any problem . A FTSE 100 chief executive once confessed to me that when he needed workers for a new warehouse , he advertised with an agency in Poland and flew them over . Other sectors have been using similar methods : EU nationals may make up 30 per cent of workers in food manufacturing , for example , but it was a negligible 1 per cent before Poland joined the EU in 2004 . So the workforce was transformed quickly : you can see the same in the changing face of warehouse workers , lorry drivers , chefs and housekeepers . The bottom line is that for a decade and more , a great many industries have expanded using immigration . And the result ? It was a stunning success : the influx of industrious , taxpaying , intelligent immigrants that enriched the economy , country and society . But there were side effects : pressure on public services and houses , for example . And there was another conundrum : if you can import as many trained workers as you need then why bother to develop your own staff or train new recruits ? Ten years ago , a seminal House of Lords report warned that companies would grow lazy on immigration , and might not spend as much time or money training their own staff . The update to that report , recently published , says things developed just as they feared . Nursing was the worst example : the NHS found that they could pay non-European nurses £6,000 less , on average , and funded far fewer training places than were needed . In construction , too , there have n't been anywhere near enough apprenticeships . Across too much of the economy , employers have not been investing in people as they should have . And now they 're panicking . Companies had grown a little too quick to complain about a skills shortage , and were rather slow to do anything about it themselves . Now the British workforce has expanded to the highest number in history and even 20,000 immigrants a month is not enough . So it 's time to think differently . Perhaps invest a bit more in machinery , move workers to higherskilled jobs , increase productivity , spend more on training and increase pay . This is how a healthy economy is supposed to function . A shortage of workers should mean average salaries on the rise - something that has n't really happened in Britain for a decade or more . Now and again , it 's argued that we need high-skilled immigration but not low-skilled . Now , it 's becoming clear that we need both - but neither will ever be enough because there 's no substitute for a country investing in its own workforce . So this panic is , in a way , a useful panic . Employers realise now , more than ever , that people are the greatest resource of all . All told , it is not a bad problem to have . FOLLOW Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
The anti-Brexit forces are gathering ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : It has probably not even crossed Tony Blair 's mind that the disenchantment many people feel with mainstream politics owes much to his time in office . He signalled in an interview with the New Statesman yesterday that he wants to re-enter the political fray after almost 10 years in exile , possessing enough self-awareness to appreciate that he can no longer expect to play a front-line leadership role . Rather , he wants to become `` an agent of influence in British politics '' , on issues from Brexit to reviving what he describes as the `` progressive centre or centre Left '' . Mr Blair said he respected the vote in the referendum on June 23 to leave the EU while at the same time observing that `` Brexit can be stopped '' . However much Mr Blair has been discredited since he left office by the fallout from the invasion of Iraq and the way he has enriched himself , he remains a formidable political operator and people who believe Brexit could yet be thwarted may well look to him for salvation . If so , a storm is brewing , something that Nigel Farage , the interim Ukip leader , now anticipates . In a speech on Wednesday he said that unlike in America , where a popular vote led to a new administration being elected , here in Britain `` the same players have just been shuffled around the chess board '' . Mr Farage predicted `` another big seismic shock in British politics '' if Brexit is not delivered . We appear now to be moving from a position in which politicians accepted the referendum result and were arguing only over the means , to one where the prospect of forestalling the outcome is seriously being countenanced . Part of the problem is the absence of any sense of direction from the Government , something apparent in this week 's Autumn Statement . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , highlighted predictions from the Office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) of continued growth in contrast to pre-referendum predictions of calamity . But anti-Brexiters have seized on indications that these are not as positive as had been anticipated before the referendum . This lost output , they say , is the real cost of Brexit even though they are just forecasts of something that may or may not happen . Part of the problem is that the Government has failed so far to make a positive economic case for leaving the EU , leaving a vacuum that Mr Blair and others will fill using forecasts that are almost certainly wrong to boost their case for a rethink of Brexit . As the former prime minister put it , they are the insurgents now . It is their turn to mobilise social media networks and crank up a grassroots campaign against the democratic decision taken on June 23 , thereby perpetuating the uncertainty they blame Brexit for causing . They need to be confronted by politicians of substance who argued for a Britain outside the EU and can make a consistently optimistic case for leaving . One obvious proselytiser is Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary ; yet instead of deploying him in this cause he is constantly belittled , and was even the butt of jokes by the Chancellor in his Autumn Statement and the Prime Minister in a recent afterdinner speech . As Paul Goodman notes on the opposite page , these doubtless light-hearted asides hardly send out a message of support for Mr Johnson - who was on the winning side in the referendum , unlike Mrs May and Mr Hammond . The anti-Brexit forces are gathering and the forecasts in the Autumn Statement will be their ammunition - even though the economic Armageddon that the very same people predicted before the vote has not materialised . Mr Blair wants to encourage this counter-revolution on behalf of a political class that thinks it knows all the answers and believes the voters can not understand the consequences of what they do . He fails to see that the backlash against the established order in Britain , Europe and in America has occurred precisely because leaders like him ignore what voters want and are indifferent to the promises they break . Perhaps he is right to say the forces of globalisation can not be reversed and those who think otherwise will be seriously disappointed . But when Mr Blair says in his interview that there has been a `` huge misunderstanding '' of what he tried to do as prime minister , he just might consider that voters understood only too well .
May to reject EU deal that would impose its rules on UK until 2021 ; Politics
THERESA MAY will reject the EU 's proposed deal on the Brexit transition period and go into battle next week over freedom of movement and socalled `` rule taking '' . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , said Britain must accept `` all decisions '' of the EU during transition if it wanted a deal , but would not have a say over any new laws . Brussels ' official negotiating stance , published yesterday , also states that freedom of movement must continue until the end of the transition period , which the EU wants to be Dec 31 2020 . Eurosceptics insist that would turn Britain into a `` vassal state '' of the EU during transition . The Government 's negotiators will be told to reject both ideas when talks begin on Feb 5 . It comes as Mrs May faces a Commons rebellion from up to 60 Eurosceptic Tory MPs over plans to pass a law allowing Britain to join a customs union after Brexit . Jacob Rees-Mogg , leader of the European Research Group of Brexit-supporting Tory MPs , will tell Julian Smith , the Chief Whip , that the group will table amendments to the Taxation ( Cross-border Trade ) Bill if the customs union clause is not removed . On a day when the battle over the rules of transition began in earnest , Mr Barnier set out an uncompromising EU position which was swiftly followed by a flurry of warnings against any UK attempts to water down the terms of a deal . He said : `` [ The UK ] will continue to have all the economic benefits , therefore it must apply all the rules . '' The Government wants the transition period - which will begin when Britain formally leaves the EU in March next year - to last for `` around two years '' but the EU favours a 21-month period , ending at the end of 2020 . `` During this limited period of time the whole EU acquis [ body of law ] will continue to apply to the UK , '' added Mr Barnier , in a move that infuriated leading Tory Eurosceptics . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , told a Commons select committee yesterday there would be an `` argument '' when negotiations begin over whether the UK must be a complete `` rule-taker '' during the transition period . He said : `` We take the view that it is not particularly good democratic practice to have your country accept without any say-so anything , and particularly if the EU takes it upon itself to do something which is actively disadvantageous to a major British industry , or something like that . '' Even though Mr Davis conceded that the UK 's post-Brexit relationship with the EU would be `` very , very similar '' , Mrs May is under rising pressure to win some concessions from Europe . Whitehall sources said she would not accept full freedom of movement during transition , insisting that the EU accepts a registration scheme for arriving EU citizens , who would then have no guarantees of being able to stay . Mr Rees-Mogg will tell Mr Smith today the Government must remove a clause from the proposed Bill on crossborder trade that would allow ministers to sign up to `` a customs union '' without a parliamentary vote . Brexiteers fear that membership of any form of customs union post-Brexit would prevent Britain signing trade deals with other countries . Mr Rees-Mogg said : `` This is more like a plank than a bridge . We are stepping off without knowing where we are going . '' Mrs May will today lead a trade delegation to China to show how serious the Government is about doing post-Brexit trade deals around the world . She will be accompanied by 50 business leaders , the biggest trade delegation she has ever taken abroad , and meet Xi Jinping , the Chinese president . Editorial Comment : Page 19 EU 's offer on transition Britain to be offered a 'status quo transition without institutional representation ' Transition period to end on Dec 31 2020 , shorter than the Government 's preferred option of `` around two years '' `` Freedom of movement for EU citizens to continue throughout transition - a rejection of UK 's registration scheme for new migrantsAll new EU rules and regulations during transition must be adopted with no chance to block them Britain will be able to air its views in EU meetings where its interests are at stake , such as fishing quotas , but access will be on a 'limited , exceptional and case by case basis ' Britain can discuss trade deals with other countries during transition
Jacob Rees-Mogg is right to fear that Brexit 's promise may go unfulfilled ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Your interview with Jacob Rees-Mogg is timely ( `` 'The Chancellor is trying to thwart Brexit ; his priorities are perverse ' '' , January 27 ) . This year , we will be approaching a watershed in British politics . Do we re-mould ourselves into a fully independent nation with the concomitant flexibility to trade freely , or do we become , as Mr Rees-Mogg puts it , a `` vassal state '' with all the obligations but without the executive authority ? The main reason I voted to leave the EU was to take back control of trade . A `` Brino '' ( Brexit in name only ) outcome will fall far short of that . Stephen Agar Chalfont St Peter , Buckinghamshire sir - Jacob Rees-Mogg was absolutely right that the British people did not vote for management of decline . But Brexit is an act of epic self-harm , and decline is what we shall get , managed incompetently by this Government . Peter Knott Kidderminster , Worcestershire sir - Thank goodness for Jacob Rees-Mogg . He and others in the Conservative Party who believe in a successful Brexit - such as Boris Johnson , Michael Gove and David Davis - must replace the `` Brinos '' such as Theresa May , Amber Rudd and Philip Hammond immediately if we are to have any chance of preventing the vindictive neutering of the country by Brussels . Alison Levinson Hastings , East Sussex sir - Mrs May is the weakest prime minister that I have experienced . She has now only two choices available to her . Either she resigns as Prime Minister , or she changes the balance of her Cabinet and makes it a Brexit -friendly one . First to go should be the Chancellor , Phillip Hammond , followed by the Home Secretary , Amber Rudd . For as long as the Cabinet contains more Remainers than those who seek a departure from the EU , Mrs May will never achieve harmony or stop the continued backbiting demonstrated by Mr Hammond during his speech in Davos last week . If the Prime Minister continues to do nothing , we will see the EU run rings around us and Jeremy Corbyn slip in through the back door . G R Walder Headley , Hampshire sir - Theresa May is a manager , not a leader . She entirely lacks the ability to enthuse or inspire . She is a caretaker prime minister - one whom we can not afford to have any longer . The wolves of Marxist socialism are howling and we urgently need a conviction politician to lead us forward . Mrs May has been dutiful and resilient , both admirable qualities , but she is not the right candidate for the top job . This has been clearly proven over a period of time , and the Conservative Party must grasp the nettle by installing a credible and determined leader . Jean Chesworth Newcastle upon Tyne
Brexit brief : banks put contingency plans in place ; With little guidance forthcoming from the Government , financial firms are factoring in a 'no deal ' scenario , reports Lucy Burton
As Britain enters a key week in the Brexit negotiations , the country 's financial sector is losing interest in the Cabinet quarrels that have dominated talks this summer . Stepping back from the chaos and pushing on with its assumption that the talks will end in a worst-case scenario - no trade deal , or a so-called hard Brexit - the City is becoming tired of the political to-ing and fro-ing that could see it stung once Britain leaves the bloc . `` I 'm not quite sure what Philip Hammond and Liam Fox were saying [ on Sunday ] - they appear to be giving something without defining what that something is , '' says a senior executive at a large US bank , referring to the joint Sunday Telegraph article on Brexit , which was widely viewed as an attempt by the Chancellor and Secretary of State for Trade to put on a united front . `` It does n't matter if they make all sorts of nice noises saying it 's not this , it 's not that , in the absence of any clarity , everyone has to assume the worst , '' the executive continues . `` Going into the election they at least appeared to have a position , one we did n't like but at least knew where we were heading . Now it 's multiple positions , which is more unnerving . '' In his weekend piece , the Chancellor assured readers that Britain would definitely leave the single market and customs union when it exits the EU . But his words are likely to rattle some of the fund executives who spoke to Hammond about their Brexit concerns in Downing Street last month . Peter Harrison , the Schroders chief executive , for example , told The Daily Telegraph shortly after the discussion that Hammond knew `` the issues very well indeed '' . For the big banks , the twists and turns are particularly unhelpful , as they need to act now so that they are ready for whatever the post-Brexit world will look like . Consultancy firm Oliver Wyman believes Britain could lose 40,000 sales , trading and investment banking jobs as a result of Brexit - half of the UK wholesale sector - with its financial services principal Patrick Hunt reiterating that banks can not take a wait-and-see approach , unlike some in the financial sector . `` Banks have to be putting [ contingency plans ] into implementation now , others have more flexibility , '' he says . `` Asset managers have a lot of challenges , but do n't have the substantial capital migration , number of people in risk and control functions , [ and their ] IT systems do n't require such a long lead time as the wholesale banks . '' Brexit preparations are already transforming the UK 's financial services industry . Headhunters who have spent their entire careers placing people in the City are now trying to fill spots overseas , while London-based investment bankers are talking to their families about moving abroad . London 's lucrative euro-clearing market is under threat as Brussels demands more control . Even the sea has come into the debate as tensions run high . `` Fishermen are not the only ones concerned about UK waters post Brexit , as the sea plays an equally important role to the financial sector , '' says Fraser Bell , the chief revenue officer of market infrastructure provider BSO . `` More than 40pc of euro transactions run through a vast network of undersea cables from around the country , '' he continues . `` If the EU harbours any hopes of taking back control of euro trading , a huge network of cables would need to be built on the continent . To reroute these links would prove to be a monumental task - particularly if no transitional agreements are struck . `` A rip-and-replace approach would not only be hugely expensive , it would also mean a massive disruption to euro trading , which is the last thing the market needs right now . '' As Theresa May 's Government tries to hash out a deal , more and more corners of the financial services industry are starting to worry about their position come March 2019 . The biggest concern is that the thousands of UK-registered firms that currently rely on passports to service clients in the EU , and vice versa , lose that right with no time to adjust . The Bank of England last week backed calls for some form of implementation period . Trade bodies are also pushing for a transitional deal , although one banking executive says it feels like their advice is going into a black hole . `` All this evidence goes in and goodness knows what they 're doing with it , '' he says . `` The most pressing and urgent priority for the industry right now is getting a binding agreement between the UK and the EU27 [ the other members of the European Union ] on a time-limited transitional period , '' says Miles Celic , chief executive of industry body TheCityUK . `` Without any clear or concrete agreement in place , or on the horizon , firms are reluctantly starting to activate contingency plans to ensure they can continue to provide continuity of service to clients . '' Indeed , while the big banks have started their contingency plans , insurers and asset managers have also been forced to push on with their planning [ see graph ] . Nicolas Mackel , chief executive of Luxembourg for Finance , says two or three insurance companies are about to announce new EU hubs in the country , while a number of banks with offices in Luxembourg are currently looking to expand their wealth management or corporate finance teams there as a result of Brexit . The smaller , UK-focused outfits , which might not have been hashing out plans to open EU hubs a few months ago , are also mulling over options , with many concerned that uncertainty will hit investor activity . `` The key thing with us for Brexit is n't so much lack of access to markets , it 's investment sentiment , '' says Paul Feeney , Old Mutual Wealth 's chief executive , who will also be steering the wealth manager through an initial public offering in the year ahead . `` [ The ] operational impact is fairly modest for us , [ but ] we 're not complacent - we 're looking at all sorts of potential scenarios . If it 's a hard Brexit , would we set up a few more functions in one of the EU markets ? If we needed to , we would . We could put a few more people in Dublin or Luxembourg . '' The banks and financial services which have so far confirmed expansion out of the UK post-Brexit Dublin IRELAND Amsterdam Berlin Brussels GERMANY Frankfurt Paris Luxembourg FRANCE Brussels Lloyd 's of London QBE Dublin Barclays Bank of America Merrill Lynch JP Morgan Standard Life Aberdeen Frankfurt Citigroup Morgan Stanley Nomura Standard Chartered Sumitomo Mitsui Daiwa Luxembourg Northern Trust 3i RSA AIG FM Global Hiscox M & G Paris HSBC Amsterdam RBS Berlin
Brexit talks will start just 11 days after the election , warns PM ; Election 2017 Theresa May will reveal negotiations ' start date today , telling voters 'weak ' Corbyn will not be ready
BRITAIN has `` no time to waste '' in Brexit talks , Theresa May will warn today as she says formal negotiations about leaving the European Union will start just 11 days after the election . The Prime Minister will tell supporters in Wales , which voted overwhelmingly to leave the European Union at the referendum , not to risk letting Jeremy Corbyn lead these talks . On her first visit to Wales of the official election campaign , Mrs May will stress that she will not take support from Welsh voters `` for granted '' as she seeks to win a Tory landslide on June 8 . Mrs May will say : `` There are just 17 days to go until this crucial general election . Just 11 days after that , the European Union wants the Brexit negotiations to begin . `` The UK 's seat at the negotiating table will be filled by me or Jeremy Corbyn . The deal we seek will be negotiated by me or Jeremy Corbyn . `` There will be no time to waste and no time for a new government to find its way . So the stakes in this election are high . '' She will claim the UK will have a `` weak hand '' should Mr Corbyn secure power with the help of the Liberal Democrat , Plaid Cymru and Scottish National Party MPs as these parties `` do n't want Brexit to succeed '' . The Prime Minister and Conservative leader is expected to say she is `` 100 per cent committed to the cause '' while suggesting Mr Corbyn is `` uncertain or unsure '' when it comes to delivering on Brexit . Mrs May is expected to say the UK 's future prosperity depends on `` getting the next five years right '' , adding : `` That is why we need someone representing Britain who is 100 per cent committed to the cause . `` Not someone who is uncertain or unsure , but someone utterly determined to deliver the democratic will of the British people . `` Because if we do n't get this right , the consequences for the United Kingdom and for the economic security of ordinary working people will be dire . If we do , the opportunities ahead are great . '' Mrs May is travelling to Wales today to launch the party 's Welsh manifesto . Polls have raised the possibility of significant gains at next month 's general election . Insiders believe the party could win nine more seats , giving the party 20 out of the 40 seats in the principality , and making the Conservatives the largest party . The insider said : `` There has been this assumption that Labour 's support is always there . It is certainly not the case . '' Mrs May will use the trip to make a bold plea for support from Welsh voters who feel Labour has taken them for granted . She will say : `` I 'm backing those that want a more secure and full life . I 'm backing those whose only wish is that their children will do better than themselves . `` And to those that look to their government and their politicians for a little help and support , I 'm backing you too . `` Because too often in the past , ordinary working people have found the help and support they need just is n't there . `` And I know that sense of disenchantment is particularly acute here in Wales . `` We saw that when people here in Wrexham and across Wales chose to ignore the hysterical warnings of Labour , Plaid Cymru and Liberal Democrat politicians in Cardiff Bay , and voted to leave the EU . `` We see it now in the way those same politicians refuse to respect that vote as they try to find new ways to put obstacles in our way . `` And the cause of that emerging gulf is clear . It is because the Labour Party has taken people in Wales for granted for decades - just as it has in other communities across Britain . '' In the Conservative national manifesto , which was published last week , Mrs May pledged to invest in `` improved infrastructure '' to help Welsh companies . She also promised a new North Wales Growth Deal `` connecting north Wales with northern England '' and which would `` encourage further crossborder working '' . The Tories also said they would `` protect the interest of Welsh farmers '' and `` ensure the strength of the Welsh brand is maintained '' . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , also raised concerns about the possibility of Mr Corbyn trying to negotiate Britain 's exit from the EU with other EU leaders . He told ITV 's Peston on Sunday : `` They 're going to look at him , and they 're going to have him for breakfast . And I think it would be deeply damaging to the interests of this country . ''
What if ... ? The fate of Brexit in a coalition No 10 ; Analysis
Supposing - just supposing - that Theresa May fails to win a majority in the election on June 8 , would that mean Brexit is off ? If `` off `` means really , definitely off , then the answer is simple : no . Brexit was started by a referendum . Only another referendum could stop it . Maybe if a party won a majority having said , in terms , that it would stop the Brexit process if elected , it could claim a mandate for doing so . But no party is going to put that pitch to the electorate : even the Liberal Democrats say only that they want a second referendum . In any case , a party could claim a mandate to overturn the referendum result only if it won a majority not just of seats in the Commons , but of votes in the country - something that no party has managed since before the Second World War . Without an electoral mandate to halt Brexit , even if some kind of Labour/SNP/Lib Dem government deal were to emerge after the election , the process would continue , and the government would continue to negotiate the terms of the UK 's departure from the EU . We can deduce from past announcements that such a government would pursue a very different kind of Brexit from Theresa May 's version : it would , for example , probably seek continuing membership of the single market . The talks would , nevertheless , go on . But what would happen once the talks had concluded ? If it does n't get a deal that it likes , could such a government decide not to pursue Brexit after all ? That depends on three things : the law ; European politics ; and domestic politics . In terms of law , the question is whether it is possible , now that Article 50 has been triggered , to revoke that triggering . On this , there is no absolute certainty . Article 50 provides no process for reversal . But many leading lawyers think there is an implied right for countries to change their minds . At the very least , everyone agrees that the triggering of Article 50 could by some means be revoked if all the other 27 member states agree to it . Many also think it could be revoked unilaterally - but only the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg can decide on this . That matters because it determines the importance of the second factor - EU politics . If the UK can unilaterally revoke the triggering of Article 50 , then the process is simple : the UK 's permanent representative in Brussels just delivers a letter to Donald Tusk , nullifying the letter he handed to him at the end of March . If , on the other hand , agreement of the other member states is needed , then some of them are likely to seek concessions before consenting . That could make things messy and end up giving the UK worse terms of EU membership than it has had to date . Then comes UK domestic politics.As I have said , last year 's referendum can be reversed only by another referendum : it would be politically untenable for any government to do www.otherwise.No government is likely to call another referendum unless it feels pretty confident of winning it - unless , that is , it sees clear evidence that significant parts of the electorate are getting cold feet on Brexit . That might happen : the negotiations might go badly , and voters might be persuaded that the decision to leave the EU was an error . But there is no sign of any such change of heart yet . The negotiations might go better than many expect , or voters might pin the blame for problems on the EU and become firmer in their desire to leave . So the outcome of the election is more likely to determine the form of Brexit than it is to influence whether it happens at all . A reversal is possible , but an improbable victory for Mrs May 's opponents is only the first of many steps needed to get there . Alan Renwick is Deputy Director of the Constitution Unit at UCL 'On Article 50 , many lawyers think there is an implied right for countries to change their minds '
Fury as Spain uses Brexit for Gibraltar 'land grab '
SPAIN has been accused of using Brexit to make a `` land grab '' for Gibraltar under official guidelines for negotiations drawn up by the EU . The European Council document yesterday suggested that Spain will be given an effective veto on whether the Brexit deal applies to Gibraltar . The draft guidelines drawn up by EU leaders state that the Brexit deal will not apply to Gibraltar without an `` agreement between the kingdom of Spain and the UK '' . The clause has taken British officials by surprise . One told The Daily Telegraph it is `` absolutely unacceptable '' and gives Spain too much power over the future of Gibraltar . `` One really wonders why the EU has thought it sensible to put in something that 's a bilateral issue between Spain and the UK , '' the official said . Earlier this week , Theresa May said that Britain would never put the people of Gibraltar under the sovereignty of another state `` against their wishes '' . Spain has already hinted that it will block any agreement on airline landing rights after Brexit , with one diplomat telling The Financial Times that a deal `` can not apply to the airport of Gibraltar '' . Andrew Rosindell , vice-chairman of the all-party parliamentary group for Gibraltar , said : `` An agreement without including Gibraltar means there can be no agreement . British people must and will stand together , we can not be bullied by Spain . '' The rock , a British Overseas Territory since 1713 with 30,000 residents , remains a major source of diplomatic tensions . Gibraltar 's chief minister has warned the territory should not be used by Spain as a bargaining chip .
Scotland SNP rebuked over bid to pin jobless rise on Brexit
AN SNP minister was rebuked by economists yesterday after he tried to blame a rise in Scottish unemployment on the Brexit vote . The latest jobless figures showed a rise in unemployment in Scotland , bucking the UK trend . Jamie Hepburn , Scotland 's employability minister , said : `` Despite the strong performance of the youth labour market , the Brexit vote caused significant economic uncertainty , threatening our economic recovery and the stability of our jobs market . '' He immediately found himself under fire from the independent Fraser of Allander Institute , which said the poor economic conditions leading to rising unemployment were in place well before June 's Brexit vote . Prof Graeme Roy , speaking on behalf of the institute at the University of Strathclyde , said the latest figures showed that the Scottish economy was lagging behind the rest of the UK . He said yesterday : `` While some may try to infer something about the economic consequences of the Brexit vote from today 's news , we would urge caution . `` While these are the first data we have about the overall performance of the Scottish economy since the vote on June 23 , Scotland 's economic challenges and underperformance predate that vote . '' Murdo Fraser , for the Conservatives , said : `` Coming on the back of other troubling news on the economy , it makes it clear that Scotland is now suffering from an SNP slump , with the cost paid in lower jobs and growth . Any normal government would make it its first priority to turn this around . '' He added : `` Instead , the SNP is squandering this strong platform and is today seeking to blame Brexit . It is a pathetic excuse from a government which appears to have given up focusing on the day job . '' According to the statistics , Scotland 's jobless total rose by 11,000 to 139,000 in the three months to November . The Scottish unemployment rate was 5.1 per cent , above the 4.8 per cent figure for the UK as a whole . Other figures out yesterday showed that the economy in Scotland is only growing at a third of the rate of that of the UK as a whole . The latest GDP data showed that Scotland 's economic output increased by 0.2 per cent in the period July to September 2016 , compared to a rise of 0.6 per cent for the UK as a whole . There was a similar difference in the annual figures , with growth in Scotland for the 12 months up to September amounting to 0.7 per cent , while the UK saw a rise of 2.2 per cent over the same period . Liz Cameron , chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce , said the continuing travails of the North Sea oil and gas industry were at least partly to blame for the `` bad news that Scotland continues to under-perform the UK in terms of unemployment '' . She added : `` We are hopeful this decline has begun to bottom out and that an eventual recovery may be on the horizon , but if Scotland 's businesses are to invest and grow , then government needs to ensure that we have the most competitive business environment in the UK . '' 139,000 The latest unemployment figure for Scotland , taking the rate to 5.1pc , above the UK 's average rate of 4.8pc
Scotland Tory chief 's aide reveals details of Brexit 'strategy '
A BREXIT memo which suggests that Britain wants to `` have its cake and eat it '' last night sparked speculation over whether the Government had revealed details of its negotiating strategy for the first time . The note , which was carried by an aide to Mark Field , the Conservative Party vice-chairman , after a meeting at the office of David Davis , the Brexit secretary , says it is `` unlikely '' that Britain will be given the chance to remain in the single market after it leaves the European Union . The note suggests that the Government is `` loath '' to introduce `` transitional '' controls after Britain leaves the EU which would give the City access to the single market for a limited period . Downing Street insisted that the memo is `` not a government document '' and said it `` does not represent the UK 's position in relation to Brexit negotiations '' . However sources refused to say who had attended the meeting . Julia Dockerill , Mr Field 's chief of staff , was photographed carrying the note as she left the meeting in 9 Downing Street . It states that the `` implementation '' of Article 50 , which will formally trigger Brexit negotiations , is likely to be `` difficult '' . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , `` wants to see what deal looks like first '' but the memo suggests Britain `` wo n't provide more detail '' . It says that a deal on manufacturing is `` relatively straightforward '' but an agreement on services , which includes the financial sector , is likely to be `` harder '' . It says that Britain is likely to pursue a `` Canada-plus '' trade deal with the EU , adding that being part of the European Economic Area would be `` not good '' . The memo states : `` Difficult on Article 50 implementation - Barnier wants to see what deal looks like first . `` Got to be done in parallel - 20 odd negotiations . Keep the two years . Wo n't provide more detail . We think it 's unlikely we 'll be offered single market . Manufacturing relatively straightfoward . Transitional - loath to do it . Whitehall will hold on to it . We need to bring an end to negotiations . '' Whitehall sources said the memo was a note of comments made at a meeting between Conservative Party officials and representatives from the Dutch ruling VVD party .
Scotland Scotland may join legal battle over Article 50
THE Scottish Government will decide within days whether to join the legal action against the UK Government 's bid to overturn the court judgement that threw Theresa May 's Brexit plans into disarray . Michael Russell , Scotland 's Brexit minister , said ministers were considering the benefits of intervening and welcomed the fact that Gina Miller , the investment manager leading the legal challenge , had said it would be helpful . The Welsh Government has already announced it wants the Supreme Court to hear its arguments against the UK Government 's wish to trigger Article 50 without parliamentary approval . Mr Russell said : `` The First Minister made it clear on Thursday that it is under consideration . We had a barrister with a watching brief at the English case , therefore the result of the English case was n't much of a surprise to us . `` Now we have to consider the benefits of making sure the Scottish Government is involved in this case . '' He also claimed there was a `` possibility '' the court could be asked to rule that legislative consent from Holyrood is necessary for Brexit , despite legal experts dismissing the idea . Mr Russell said the Prime Minister was `` foolish '' to try to `` bulldoze ahead '' after she said she planned to keep to her original timetable of starting formal talks by the end of March . The UK Government announced an appeal to the Supreme Court after three judges said Mrs May could not start the process without peers and MPs voting , in direct contradiction to her position . Scotland 's Brexit minister also told the BBC 's Sunday Politics Scotland programme , that despite the Scottish Government seeking `` deep involvement '' in the Brexit process , he could not imagine any circumstances in which SNP MPs would vote in favour of triggering Article 50 . He claimed the party had a mandate to take steps to protect Scotland 's place in Europe , which would justify blocking the UK Government 's plans . Mr Russell added that calls from other parties for the UK to remain in the single market after Brexit - a key Scottish Government demand - `` bode well '' for the SNP working with others . When asked if there were any circumstances in which the SNP 's 54 MPs would vote to start the exit process , he said : `` I ca n't imagine what those would be . '' The constitutional expert Jim Gallagher , a visiting professor at Glasgow University , said that if the Scottish Government was going to attach itself to the Supreme Court case it should `` probably have done so earlier '' . He added that it was `` pretty unlikely '' the Supreme Court would say that the devolved parliaments had any veto of Brexit . Meanwhile , Nicola Sturgeon will claim in a speech in Sheffield today that the UK Government 's austerity agenda was one of the underlying reasons for the vote to leave the EU . Speaking at the Sheffield Political Economy Research Institute , the First Minister will say that the vote for Brexit was also a vote against austerity . She is expected to say : `` Austerity has already caused huge social harm and brought no economic benefit , it has failed , categorically and comprehensively , on its own terms . `` We know that people on low incomes were more likely to vote to leave the European Union , as were areas with low employment www.rates.UK economic policy has just not given enough people enough grounds for hope . ''
Scotland Brexit may be a boon say farmers and fishermen
SCOTLAND 'S farmers and fishermen yesterday said Brexit provides opportunities for their industries to expand as the SNP defended the status quo in the EU . NFU Scotland yesterday staged its first meeting with Andrea Leadsom , the Environment , Food and Rural Affairs Secretary , to discuss the UK 's replacement of the controversial Common Agricultural Policy . Allan Bowie , the organisation 's president , said he was confident she could capitalise on the opportunities from Brexit by securing the right trading deal with the EU . The Scottish Fishermen 's Federation ( SFF ) said last night that Brexit could reinvigorate coastal and island communities and turn Scotland into a world-class seafood nation , but only if SNP ministers start working with their UK counterparts . But Derek Mackay , the SNP 's Finance Minister , praised the EU 's contribution to both industries and said EU funding contracts for structural funds , fisheries and farming projects that are agreed before Brexit will be paid in full . The NFUS used its meeting with Ms Leadsom to press for costs , customs controls , barriers and tariffs to be mitigated in any new trading arrangements , and sought reassurances that Scottish quality will be protected . Mr Bowie said : `` We were encouraged by her straight talking and willingness to engage . '' Leaving the EU will spell the end of the Common Fisheries Policy and enable the UK to assert control over its 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) , more than half of which is around Scotland . Foreign vessels could not then fish in the zone without consent . A report published earlier this month found more than half the fish caught in British waters are landed by trawlers from the rest of the EU . Speaking at the SFF 's annual dinner in Edinburgh last night , which was attended by Fergus Ewing , the SNP 's Rural Affairs Minister , the organisation 's chief executive said Brexit would deliver tangible benefits to coastal communities if handled correctly .
Brexit fears rock global stock markets ; UK 's biggest firms lose £98bn in value in four days as Leave camp pulls ahead and FTSE 100 dives
LONDON 'S benchmark index fell through the 6,000 level yesterday as Brexit fears shook financial markets around the world . Investors offloaded risky equities in favour of safe-haven assets after the latest referendum polls showed the Leave camp pulling ahead . Anxiety about the UK 's possible exit from the European Union triggered the FTSE 100 's steepest daily fall since mid-February , with the blue chip index dropping 121.44 points , or 2.01pc , to 5,923.53 . In just four days the value of Britain 's biggest companies has fallen by more than £98bn . European bourses also floundered as volatility spiked ahead of next week 's referendum . Frankfurt 's DAX and the CAC in Paris both fell 1.4pc . Mike van Dulken , of Accendo Markets , said investors were fearful of the `` heightened prospect '' of a Brexit , which would `` worsen an already fragile global growth situation by delivering an economic and political blow to a struggling eurozone '' . As stock markets went into freefall , investors sought shelter from the Brexit storm in www.bonds.UK Gilt yields fell to record lows yesterday , while Germany 's 10-year Bund yield skidded into negative territory for the first time ever . The negative yield means investors are effectively paying to lend money to the German government for a full decade . Anthony Gillham of Old Mutual Global Investors said : `` In the short to medium term [ after Brexit ] , I think we 're likely to see concern in the market that some of the other European countries might follow suit and that puts breakup risk for the eurozone right back on the table . The natural reaction for investors who are pulling out of peripheral bonds will be to look for safe places to put their money , and we might see UK bond yields fall . '' However , he said that yields could increase if a vote to leave starts to further devalue the pound . `` Brexit is likely to put real pressure on sterling . Sterling has one of the biggest current account deficits in the developed world , and we are likely to see a lot of downward pressure on sterling , exerting inflation pressure . '' Yesterday , sterling slumped to a twomonth low against the dollar , dropping by as much as 1pc to $ 1.4097 , while the cost of insuring against volatility in the pound a month into the future soared to its highest level since the height of the 2008 financial crisis . The panic selling was also confirmed by a Bank of America Merrill Lynch global fund managers survey which found that investors are sitting on the biggest pile of cash since November 2001 . Fund managers are now holding 5.7pc of their portfolio in cash , it said . A new poll showed more than eight in ten investment professionals foresee a drop in the London stock market in the six months after a vote to leave the EU , with 39pc expecting a sharp decrease in the wake of a Brexit decision . In a survey of more than 1,750 investment staff by the industry body CFA UK , 71pc said they expected UK investment portfolios to suffer in the year after a vote for Brexit , against 8pc who felt the effect would be positive on portfolios and 17pc who thought there would be a minimal impact . Market Report : Page 7
The Christmas miracle is that the PM will survive to lead Brexit talks ; Analysis
To lose Damian Green must have been a personal blow to Theresa May . The two MPs have been friends since university ; Mr Green effectively served as her deputy . But a Cabinet Office inquiry has found that he lied about porn being found on his office computer - an inquiry triggered by an account of sexual harassment that it deemed `` plausible '' . The Prime Minister has always put tackling abuse at the top of her agenda . To lose her right-hand man in such a humiliating way , over so sensitive an issue , would at any other time cripple a government . But this is the age of Brexit . The Conservative majority in the Commons is tight and Eurosceptics are nervous about doing anything that damages the Prime Minister 's authority further . There is no obvious alternative to Mrs May . Remainers fear a Eurosceptic coup ; the Leavers do n't want Brexit undermined . And the decision of EU leaders to allow Brexit negotiations to move on to phase two has given the diplomatic side of things a whole new momentum . Phase two will be difficult and doubts have already been raised about Britain 's ability to get a bespoke trade deal . But at least progress seems possible after months of inaction , and at least we know what the politics of 2018 will be about . So , yes , Mrs May has had a pig of a year - an underwhelming election result , the worst conference speech in memory . But it 's hard to imagine the Tory party dropping its pilot at this stage in the Brexit talks . And the assumption that Mr Green can go and the PM can remain in power , despite how politically and personally close he is to her , is indicative of how her position has changed since the election . It 's a position that is n't so much strong as miraculously stubborn . That said , with Mr Green gone , speculation about a Cabinet reshuffle will only increase . There has already been movement . Gavin Williamson replaced Michael Fallon as Defence Secretary after another harassment-related scandal . But even if Mrs May 's authority has been briefly lifted by Brexit , her room to manoeuvre remains limited by it because she has to maintain the appearance ( if not the numerical reality ) of balance within the Cabinet . Move Boris Johnson and the Leavers will protest . Sack Philip Hammond and the Remainers will be outraged . What many MPs are saying is : bring in someone new . There 's plenty of talent that is n't scarred by harassment allegations and is desperate for a shot at ministerial office . Why not strong media performers like Johnny Mercer , an articulate conservative such as Jacob Rees-Mogg or , to combat the appearance of sleaze , an intelligent woman such as Suella Fernandes ? Of course , the gap that has to be filled is personal as well as political . The one thing that matters more than anything to Mrs May is loyalty . To have to sack a friend will have been very painful , a reminder that wielding authority is rarely a pleasant business and the job of Prime Minister is most times utterly thankless . 'There is no real alternative ; it 's hard to imagine the Tory party dropping its pilot at this stage in negotiations '
Britain questions £85bn bill for Brexit divorce as mask of optimism slips ; Davis denies caving in to EU demands to settle money and citizens ' rights issues on day one of talks
BRITAIN is questioning whether it is legally obliged to pay a Brexit divorce bill to the European Union , it emerged yesterday as the first day of talks descended into ill-concealed rancour . The EU is demanding that the UK pays up to £85billion to meet outstandbasis ' , '' ing obligations after Brexit , a demand that has been heavily criticised by Cabinet ministers . Britain reportedly believes it is not legally obliged to make any payment at all . `` They question that there is a legal basis for an exit payment , '' a senior EU official told www.Reuters.UK negotiating sources confirmed that the British side had demanded an explanation for the demand , which Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , has described as `` egregious '' . `` We asked them to explain what they saw as the legal basis , which is not the same thing as saying there is 'no legal a UK source said . `` We asked a large number of questions on the issues . '' The Brexit divorce bill and an agreement on the rights of expats on both sides of the Channel will be the first two items that will be settled in the talks , which will begin in earnest next month . The two sides agreed that negotiations will be held in four-weekly cycles , with one week each month set aside for face-to-face negotiations , with the aim of making `` sufficient progress '' on these issues to begin trade talks after the EU summit in October . Mr Davis denied that the Government had caved in to EU demands to settle money and citizens ' rights before talking trade terms , even though these will now not be discussed until October at the very earliest . Britain had wanted to discuss both the terms of leaving the EU and the future of any trade deal in parallel , with Mr Davis previously describing the clash as one of the `` rows of the summer '' . Theresa May will use this week 's European leaders summit in Brussels to brief EU leaders on how the UK intends to treat the 3.2 million EU citizens currently in the UK after Brexit , in an attempt to kick-start the substantive negotiations on a positive note . Further details will be contained in a white paper to be published by the Government on Monday , with the key issue on the EU side being how the UK can legally guarantee those rights without submitting to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . The formal talks opened with attempts on both sides to be positive . Mr Davis promised to be `` constructive '' while Michel Barnier said that there was no intention to punish the UK , but instead focus on arranging an `` orderly withdrawal '' . The two lead negotiators , who already disagree on many of the fundamental points on Brexit , exchanged gifts that recognised their shared passion in hiking . It did not take long before there were quips on social media about having `` mountains to climb '' . Mr Barnier produced a carved walking stick from his native Savoie for Mr Davis , while the Brexit secretary presented his counterpart and with a signed copy of a classic mountaineering book Regards vers Annapurna , an account of an epic French expedition to the Himalayas in 1950 . Once inside the meeting room , Mr Davis , facing his counterpart across a giant horseshoe negotiating table , tried to strike a statesmanlike tone , using his opening remarks to promise that the UK wanted to remain a `` committed partner '' to the EU . `` This partnership will necessarily look and feel different from membership . But we hope that throughout , our close cooperation on trade and on security will continue as we tackle the the challenges of this and future generations together , '' he said . It did not take long for the mask to slip , however , with Mr Barnier striking an exasperated tone at the end of a long day 's talks , when asked if the EU has made any significant concessions to the British - given that the UK had agreed to all the EU 's demands over the schedule for the talks . `` I am not in a frame of mind to make concessions , or ask for concessions , '' he said tartly , adding that the EU was only following through on the UK 's own decision to leave , which would have `` substantial '' consequences . `` It is not about punishment , it is not about revenge , '' he said . But it was clear emotions are running high on both sides . `` I will do all I can to put emotion to one side and stick to the facts , the figures , and the legal basis , and work with the United Kingdom to find an agreement in that frame of mind , '' Mr Barnier added . Mr Davis , repeating the UK position that any final deal would have to include the outline of a future relationship as agreed under Article 50 , chose to quote Winston Churchill in summing up the prospects for a mutually beneficial deal . `` There is no doubt the road ahead will be challenging , but as Winston Churchill said 'The pessimist sees difficulty in every opportunity . The optimist sees the opportunity in every difficulty . ' And I am certainly an optimist . ''
Brussels wants EU citizens in Britain to live under EU law
EUROPEAN citizens living in Britain after Brexit should remain under the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , according to proposals tabled by senior European Commission negotiators , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . The idea - certain to be rejected by Britain - was set out at a meeting between Michel Barnier , the chief European Commission negotiator , and officials from the 27 other EU member states , according to a diplomat . `` The European Commission legal service was of the view that a political declaration on the rights of EU citizens in the UK would not be enough and that EU law must be available to EU citizens after Brexit , under the jurisdiction of the ECJ , '' said the source . Mr Barnier and officials from the 27 countries met to talk over Brexit tactics and discussed at length how the rights of the estimated three million EU citizens in the UK should be protected . European negotiators are concerned British citizens in Europe after Brexit will have rights guaranteed under EU law to third-country nationals , but that these might not be reciprocated . Europe has refused to enter into any negotiations with Britain over the status of EU expats ahead of the declaration of Article 50 and the start of formal negotiations . Attempts by Theresa May to cut an early deal on allowing expats in the EU to keep their rights to residence , work and health care after Brexit were rebuffed last month . Several EU member states at the meeting questioned whether it was `` realistic '' to expect the UK to agree to ECJ jurisdiction , but the Commission insisted it was paramount to protect EU law and the court 's jurisdiction . Officials in Whitehall with knowledge of the UK negotiating position described the proposals as `` pie in the sky '' , but indicative of the ultra `` theological '' thinking of parts of the European political establishment . Under reciprocal plans being considered in Whitehall , EU citizens who have lived in the UK for more than five years will be granted `` equal treatment '' and guaranteed rights equivalent to those under the old EU system . Yesterday British Future , a think tank , published the results of an inquiry into the position of EU nationals in the UK after Brexit . It urged the Government to guarantee rights and not use them as bargaining chips . Prof Stephen Peers , an EU law expert from the University of Essex , who sat on the inquiry panel , said the idea of retaining ECJ jurisdiction was a `` a nonstarter '' given that Mrs May has already ruled out ECJ jurisdiction for the UK post-Brexit . He said Mr Barnier `` should instead focus on getting a simple deal ensuring both sides guarantee the acquired rights of each others ' citizens '' . Editorial Comment : Page 19
Judgment day for Brexit saboteurs ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : Technically , the votes in the House of Commons today over a Labour motion on Brexit are symbolic , their results having no concrete effect on the law or government policy . But as so often in politics , symbols matter , since they show the electorate something about the people who wield power in their name . Labour MPs believed they had been rather clever in tabling a motion calling for the Government to publish a `` plan '' for Brexit , attempting to exploit unease on the Conservative benches about the Prime Minister 's approach of not giving away precise details about her plans before entering exit negotiations with the EU . The Government has responded with a ruse of its own . Mrs May will set out her thinking on Brexit in Parliament in due course , as she was no doubt always intending to . More immediately , she will ask MPs to support an amendment confirming that the House of Commons will respect the view of the British people expressed in the EU referendum and call on ministers to start the Article 50 process of exit by the end of March . How could any MP reasonably refuse to vote for that amendment ? The referendum result was clear : the British people , in a democratic vote , expressed their desire for Britain to leave the European Union . The Government , in turn , has said that it will act on that instruction by invoking Article 50 . Seen in that context , the contents of the government amendment are such an uncontroversial statement of the obvious that one might expect the Commons to accept it unanimously . Yet in the curious , twisted world of post-referendum politics , there are indeed questions about whether politicians elected by and answerable to the people will actually do something that those people have clearly told them to do . Labour shabbily seeks to use parliamentary chicanery to delay , dilute and even derail Brexit : laughably a party led by business-hating Marxists says it wants assurances on access to the EU 's single market before it will endorse Article 50 . That claim reveals Labour 's Brexit stance as deceitful opportunism . The Lib Dems are a little more honest , making no secret of their desire to deny the electorate what it voted for with a commitment to the failed ideology of European integration that is neither liberal nor democratic . Most Conservative MPs voted to remain , but most have sensibly accepted the referendum result and , like Mrs May , are committed to making the best of Brexit . A few , including several former ministers , persist in trying to make trouble for the woman who sacked them . Such attitudes among MPs have helped sustain a fundamental division in British politics between Parliament and the people . For many years , large numbers of people in the country had deep reservations about the EU and its development . Yet those reservations were generally ignored by a political class that generally embraced the EU and in some cases believed it right to impose on Britain policies the electorate was simply too stupid to accept or appreciate . The result of that arrogance was spelt out clearly at the referendum . It is to David Cameron 's credit that he held that referendum and finally gave the people their say on Europe , and it is to Mrs May 's credit that she is working so hard to enact their decision . The vote today gives MPs a chance to show that they too acknowledge the primacy of the people on Europe . Those who refuse to back the amendment will be making a public declaration of contempt for the voters . For those intent on resisting Brexit , much hope hangs on the case before the Supreme Court , which could rule that ministers must pass legislation in Parliament before invoking Article 50 . Whether the government amendment passes today will have no direct bearing on that case , but if it is indeed endorsed by the Commons , the judges might want to take account of it . A vote for the amendment would make it harder to argue , as some Remainers do , that Parliament is `` silent '' on what should follow from the referendum . As we have said before , the court ruling can not change the basic facts of Brexit : the people voted for it and it will happen . All that remains to be established is how many misguided Remainers in Parliament try to stand in the way . Such MPs are entitled to their views , but they must also expect to be challenged to justify those views , and to account for them . With this move to call the bluff of Brexit 's parliamentary saboteurs , Mrs May has shown her quality , demonstrating just the boldness many of her friends have been asking for . And when the votes are counted , we will see how many MPs are willing to reveal their true colours by refusing to declare , clearly and openly , that they will accept the choice of the electorate on Europe . They should know that the people they work for will be watching , and will judge them accordingly . Labour shabbily seeks to use chicanery to delay , dilute and even derail Brexit The vote gives MPs a chance to show that they too acknowledge the primacy of the people on Europe
Brexit 'threatens ' UK 's top spot for tech start-ups
THE UK 's leading position in the European tech start-up industry could be threatened if Brexit makes it harder to attract foreign employees , a new study warns . The UK currently boasts almost a third of all tech start-up employees in Europe , ahead of France on 19pc and Germany on 18pc , according to research by venture capital firm Balderton . But tech companies , which have high levels of foreign workers , fear this position could be at risk as the fall in the pound makes UK salaries less competitive and the Government considers curbs on free movement of people . Official figures suggest technology is one of the UK sectors most reliant on foreign workers , with more than a fifth of employees hailing from overseas . Balderton analysis also found that 42pc of new tech start-ups in the UK in 2015 had at least one foreign founder . A survey of chief executives and senior staff found that 82pc of UK start-ups were worried about continued access to talent post-Brexit . Balderton claimed that `` the attractiveness of the UK to this highly mobile workforce could decline rapidly and that the high costs of hiring staff who need visas could become a significant issue , should policies towards skilled workers change significantly post-Brexit '' . Currently , companies are able to hire new skilled talent from elsewhere in Europe without a visa within three weeks , it found . While it is unclear what arrangements will apply post-Brexit , the average time taken to hire those from elsewhere in the world that need Tier 2 visas is 16 weeks . `` Tech companies hire very quickly and grow quickly , '' James Wise , a partner at the firm said . `` Hiring in a couple of weeks is the norm , so having to go through visa system that would take 16 weeks would severely diminish our ability to be competitive . '' He added : `` London in particular has benefited significantly from migration . But the relative weakness of the pound since the referendum vote could reduce the advantage the capital enjoys without proper policy support post-Brexit . '' 82pc The number of UK tech start-ups that were worried about continued access to talent post-Brexit
May tells bosses : we will set our own rules for new international trade deals ; US election : the aftermath ; PM warns that Britain must once and for all deal with immigration and our forgotten communities
BRITAIN will use the freedom of Brexit to `` set our own rules '' as it negotiates new international trade deals , Theresa May told company bosses last night as she denied that she has an `` anti-business agenda '' . In her first major foreign policy speech since becoming Prime Minister , Mrs May said that the UK will `` forge new and dynamic trading agreements '' as it leaves the European Union . She also used the speech to respond to Donald Trump 's election , saying that it shows that Britain must once and for all deal with immigration and the communities across the country that feel forgotten by successive governments . She warned that a failure to deal with the `` downsides '' of globalisation could lead to its `` ruin '' . In her most significant comments yet about what Britain 's trading relationship will look like after Brexit , Mrs May said : `` As we leave the European Union , we will also use the strength and size of our economy to lead the way in getting out into the world and doing new business with old allies and new partners alike . `` We will use the freedoms that come from negotiating with partners directly , to be flexible , to set our own rules and forge new and dynamic trading agreements that work for the whole UK . '' Mrs May also rejected claims that there is a choice between `` hard '' and `` soft '' Brexit . `` That is also why ... we are not trying to replicate the deal that any other country has with the EU , '' she said . `` And we are not going for an offthe-shelf solution . `` All of us here tonight know that there is not some choice between hard Brexit and soft Brexit . It is about how business and government works together to get the best deal ; the right deal for Britain and the right deal for businesses working across the continent . '' Mrs May attacked business leaders who `` game the system and work to a different set of rules '' , in a thinlyveiled attack on bosses such as Sir Philip Green and Mike Ashley . However , she attempted to reach out to business leaders , who have in recent months criticised her over policy plans that have been described as punitive . The Government has said that it wants to force companies to put workers on boards and curb executive pay . Addressing the Guildhall in London , Mrs May said : `` I know many of you ... recognise this responsibility , but others have voiced their suspicion of what they see as a growing anti-business agenda . I do n't agree . It is because I believe so passionately in business that I say this . `` Asking business to work with government to play its part is profoundly pro-business , because it is fundamental to retaining faith in capitalism and free markets . '' Liam Fox has warned that the EU will be forced to compensate its trade partners unless the UK is given access to the single market after Brexit , it was reported . A leaked memo of a meeting with Irish politician Mary Mitchell O'Connor details the Trade Secretary 's belief that the threat of compensating countries which would no longer have access to the UK 's market will force the union to rethink its stance on single market access . 'There is no choice between hard Brexit and soft Brexit . It 's about how businesses and government work together to get the best deal for Britain '
Scotland Brexit risks younger generation 's future , says Morgan
PARENTS who vote for Brexit are `` gambling with their children 's future '' and risk creating a `` lost generation '' of young people , the Education Secretary warns today . Mrs Morgan will say that the economic shock of Brexit would `` damage the ability of young people to get on in life '' in an intervention that will be labelled by Eurosceptic Conservative MPs as `` scaremongering '' . Her comments are likely to deepen Conservative divisions over Europe , which intensified at the weekend amid accusations that David Cameron is ignoring Eurosceptic ministers . In a speech in London , Mrs Morgan will also suggest that Britain will vote to leave the European Union unless young people get out and vote and convince their parents and grandparents that Britain should stay in the European Union . She will highlight new research by Adzuna , a job search website , showing a drop in the number of vacancies being advertised as evidence that employers are concerned about the impact of Brexit . Young people , she will warn , will `` suffer the most '' from an economic shock of a Brexit because companies will cut back on entry-level jobs . In a speech in London she will say : `` It 's clear , that if Britain leaves Europe it will be young people who suffer the most , left in limbo while we struggle to find and then negotiate an alternative model . In doing so we risk that lost generation becoming a reality . `` At a time when people are rightly concerned about intergenerational fairness the most unfair decision that the older generation could make would be to take Britain out of Europe and damage the ability of young people to get on in life . ''
UK facing traumatic 'no deal ' decision soon ; If UK plays the no-deal card , it must be ready to see it through
IF THE European Union will not take `` yes '' for an answer on Brexit , this country faces a traumatic decision very soon . Should the European Council refuse to endorse talks on future ties with Britain next week in Brussels , we may indeed be forced to depart without a deal , on minimalist terms and in acrimony . One loses count of Theresa May 's concessions , all seemingly to no avail . There comes a point in diplomacy when a sovereign nation must stand its ground . This decision can not be put off for much longer . `` Time decay '' is poisonous . It is working remorselessly against British economic interests . The Bank of England warns that banks and City finance houses will activate their contingency plans and start to decamp en masse by Christmas unless they know where Brexit is heading . Sir Howard Davies , RBS chairman , said American and Asian banks are all shifting parts of their operations out of London . The question is whether City losses will be in the thousands or the tens of thousands , and the timing is `` very tight indeed '' . The German industry federation ( BDI ) said it is working on the assumption that Brexit talks will break down . Its Brexit `` task forces '' are taking steps to replace British subcontractors and reorganise their supply chains . Every week that goes by in this purgatory means Britain suffers the irreversible effects of a hard Brexit , yet without being able to negotiate new trade deals . It is dragging out the ordeal . It risks turning into the worst of all worlds : a hard Brexit by default . The Brexit mandate imposed on EU negotiators by the EU Council is legally dubious . Article 50 does not stipulate that all divorce issues must be settled before there can be any talk about trade ties . It states that the EU should work out the arrangements for withdrawal while `` taking account of the framework for its future relationship with the Union '' . Britain has gone along with the EU 's sequencing framework nevertheless . It has done so even though the three chapters on Ireland , citizens ' rights , and the alimony bill can not logically be separated from longer-term trading and security links . The Prime Minister has largely signed off on citizens ' rights . It is a fudge , of course : a legal mechanism will be found to lock in the privileges of EU nationals in Britain , with UK and EU judges working in concert . `` The British have basically given in , '' said Charles Grant from the Centre for European Reform . `` The Germans are blocking everything until they are offered more money . But they had better be careful because if this leads to the downfall of Theresa May , they will come to rue the consequences . '' Britain faces a corrosive state of affairs . The EU powers are `` shaking the tree '' , delaying talks even as they plot to snatch British spoils . Lord Owen , the former foreign secretary , says the time has come for a `` unilateral declaration '' stating how the country will proceed . Brinkmanship is a part of every EU summit . Germany and France may be playing a tactical game to wring out a few more concessions . By the same token , the British Government is hoping to concentrate the mind by floating contingency plans for `` no deal '' . I have no objection to such plans . What bothers me is that this is suddenly coming to the fore just days before the summit seemingly as a negotiating ploy to call Europe 's bluff . This is a dangerous gamble . Never try to bluff the EU . It is an error to try to play the `` no-deal '' option as if it were a card , not least because it misreads the European landscape . Two years of ultra-easy money and fiscal loosening have together generated a boom . If we are going to talk about a `` no-deal '' rupture , we must be willing to see it through . Here we confront the Original Sin of the Brexit `` cake and eat it '' movement : they never admitted that Brexit means blood , toil , sweat and tears . They never told the British people that there might be a stiff price to pay for restoring the supremacy of Parliament , or that it would be a logistical nightmare to extract ourselves after over 40 years enmeshed in the EU system . They have no political mandate for the hair shirt sacrifices that a walkout may entail . It is time to tell the British people now what those sacrifices would be . 'Bluffing the EU is a dangerous gamble . Never try to bluff the EU ' 'It is time to tell the British people what the sacrifices of `` no deal '' would be '
HSBC chairman warns of a Brexit 'Jenga tower ' of City job losses
BREXIT could trigger a `` Jenga tower '' of job moves out of the City , according to the chairman of HSBC , who has warned MPs that some banks could start to act on their contingency plans in a matter of months . Douglas Flint told the Commons ' Treasury select committee , which is investigating the impact of the UK 's decision to leave the EU , that secession could spark an unpredictable number of job losses from the capital into Europe or elsewhere . `` The ecosystem in London is a bit like a Jenga tower , '' Mr Flint said , referring to the game in which players have to avoid toppling a tower of wooden blocks . `` We do n't know if you pull one small piece out , whether nothing happens or indeed there is a more dramatic impact . '' It came as Xavier Rolet , chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , gave his bleakest forecast yet for the magnitude of job losses if the enormous clearing industry leaves the UK . Some 232,000 roles up and down the country are at risk if Britain is no longer the centre for euro-denominated derivatives clearing , he cautioned , citing research from EY commissioned by the LSE , which owns the world 's largest clearing house . That figure is more than double the 100,000 estimate Mr Rolet gave in September and was accompanied by a warning from the LSE chief yesterday that the financial consequences of Brexit could have a `` systemic impact '' . Labour has suggested the Government will seek a `` bankers ' Brexit '' for City firms , which have been vocal about the threat posed to jobs by EU secession , especially if the UK loses access to Europe 's single market in a socalled `` hard Brexit '' . But Mr Flint rejected those claims yesterday when asked by MPs whether the financial services industry was simply seeking to secure `` a good deal '' for the City . The Government has so far been tight-lipped about what sort of future relationship it will try to negotiate with Brussels for the UK . Putting pressure on the Government , the HSBC chairman warned that financial firms will quickly start to implement Brexit contingency plans if ministers do not give them guidance on the deal the UK wants from the EU . `` For those businesses that do n't have infrastructure already in place in Europe it will start , I think , pretty much immediately on the triggering of Article 50 , '' he said . The banking veteran added that some firms may simply decide to cut jobs , rather than move roles elsewhere . HSBC has previously warned that it could shift 1,000 jobs to France , where it already has a sizeable operation , although Mr Flint stressed that it was City firms ' preference to maintain the `` status quo '' following Brexit . Both City figures - along with Allianz Global Investors vice-chairman Elizabeth Corley , who also faced MPs - urged the Government to secure a transition period from Brussels lasting beyond the two years the UK has under Article 50 to negotiate the terms of Brexit , to help with financial stability . Mr Flint said that two to three years following the end of Article 50 might be sufficient , while the LSE boss called for a `` grandfathering '' of existing arrangements for a `` limited period '' .
Royal Bank of Scotland plunges further after downgrade
Royal Bank of Scotland plunged to the bottom of the blue-chip index after Morgan Stanley downgraded the stock amid fears `` a prolonged , convoluted and costly '' Brexit would weigh on earnings . The British bank is among the biggest Brexit casualties and is still nursing a 34pc loss since the result was announced on Friday . In the latest blow to its share price performance , analysts at Morgan Stanley downgraded its rating to `` equal weight '' from `` overweight '' and revised its price target down to 210p . The investment bank said it views the `` seismic '' Brexit shock as one of `` earnings and heightened uncertainty '' , before adding it was `` not systemic '' . Although it thinks UK banks are in dramatically better funding positions than they were in 2007 , it warned the weaker outlook will `` aggravate those banks with capital gaps '' . They believe Britain 's divorce proceedings with the EU will hurt bank earnings , particularly through rates and volumes . `` For RBS , the net profit impact is higher owing to higher operating leverage , '' Morgan Stanley said in a note . Furthermore it cautioned : `` A worse rates outlook will be a big hit on both UK but also eurozone banks , as the ECB may reopen what we 've called the `` dangerous experiment '' of negative rates '' . As a result shares in Royal Bank of Scotland tumbled 8.6p , or 4.8pc , nearing 2009 levels of 171.6p . Morgan Stanley also downgraded Clydesdale to `` underweight '' , sending share 1.4pc lower to 232p . For the remainder of the sector , Morgan Stanley also slashed earnings per share forecasts for 2018 by 12 to 27pc . In its wake , shares in Lloyds fell 2.6pc to 54.1p . However , shares in Barclays rose 0.5pc to 138.6p , HSBC climbed 2.9pc to 465.9p and Standard Chartered added 1.3pc to 564.6p . On the wider market , the FTSE 100 charged ahead to a 10-month high , closing up 144.27 points , or 2.27pc , to 6,504.33 . The blue-chip index has now made gains of 2.8pc since Brexit . The remarkable surge came as Bank of England Governor Mark Carney said that more stimulus was `` likely to be required '' in the summer months . Elsewhere , private equity firm 3i took the FTSE 100 top spot after it said it had no plans to dispose of its investment in Dutch discount retailer Action , even though it has received a number of approaches for its stake . Separately , Barclays named 3i as its top pick in the European diversified financials sector after it reshuffled the sector on the back of increased macro uncertainty following Britain 's vote to leave the EU . Shares leapt 8.5pc to 547½p . Mining stocks were also among the risers as the sector continued to benefit from a weak pound in the Brexit aftermath . Antofagasta and Anglo American also benefited from rating upgrades from Haitong Research , who said the sell-off across the sector had become `` more constructive '' . Shares in Antofagasta rose 5.1pc to 465.6p , Anglo American climbed 4.3pc to 726.9p , Glencore advanced 4.2pc to 152.9p , and Rio Tinto edged up 3.5pc to £22.94 . Utility company SSE also made gains , up 5.6pc to £15.54 , on the back of rating upgrade . RBC Capital Markets hiked its rating to `` outperform '' from `` underperform '' . On the other side , Berenberg took an axe to Travis Perkins , lowering its rating to `` hold '' , citing Brexit uncertainty . Although the broker still believes the FTSE 250 builders merchant still has a `` sound long-term strategy '' , it is unable to maintain its `` buy '' rating in light of the risks to UK construction activity resulting from the Brexit vote . Michael Watts , of Berenberg , said : `` We do not foresee a 2008-09 scenario but a more moderate contraction in activity , which means that the group 's midterm growth ambitions will not now be achieved . '' In its wake , shares fell 23p , or 1.5pc , to £14.74 . Property group Zoopla also slumped into the red after a rating revision from Panmure Gordon . The broker cut its recommendation from `` buy '' to `` sell '' as it thinks the stock has further to fall in the Brexit aftermath . Jonathan Helliwell , of Panmure Gordon , cautioned : `` We fear the uncertainty created by the surprise Brexit vote could push an already weakening housing transactions market over the edge , into a prolonged period of torpor . '' Shares dipped 0.7pc to 266p . Away from Brexit , JP Morgan slashed Reckitt Benckiser 's rating to `` neutral '' despite believing the FTSE 100 has `` strong business fundamentals '' . Celine Pannuti , of JP Morgan , said : `` We expect underlying momentum will be hit in the shortterm by the boycott of Reckitt Benckiser products in South Korea , leading to a group like-for-like slowing to 4pc . '' The consumer goods maker has been blamed for selling fatal disinfectants that caused around 100 deaths five years ago . Investors appeared to shrug off the rating downgrade as shares rose 2.9pc to £74.90 . On the mid-cap index , bid speculation lifted shares in insurer Esure . Despite the group confirming `` no approach has been received '' , the FTSE 250 stock closed up 9.8pc at 286.1p . Transport group Go-Ahead drove 3pc higher to £19.56 on the back of a rating upgrade from Investec . The broker said only about one-third of the business is directly exposed to GDP changes . On Aim , shares in Venn Life Sciences enjoyed a bounce of 14.3pc to 28p after the Dublin-based group said its revenues for the six months ended June 30 will exceed ( EURO ) 8m .
May bows to the 'mutineers ' ; Rebels emboldened after EU states take legal advice over extension to negotiations
THERESA MAY is poised to bow to the demands of the Brexit `` mutineers '' by dropping Britain 's EU exit date from legislation governing the UK 's withdrawal . David Lidington , the Justice Secretary , said `` various constructive suggestions '' had been made to the Prime Minister and that the Government `` will listen '' to calls for the exit date to be removed from the Bill . Another senior Cabinet minister told The Daily Telegraph the Government was considering removing the controversial amendment after a series of tight votes earlier this week signalled Mrs May might lose if it was put to the vote . Dominic Grieve , the leader of the Tory rebels , said that as many as 27 Tory MPs were prepared to oppose Mrs May 's amendment which proposed to set a legal date and time for leaving the EU . The rebels were emboldened last night by the news that EU member states have sought legal advice from the European Commission over a possible extension of the two-year negotiation period set out in Article 50 . Pro-Brexit ministers had already warned Mrs May to back down over the plans to enshrine the Brexit date in law after it became clear that the Government would face defeat in the Commons when it was put to a vote . Speaking at a Press Gallery lunch in the Houses of Parliament , Mr Lidington said : `` As the PM says , various constructive suggestions have been made during the committee debate about how the Bill might be improved and obviously we will listen to ideas coming from colleagues across the House during the Bill 's progress in both Commons and Lords . '' Reacting to the news that the EU27 had sought legal advice , Tom Tugendhat , one of the Tories now threatening to vote against the amendment . He said : `` It puts control in their hands , not ours , and what we have to maintain as much control as possible and flexibility in the negotiations . This is about leaving as quickly as possible but on our terms . '' Mr Grieve told today 's `` Chopper 's Brexit Podcast '' the amendment to enshrine the Brexit date in law was `` completely idiotic '' because it did not allow `` for last minute changes or adjustments '' to the timetable for Brexit . He said that if the amendment were put to a vote `` I will vote against it '' . A Government source said : `` What the European Commission do is totally up to them , but any legal advice they give is totally irrelevant because we will not be extending Article 50 , we will have left at the end of March 2019 , and whatever happens , Article 50 can only be extended with the unanimous agreement of all 28 member states . '' Last night David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , warned the EU not to allow its demands for more money from Britain to scupper a deal . At an economic summit in Germany he referred to the £157billion of trade between Britain and Germany as he said : `` I know that no one would allow short-term interests to risk those hard-earned gains . '' Before Mr Davis delivered his speech , Hans-Olaf Henkel , the former head of the Federation of German Industries , said Germany expected Mr Davis to offer his `` unconditional surrender '' to the EU 's terms . It emerged as EU officials said that Ireland will not be able to block Britain from opening trade talks with the EU if it can not resolve an ongoing row over the future status of the Northern Ireland border . `` There 's a risk of separation talks not making sufficient progress on Ireland , not a risk of Ireland blocking on its own the advancement of Brexit talks , '' a senior EU official told reporters in Brussels .
Boris and May in Brexit bill showdown ; Foreign Secretary to tell PM £30bn 'divorce ' settlement is not acceptableBoris 'not thinking of top job '
BORIS JOHNSON will use a showdown meeting with Theresa May this week to demand reassurances from the Prime Minister over how much she is prepared to pay to the EU after Brexit . The Foreign Secretary is concerned by reports that Mrs May is preparing to announce that she will carry on paying up to £10billion per year to the EU during a transition period , which could be as long as three years . He used an article in Saturday 's Daily Telegraph to insist that Britain should only pay `` what is due '' and should pay nothing to access the single market . Mr Johnson has been told he will not be sacked over the article , which had not been authorised by Downing Street and was regarded by some as a deliberate attempt to undermine Mrs May . However , there are fears among some Tory MPs that Mr Johnson could take the `` catastrophic '' decision to resign within days if Mrs May fails to appease him in a key speech on Brexit to be given in Florence on Friday . Senior Conservatives are nervous that the maverick Mr Johnson could `` explode the fragile unity of the party '' by quitting the Cabinet if Mrs May signals she is prepared to pay tens of billions in an EU `` divorce '' deal . Ministers are also braced for a possible Cabinet reshuffle after next month 's party conference , at which Mr Johnson could be demoted if he does not step into line . As well as being attacked by some Tory colleagues over his Brexit essay , Mr Johnson has been embroiled in an extraordinary spat with a senior civil servant over his claim in The Telegraph that Britain would be £350 million per week better off outside the EU . In a series of increasingly testy letters and phone calls , Sir David Norgrove , chairman of the UK Statistics Authority , said he was `` surprised and disappointed '' that the £350million claim - first made during last year 's referendum campaign - had been revived . Mr Johnson hit back , accusing Sir David of `` wilfully distorting '' his words . Mr Johnson will accompany Mrs May to the United Nations General Assembly meeting in New York this week , where she is to address delegates , and where she will privately discuss her Florence speech with him . He will seek reassurances that Mrs May is not about to agree to keep paying £10billion a year to Brussels in any transition period after March 2019 . Those concerns will not have been allayed by Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , telling Sky News that Britain would continue paying the EU to access Europol and other bodies post-Brexit . He also twice refused to rule out paying to access the single market during any transition period and said the 27 remaining capitals of Europe would `` welcome '' what Mrs May says on Friday . Asked if Mr Johnson was going to be sacked , Mr Green said : `` No , he is n't and the reason is , he , like the rest of the Cabinet , like the Prime Minister , is all about wanting to get the best deal for the British people . '' He suggested `` people should calm down '' after a `` weekend of excitement '' and said he did not think there was anything in Mr Johnson 's article that was surprising or contradicted Mrs May . Mr Johnson 's Brexit blueprint reopened Cabinet splits that appeared to have healed over the summer , with Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , accusing him of being a `` backseat driver . Sir Vince Cable , the Lib Dem leader , said Mrs May 's decision not to sack Mr Johnson shows she is `` paralysed and impotent '' , but friends of Mr Johnson have said his article was intended to set out concerns he and fellow Cabinet ministers Michael Gove and Priti Patel have about what might be in the Florence speech , but was not a leadership bid . However , one veteran Tory MP said : `` This is a dangerous moment ... he is lighting a blue touch paper that risks exploding the fragile unity of the party and the Government . '' `` The Prime Minister needs to be tough ... if we have a leadership contest in the middle of Brexit the wheels are going to come off everything . '' Mr Johnson insists Mrs May retains his full support as leader and in the Brexit talks , and he is on record as saying that he would not contemplate a leadership bid before the Brexit date . One friend said yesterday : `` All he is thinking about at the moment is his conference speech , not the leadership . There is no question of him resigning . `` He is enjoying the job of being Foreign Secretary and all he was doing with his article was trying to put some 'va-va-voom ' back into the Brexit process , as he feels there is too much negativity . `` He has never suggested he would die in a ditch fighting any attempt to pay money to the EU , and if he did start to talk about resigning I think his closest friends would lock him in a room and tell him to keep his eyes on the prize , which is Britain leaving the EU . '' Jacob Rees-Mogg , who has himself been talked of as a possible future Tory leader , backed Mr Johnson 's `` magnificent '' vision of Brexit in the 4,000-word article , and says in today 's Daily Telegraph that Britain must not agree an `` unnecessary divorce payout '' .
It 's clear the great Brexit betrayal has begun ; An out-of-touch elite is failing to accept that the issue which won Brexit was open-door immigration
When I heard that the government minister Lord Prior had told a meeting of tech and insurance leaders last week that they should n't worry about barriers to entry for future employees from the EU , I thought he 'd gone too far . How could a Brexit administration elected on a promise of reducing net migration to the tens of thousands tolerate such behaviour ? Surely Lord Prior would be sacked ? Instead , it got worse . A new Cabinet consensus around transitional arrangements has been unveiled . Under it , open borders will be maintained for a minimum of two years after we finally leave the EU in 2019 . Britain will have to wait until at least 2021 - five years after the Brexit referendum - to take back control . Millions who voted Leave will feel cheated , and rightly so : it 's clear the great Brexit betrayal has begun . Although the modern Tory party has a dreadful track record when it comes to immigration , last summer things looked brighter . Boris Johnson and Michael Gove even advocated an Australian-style points system . That message undoubtedly helped to secure Brexit . Things have now changed . Gove argues that future migration policy should be shaped by the interests of our economy . Unsurprisingly , our Remain Chancellor , Philip Hammond , agrees , while also apparently believing Britain should stay in the single market post-Brexit . The old alliance of big business and a Tory government is booming again . Meanwhile Tory supporters , who have voted loyally in successive elections for manifestos that promise to drastically cut numbers , have been sold out . Daily , we are spoon-fed arguments about the need for a transitional period after leaving the EU , allegedly in the interests of the economy . In reality , this is just a re-run of an argument advanced by the Remain side last year , which was dramatically rejected by the electorate . Apart from a few delusional Westminster MPs , everyone knows that the issue which won Brexit was open-door immigration . Large numbers of people who had never previously voted turned out on June 23 last year believing that Britain could reclaim its future if this irresponsible policy was jettisoned . Not only did voters regard this as a vital matter in a democracy , it was also about trust . That sense of trust is falling away rapidly . The irony is that the Government 's decision to keep the borders open comes as the migrant crisis in Italy is intensifying . Even the most optimistic measure of the `` new consensus '' will mean that , one year on from the historic vote , all of the problems caused by the UK 's rising population - which is set to hit 77 million by 2050 - will continue to worsen . Every week Britain 's national debate focuses on the lack of available school places , shortfalls in NHS funding , overcrowding on our railways , or on the housing crisis . But rarely , if ever , does any member of the political class dare to voice the undeniable truth that immigration lies at the root of these difficulties . The talk is always of the economic benefits , never the capital costs of the infrastructure required . The Brexit-voting public is not in denial over immigration . Many now want a total stop to it . For a nation to rise up against the establishment and secure a historic victory , only to have its hopes thwarted by an out-of-touch elite , is a recipe for dangerous division . It is strange to think that Jeremy Corbyn is now offering a tougher line than the Government when he says he would ban the wholesale importation of low-skilled EU workers . Is this a ploy to damage Theresa May , much as the late Labour leader John Smith cynically opposed the Maastricht treaty in 1992 ? Even the shadow trade secretary and staunch Remainer , Barry Gardiner , acknowledges that a `` key objective '' of Brexit was to `` have control over our borders '' . He says that unless this objective , and others , are met , `` we will find it difficult to justify the final result to the 52 per cent who voted Leave '' . Mr Gardiner is absolutely right . My hopes that this Government had learnt the lessons of the referendum , and understood that open-door immigration and its effects matter more to voters than any other issue , have for now evaporated . The `` new consensus '' must be broken . FOLLOW Nigel Farage on Twitter @ Nigel_Farage ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
What to watch BODY : After Brexit : The Battle for Europe BBC TWO , 9.00PM ? ? Hard Brexit . Soft Brexit . As Britain continues to prepare for withdrawal from the EU , the BBC 's Europe Editor Katya Adler presents this special investigation into the rise of populist Eurosceptic movements and asks whether the union itself can survive . Adler begins in Sicily , where she charts the conflict between Ukip-like movement Five Star and pro-Euro centrist Matteo Renzi , who recently resigned as Italian prime minister . She then travels across the continent , meeting the politicians posing a major threat to the EU establishment , as well as ordinary voters disfranchised by years of Eurozone turmoil and the migrant crisis - from France , where the Front National 's Marine Le Pen is in contention for the country 's presidency , to Hungary , where prime minister Viktor Orban is launching his own counter-revolution against Brussels . Adler also meets top Eurocrats including Germany 's Martin Schulz and Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian PM charged with negotiating Brexit on behalf of the European Parliament . Can the 60-year old union survive or will it be swept away by a populist revolution ? Michael Hogan
Attempts to set aside the Brexit referendum ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Tom Brake ( Letters , January 26 ) denies that Liberal Democrats want to block Brexit by any means possible , stating that his party simply wants to grant the people a say on the Government 's final deal with the European Union - through a further referendum . If a middle-of-the-road Brexit deal were put to the people , many might reject it for not being hard enough . Yet Mr Brake and others might reject it for not being soft enough . Thus the majority could reject the deal , but for opposing reasons . Tim Farron has said that , in such circumstances , Britain would remain in the EU despite this being the will of the minority . Is this another example of shallow thinking by the Liberal Democrats or proof of their desire to block Brexit at any cost ? Christopher Healy North Ferriby , East Yorkshire SIR - Mr Brake 's conditions that would see the Liberal Democrats vote in support of invoking Article 50 remind me of the demands Austria issued to Serbia in 1914 . He knows the Government is very unlikely to agree to a second referendum on the final Brexit deal . If the Liberal Democrats ( like the EU ) can not accept a referendum result , I suggest their title needs updating . Henry Ireton Hordle , Hampshire SIR - The treatment of the people 's decision in the EU referendum is nothing short of a scandal . Before the referendum , the Government delivered a brochure to every house in the land extolling the benefits of staying in the EU . It said nothing in favour of leaving , and its whole campaign was one of threats and warnings . Yet most people voted to leave . On the 14th page of the brochure , it was clearly stated : `` This is your decision . The Government will implement what you decide . '' The brochure did not add `` unless you vote to leave '' . Nor did it say : `` Whatever the result , Parliament will need to ratify it . '' The subsequent attempts to subvert the people 's decision will have grave consequences for the future of democracy in this country . A J Brooks Swindon , Wiltshire
Scotland EU 'has more to lose from Brexit ' ; Carney admits British economy is doing better than Bank expected in wake of referendum
THE EU has more to lose from Brexit than the UK , the Governor of the Bank of England has said as he admitted that Britain 's economy will defy his own gloomy forecasts and grow at a faster rate than expected . Mark Carney conceded that Brexit is no longer the biggest domestic risk to Britain 's economy after issuing a series of dire warnings about the consequences of a Leave vote in the run up to the EU referendum . The Bank of England is now `` very likely '' to improve its economic forecast next month , Mr Carney said , adding that he was `` surprised '' that the economic slowdown which he forecast has not materialised . `` In the run-up to the referendum we felt that it was the largest risk [ to the economy ] , '' he said . `` There were a series of things that could have happened that would have had financial stability consequences . '' He said that having got this far , `` the scale of the immediate risks around Brexit have gone down '' . During an appearance before MPs , he said that a hard Brexit would pose a greater threat to the financial stability of the European Union than to the UK because of the strength of Britain 's financial services sector . `` I am not saying there are not financial stability risks in the UK , and there are economic risks to the UK , but there are greater short-term risks on the continent in the transition than there are in the UK , '' he said . However , he insisted that the Bank of England was right to be pessimistic in its forecasts . `` As you 'd expect a bunch of dour central bankers to be , we 're focused on the downside and less focused on how everything could turn out well , but what could go really wrong ... and where can we potentially mitigate that , '' he said . `` We do n't have to see a ghost behind every corner , but we do have to ask ourselves what could go wrong . '' Eurosceptic Conservative MPs said that Mr Carney should apologise for the forecasts during the referendum campaign . Peter Bone said : `` I do n't think experts ever say sorry . They just say they got their forecasts wrong due to unexpected circumstances . It proves that the British people were right and the banking experts were wrong . '' Oxford University 's head of Brexit strategy said yesterday that British universities will establish global networks and recruit the world 's `` best and brightest '' students outside of the EU . Prof Alastair Buchan told the education select committee that EU membership had `` sidelined '' Canadian and US researchers who used to work at UK universities . He told the committee : `` We had really good collaborations , which hopefully in this Brexit climate might be reinvented , because that movement of English-speaking medicine was actually a casualty of joining Europe . '' Yesterday Robert Goodwill , the immigration minister , suggested that businesses could be hit with a £1,000 annual charge for every skilled European worker they employ after Britain leaves the EU . However , Downing Street said it is `` not on the Government 's agenda '' . Sturgeon plan 'impossible ' : Page 4 Business : Page 1
City bosses face grilling over Brexit doomsaying ; Douglas Flint , Xavier Rolet and Elizabeth Corley to be quizzed by MPs over pessimistic EU forecasts
THREE of the City 's most powerful figures face questions from MPs over suggestions banks and other financial services firms exaggerated the threat posed by Brexit . Douglas Flint , chairman of HSBC , London Stock Exchange boss Xavier Rolet and Elizabeth Corley , vice chairman of asset manager Allianz Global Investors , will appear before the Treasury Select Committee ( TSC ) tomorrow . The influential panel of MPs has launched an inquiry into the future of Britain 's economic relationship with Europe once it leaves the EU . It is understood MPs will investigate whether City firms have embellished the likely impact of Brexit on the Square Mile , in an attempt to pressure the government into prioritising the financial services industry during negotiations with Brussels . It comes after the chief economist of the Bank of England conceded that the warnings of an economic downturn forecasters sounded before the EU referendum had been a `` Michael Fish '' moment - the infamous episode in 1987 when the BBC weatherman said there would be no hurricane the night before the Great Storm . Andy Haldane admitted that some of the bleakest Brexit forecasts might transpire to be `` just scare stories '' and that economics was now in `` crisis '' . Mr Rolet 's predictions have been among the most doom-laden . In the run-up to the referendum he told The Sunday Telegraph that Brexit would lead to `` implosion '' of the continental bloc . In September , the stock exchange boss claimed that as many as 100,000 jobs across the country are at risk if exiting the EU results in the loss of the clearing industry from the UK . The clearing of some £460bn of euro-denominated derivatives a day is set to be one of the main financial battlegrounds in negotiations between London and Brussels . European cities such as Paris and Frankfurt are vying to take over the industry , although Mr Rolet has suggested most clearing will move to New York after Britain 's exit . HSBC said it could move about 1,000 employees from London to Paris if the UK left the EU , although Mr Flint appeared to row back on that claim following the EU vote , saying that such a move would be an `` extreme '' scenario . One of the main worries for executives at banks , asset managers , and insurers with European operations based in the UK is that their firms will lose access to the EU 's single market . They say this would force firms to move employees on to the Continent to sell services to European clients . Many are pushing for a lengthy transition period .
Scotland 'Brexit was n't a vote to shut down the economy ' ; Philip Hammond warns that immigration controls must not come at expense of growth
PHILIP HAMMOND is keen to point out that his relationship with the Prime Minister is very different from the one George Osborne had with David Cameron . In the three months since Theresa May made him Chancellor , there have been reports of strains . Gone are the days when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne governed almost as one . The new Prime Minister prefers to make decisions alone or with only her most trusted advisers , it is said . It has even been reported that Mr Hammond is no longer a guest at her daily morning meeting , something that would have been unthinkable when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne occupied Downing Street . But Mr Hammond suggests that the nearsymbiotic relationship maintained by his predecessor and the former prime minister was not necessarily conducive to good government . `` George Osborne had a very close personal and political relationship that goes back a very long way with David Cameron and they worked together in a certain way , '' Mr Hammond says . `` Theresa May and I work together in a different way - [ though ] we 've also known each other a long time . '' He adds : `` The most important thing is that we share clear objectives . That we understand each other 's priorities , we know how each other work and we have a channel of ready communication between us and I 'm quite satisfied with the arrangements that Theresa May and I have got . '' Brexit and the Single Market In recent days there have been reports that Mrs May is seeking a `` hard Brexit '' , which would mean Britain relinquishing its membership of the single market so that it can have full control of its borders . Mr Hammond is dismissive of attempts to characterise exit negotiations as `` soft '' or `` hard '' . `` We 're the world 's fifth-largest economy and creating a relationship between the European Union and the world 's fifth-largest economy is going to be a complex process for which there is no model , '' he says . `` So it will be a bespoke model . We should be looking for a good Brexit - not a hard Brexit or a soft Brexit . '' There have been reports that he is concerned that the desire among some in Government to control immigration could lead to economic harm , with the European Union denying access to the single market if Britain does not accept the free movement of migrants . But Mr Hammond insists that any migration controls must not come at the expense of economic progress . The Chancellor says : `` We 've got to be clear about one thing - there 's an implicit term of the mandate we received from the British people . It may not have been stated explicitly but it 's implicit . And that is that they do not want to see the economy suffer . `` They do not want to see jobs lost , they do not want to see standards of living decline . So they will expect us to negotiate a solution which delivers the key elements of leaving the European Union - regaining our sovereignty , getting control over our borders - but they will expect us to do all of that in a way that allows the UK economy to go on growing . '' Immigration Mr Hammond has made clear that whatever immigration controls are enforced , `` highly skilled '' workers will never be `` shut out '' of Britain . He has already said that key workers in the financial services industry will be exempt , but appears to suggest that other sectors will get similar freedoms . `` Whatever solution we end up with , whatever control powers we have over immigration into the UK , we will use them responsibly , '' he says . `` We will use them in a way that supports the UK economy and we will certainly not use them to shut out highly skilled people - whether they are bankers or software engineers or managers in global companies - from the UK when their presence is supporting inward investment and growth . '' Responsible capitalism Mrs May has faced criticism from the country 's biggest firms by demanding `` responsible capitalism '' . The Prime Minister wants to put workers on company boards and also rein in excessive pay . He insists the measures , particularly plans to put workers on boards , are `` something that responsible businesses will recognise can be positive for them '' . He also suggests large companies will not want to risk a backlash from angry customers . `` Business needs to understand - and I think business does understand - in the wider context it is n't sustainable to have large household brand-name businesses angering their consumers . Their consumers , our voters , must be important to them and their reputation , their image with their consumers must be important . '' Amid growing concerns about the German lender Deutsche Bank , Mr Hammond is quick to reassure voters that the British - and global - banking systems are more `` resilient '' than before the 2008 financial crash . He says that if a big bank is in trouble `` the world 's central banks would cooperate together to resolve it in a way that did n't contaminate the wider system '' . He adds : `` I have a high degree of confidence that those mechanisms that we now have in place are effective and will work if called upon . '' The tech industry Mr Hammond will use his speech to the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham to announce a huge cashinjection for hi-tech companies . As well as £100 million for life sciences , there will be £120 million to research artificial intelligence and nanotechnology . Mr Hammond says he wants to make Britain a `` global capital '' of `` innovation '' . What 's on when Conference agenda ? Tomorrow Theresa May ; David Davis , Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union ; Liam Fox , International Development Secretary ; Boris Johnson , Foreign Secretary ; Sir Patrick McLoughlin , party chairman ? Monday Philip Hammond , Chancellor ; Greg Clark , Business Secretary ; Sajid Javid , Local Government Secretary ; Chris Grayling , Transport Secretary ? Tuesday Amber Rudd , Home Secretary ; Michael Fallon , Defence Secretary ; Liz Truss , Justice ; Jeremy Hunt , Health ; Justine Greening , Education ; Damian Green , Work and Pensions ? Wednesday Theresa May
The IMF is missing the point on Brexit ; COMMENT
There are two ways of looking at the IMF 's pronouncements on the economy , Brexit and all other matters . The first is to dismiss everything it says as irrelevant : after all , it has regularly changed its mind in recent decades over central issues of economic policy and utterly failed to predict or understand the bubble of the 2000s and the subsequent crash and financial collapse . It also proved unable to properly predict the eurozone crisis , or to be sufficiently objective about the launch of the single currency . It got it wrong on austerity , or at least on the impact of the version practised by George Osborne , forcing a rare apology . Time and again , its predictions or prescriptions turn out to be wanting . I would n't go as far as to claim that it is a contrary indicator - it is right on some major questions , such as the desirability of globalisation and free trade - but its record is poor when it matters . Like almost all international organisations and institutions , it buys into the current ( and everchanging ) 'The status quo itself is unstable : the EU will received economic change over the next few years ' wisdom . International bureaucracies support other international bureaucracies ; and the IMF , all too predictably , backs the EU . Christine Lagarde argues that the referendum on Brexit could create uncertainty , whereas she believes that certainty would be preferable ( sadly , bureaucrats never like the fact that democracy actually implies a choice from empowered voters ) . Despite all of that , I prefer the second option , which is to take all arguments seriously , even if their source is suspect and has a terrible history of getting it wrong . The IMF is engaged in what could be a six-month project to write a report on how Brexit would impact the economy , the conclusions of which are likely to be predictable ; but when it is published , it will deserve to be taken seriously even by those of us who already suspect that they wo n't be convinced . The real debate to be had within the business community is slightly different , however . I have spoken to several anti-Brexit CEOs in recent weeks , who have made the same point : they believe that the EU is procapitalist and those who oppose it are not . I have also spoken to pro-Brexit business people and economists who have argued the exact opposite : it is the EU that is anti-capitalist , its centralising , harmonising and regulatory instincts inherently at odds with real free markets . It is a fascinating divide : two groups of intelligent people are looking at the same organisation , and coming to radically different conclusions . One group is right , and the other wrong . In a variation on the same theme , one prominent chief executive told me that his own decision as to whether or not he would back Brexit would boil down to whether he thought that an independent UK would be more protectionist and inward-looking - or whether Brexit would make us more global in outlook and more likely to embrace pro-growth reforms . The truth is that we can not know for sure . It is possible that we would become a lot more protectionist if we were to leave the EU , or at least loosen our ties with it ; in particular , there is a good chance that the labour market will become less liberal ( though more barriers to EU migrants might be cancelled out by fewer barriers for certain non-EU ones ) . But it is equally possible that the rise of Marine Le Pen in France and other factors will make the EU far more interventionist and illiberal than it is today , impacting us , too . The status quo itself is unstable : the EU will change over the next few years and us with it . My own guess is that the sort of constitutional and cultural shock that a Brexit /proper renegotiation would guarantee would jolt Britain out of its current complacency . Paradoxically , trade and life would continue unchanged for the first few years at least ; but it would nevertheless be a seismic event for Westminster elites . Attitudes would change very quickly . They would become far more aware of the need to attract capital and talent ; the pressure to allow the construction of new airport capacity would be greater ; we would finally sort out our domestic political institutions ; we would have to fight harder and be better in every way , focusing on education , investment and competitiveness . The artificial European cocoon would be gone , if only psychologically ( in practice , the UK and the EU would probably remain just as economically integrated as they are today ) . Far from retreating into protectionism and nimbyism , I suspect that we would become even more open . It 's just a guess , of course - but contrary to what the IMF seems to believe , certainty is n't possible in the real world . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk 'The status quo itself is unstable : the EU will change over the next few years '
UBS to start moving City jobs to Europe 'early this year '
SWISS investment bank UBS has revealed it will start to implement Brexit contingency plans early this year , in a move that could see hundreds of the firm 's London staff move to continental Europe . In full-year results published yesterday , UBS - which employs 5,000 people in London said it would begin `` implementation of contingency measures in early 2018 '' in preparation for Brexit . Some 200 roles are expected to leave the UK , according to reports , compared with 1,000 initially feared . UBS has struck a more upbeat tone on Brexit in recent months , saying it is `` more and more unlikely '' it will have to move as many as 1,000 staff from London due to `` regulatory and political clarifications '' it has received . However , the speed with which international banks are enacting contingency plans will add to concerns about the City of London 's global status . The Bank of England and consultancy EY have warned that as many as 10,000 City jobs could go by March next year without a Brexit trade deal . City bosses and the UK Government are pressing the EU for a Brexit trade deal that includes financial services . Axel Weber , chairman of UBS , was among the finance bosses making the case at a summit with Theresa May , the Prime Minister , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , at Number 10 earlier this month . However , the EU has insisted Britain 's financial services industry will not be included in any agreement . UBS posted pre-tax profits of Swiss francs 5.4bn ( £4bn ) for 2017 , narrowly above analyst expectations of Sfr5.3bn . The strong profits came despite a Sfr2.9bn one-time hit in the fourth quarter from Donald Trump 's US tax reforms . UBS also announced plans to merge its global and US private banks and a Sfr2bn share buy-back programme in a boon for investors . Sergio Ermotti , chief executive at UBS , said the merger of the group 's two wealth management divisions would help to lower costs and increase profits .
We should all be optimistic about Brexit - here 's why
The Treasury wants to keep the lid on public spending and limit tax giveaways until UK public finances are sound . This is a good aim , since the Government 's debts are about 80pc of our national income when you strip out the effects of the Bank of England 's operations in the money markets and the debt of RBS . But in March 2019 we formally leave the EU ; and probably by mid 2020 we are out of the transition period . We must have the right policies to make sure the economy thrives . For that the Treasury needs to have a positive mindset . Unfortunately , it seems quite determined to take the gloomiest view possible . The Treasury has not retracted the assessments of Brexit it made before the referendum : long-term , that GDP would be reduced by any Brexit , most of all ( 7pc ) by a clean Brexit with no EU trade deal , and short-term , that there would be a sharp and immediate recession . The short-term one has already been contradicted by events : the UK is still growing well . The long-term assessment has come under widespread attack ; its protectionist assumptions are contrary to the Government 's trade policies , and its empirical work was largely based on non-UK experience . Neither the Treasury nor the Chancellor have replied to these crucial criticisms . Against this depressing background the Economists for Free Trade group has felt it necessary to do its own assessment of the budget outlook up to and after Brexit . There are four main reasons why we take a much more upbeat view of the future for the economy and the public finances . First , there are the current economic facts : the economy is doing well . Growth according to the ONS is running at just below 2pc per annum.We think that when all the data is in the final revised GDP growth rates will be seen to have been running at 2pc-plus since the referendum . That would fit with the data from the purchasing manager indices , CBI surveys and robustly growing employment . It also fits with the steady improvement in the public finances . You would hardly think from all the reported hand-wringing that public borrowing is running below the OBR 's forecast for this financial year . The money coming in from revenues is growing more strongly , at 4pc , than the money going out in spending ( at 3pc ) . It looks as if borrowing this year will be around 2pc of GDP . Second , that steady trend in revenue growth looks set to continue up to Brexit as growth in money GDP stays around the 4pc mark , so that by 2020 , borrowing will have got close to zero . When borrowing is this low , debt falls as a percentage of growing GDP . By 2021 , regardless of Brexit , debt would have reached 75pc of GDP , well on its way towards the safe target level of 60pc , where the risks of a sharp interest rate rise causing a crisis become manageable . Third , the official gloom about UK productivity growth stalling is misleading . There is a huge measurement problem for the quality , and so the productivity , of services . It is easy to measure the number of plates rolling off a production line ; but how to measure the service you get from your mobile phone or your computerised booking agency ? For example , according to ONS figures , productivity in education , healthcare and social services has been falling since 1998 at 4pc a year ; this is an absurdity . Unfortunately until we can get some grip on the measurement issue the only reliable figures for the economy 's growth are money GDP - the money value of what we spend and produce . Fourth and finally , there is Brexit and the massive boost that its economic revolution will provide by bringing free trade and world competition , home-grown pragmatic regulation and an end to subsidised , unskilled EU immigration . In the long term this raises our GDP by 7pc , brings down consumer prices by 8pc and boosts the living standards of the lowest income groups by 15pc . From 2020 , it takes gradual effect because of the usual time lags ; by 2025 about 2pc of the full 7pc will have come through , with the rest due by 2030 . The total effect on government revenues will be a rise of about 10pc , worth £80bn in today 's economy but of course much more by 2030 . When you feed Brexit into the public finances , two things happen . First , the future path of debt is much lower relative to GDP , as the finances improve sharply with no change in assumed public spending ; this permits the UK to get the debt/GDP ratio to 60pc faster and indeed below 50pc by 2027 . Second , there is a policy need to support the changing Brexit economy , to make the most of our new opportunities . Faced with chances to grow faster and penetrate new markets all around the world , UK competitiveness should be reinforced : tax rates should fall , infrastructure be improved , and public services made fit for a stronger economy . If you put these things together , Brexit creates a dividend or fiscal fund that can satisfy this policy need while still bringing the public finances to a safe debt/GDP ratio in the 2020s . We show that we can afford to spend another £25bn a year from 2020 , topped up by a further £40bn a year in 2025 . This will be enough to spend another £33bn a year on public services and infrastructure by 2025 , a lift of about 4pc in public spending ; and also to cut corporation tax to 14pc , the top rate to 36pc with no additional rate above it , and the standard income tax rate to 18pc . This is truly a future to be optimistic about . Professor Patrick Minford is the chairman of the Economists for Free Trade group 'Sadly , the Treasury seems quite determined to take the gloomiest view on Brexit possible '
Scotland Osborne is 'too gloomy ' about Brexit , says his former aide
GEORGE OSBORNE is `` too gloomy '' about the progress being made by the Government on Brexit , his former aide has said . Rupert Harrison , who served as Mr Osborne 's chief of staff when he was chancellor , insisted that once the `` dust settles '' the `` outlines of the UK position are pretty clear '' . It came after an editorial in the London Evening Standard , edited by Mr Osborne , suggested that little progress has been made on key aspects of Brexit . Britain will have to `` cough up '' a £36billion Brexit divorce bill if it wants to conduct talks on its future deal with the EU , the editorial said . It said : `` The sensible thing for the Prime Minister to have done would have been to say : 'I never made these stupid claims we 'd get money back ; I 'm just settling the bills everyone knew we 'd have to pay if we left ' . `` Instead , Downing Street dug itself into a new hole by claiming that the £36billion bill being talked about over the weekend was 'inaccurate speculation ' - when the truth is the opposite . But the inability of our leadership to think more than one step ahead should n't obscure the fact that a deal on the money will be done , and we will cough up . '' Mr Harrison , who is now a managing director at global fund manager Black-Rock , responded on Twitter : `` My old boss [ is ] part of [ the ] consensus that is too gloomy on Brexit progress - once dust settles we will see outlines of UK position are pretty clear . '' He added : `` What I do take issue with at the moment is this over the top critique of everything the UK does - mistakes poor comms for lack of progress . '' The Sunday Telegraph disclosed at the weekend that ministers are considering paying a £36 billion Brexit divorce bill in a bid to break the deadlock in negotiations . The scale of the divorce bill has infuriated eurosceptic Cabinet ministers and Tory MPs , many of whom believe that Britain is under no legal obligation to pay anything when it leaves the EU . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , told MPs that European leaders can `` go whistle '' if they expect Britain to pay an `` exorbitant '' divorce bill .
Scotland Leading Nationalists challenged to back fishermen on Brexit
NICOLA STURGEON and Alex Salmond were urged yesterday either to sign up to a Brexit fishing pledge , or tell their MPs who have already done so to withdraw . The Nationalist MPs Eilidh Whiteford ( Banff and Buchan ) and Mike Weir ( Angus ) , whose seats are under threat from the Tories according to polls , signed the Scottish Fishermen 's Federation pledge last week . The pledge supports the UK 's withdrawal from the EU and the Common Fisheries Policy . The move contradicts the stated SNP position of maintaining full membership of the EU , which also means signing up to the widely hated CFP . The pledge claims that Brexit presents the industry with a `` sea of opportunity . '' Dr Whiteford 's seat includes the major fishing ports of Fraserburgh and Peterhead and was one of the few areas of Scotland that voted for Brexit . Mr Weir has an 11,230 majority , but Angus was formerly a Conservative stronghold and the Tories are confident of making major gains . Ross Thomson , the Tory candidate for Aberdeen South , said : `` The Scottish Conservatives are fully behind the Scottish Fishermen 's Federation aim of exiting both the EU and the CFP to make the most of the opportunity afforded by Brexit . `` Today every Scottish Conservative candidate in the North East is signing their pledge . Alex Salmond and Nicola Sturgeon must come clean with people in the North East . `` Either they commit to signing it too or Nicola Sturgeon should tell the MPs who did to remove their names . `` As things stand , the SNP want to drag our fishermen back into the disastrous CFP and Brussels control of our waters . '' Speaking in Aberdeenshire , Ms Sturgeon said the SNP always had , and always would , stand up for Scottish fishing . She added : `` We have been longstanding critics over many years and many elections of the Common Fisheries Policy . `` It 's the Tories who have repeatedly sold out Scottish fishing , they once described them as expendable and the Brexit white paper makes clear that they want to bargain over other European countries ' access to Scottish fishing waters . `` It 's the SNP who has stood up for Scottish fishing and it will be the SNP who continues to stand up for Scottish fishing . ''
Scotland Chancellor 's call for 'soft Brexit ' threatens Cabinet unity
BRITAIN is not able to carry out a `` hard Brexit '' in only two years , Philip Hammond suggested last night , as he risked a Cabinet split by saying `` thoughtful politicians '' would agree . The Chancellor said that a transitional deal - under which Britain would pay to have access to the single market for about 24 months after leaving the EU - would help to ensure a `` smooth '' Brexit . His intervention throws new light on differences of opinion in the Cabinet . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , and Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , are both thought to oppose a transitional deal . Mr Hammond also suggested that leaving the European customs union , which sets EU-wide tarriffs on goods , could cost hundreds of millions of pounds a year . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , wants Brexit to be delivered `` as soon as possible '' and has said that the UK is likely to have to leave the customs union so it can strike its own trade deals with the rest of the world . Mr Hammond insisted that controls on European migration , which will be possible after Brexit , would not `` choke off `` the supply of high-skilled workers . He said : `` Just because you have a system of controlling immigration does not mean you have to use it to slam all doors shut . `` I ca n't conceive of any circumstance in which we would want to impede or prevent the flow of highly skilled , highly paid people . '' SNP 'clear as mud ' : Page 2 Michael Deacon : Page 4
More than Brexit at work in large market movements
There have recently been large movements in the prices of three major financial assets - shares , bonds and the currency - that , it is alleged , derive directly from the Brexit vote . But have these changes really been caused by the referendum result ? It did n't take long for market operators to work out that the prices of many of the shares quoted on the London Stock Exchange should rise , not directly because of the Brexit vote , but rather because of the associated fall in the pound . Many of our large companies have substantial overseas interests , ranging from investments and significant business operations abroad to simply selling a large part of their output overseas . If the dollar ( or euro ) value of these activities or investments is unchanged , then the sterling value must rise by the extent of the pound 's depreciation . These companies will have enjoyed a substantial boost to their income and net asset value in sterling as a result of the exchange rate falling . Accordingly , their share prices should be higher . So it is no surprise that the FTSE 100 has recently been trading at about 11pc up from its level just before the referendum . Interestingly , since the pound has fallen by more than this , in dollar terms , the FTSE 100 is down by 8pc.Meanwhile , the shares of companies not involved in international trade or investment are generally lower even in sterling terms . Much more significant than share price movements has been the change in the government bond market . During the referendum campaign , some prominent Remainers argued that if we voted to leave the EU the UK would face a funding crisis . After all , they argued , the government is running a large budget deficit of about 4pc of GDP and , alongside it , we have a very large current account deficit of more than 5pc of GDP which requires capital inflows of that amount to finance it . The Governor of the Bank of England , Mark Carney , said we were relying on `` the kindness of strangers '' . Actually , it was n't kindness that persuaded foreign capital holders to pour money into the UK , but rather their perception of significant prospective returns . More importantly , whether you call it kindness or self-interest , their money did not help but rather hindered our economic progress . It served to keep the pound at a very high level which thereby exacerbated the very current account deficit that the capital inflow was financing . Nevertheless , you can see that the worriers had a point - and not only with regard to the currency . In principle , it was possible that if we voted for Brexit the market would take fright about the UK 's fiscal prospects and accordingly drive the yields on British government debt appreciably higher . On a casual inspection , they seem to have been vindicated . The yield on 10-year gilts has recently just about doubled from 0.5pc to 1pc . Yet this is no cause for alarm . This rise came after an earlier sharp drop . Far from there being panic about holding British government bonds , the initial reaction after the Brexit vote was to pile into them . Accordingly , the recent rise in bond yields has still not taken them back to where they were before the Brexit vote . Indeed , excluding the recent ultra-low levels , they remain the lowest British yields on record . What 's more , if you look at the credit default swap market - which gives a measure of the market 's anxiety about default risk - you see a small spike immediately after the Brexit vote followed by a return to previous levels . So the market does n't seem to be alarmed about the UK 's fiscal health . So what does explain the recent pick-up in gilt yields ? I think this can be explained by a change in economic and financial circumstances which is only partly and indirectly due to Brexit . The fall of the pound has already increased inflation and it is likely to go on rising for the next couple of years . In the financial markets , expectations of future inflation have picked up . Other things equal , this should push bond yields higher as investors seek protection from the erosion in real value that inflation causes . Yet the recent rise in gilt yields is not a uniquely British phenomenon . Government bond yields have picked up from their ultra-low levels in the eurozone , the US and just about everywhere else . Surely that can not be due to Brexit . What explains this , I think , is a change in the medium-term outlook for short-term interest rates and in the prospects for quantitative easing ( QE ) . If short-term rates are ultra-low and are expected to be ultra-low for as long as the eye can see , then long yields will be low - even if inflation prospects suggest a loss of real value . Equally , more QE , involving central bank buying of bonds , will tend to depress yields . But the intellectual climate , not just here but globally , is shifting against monetary stimulus - both lower interest rates and QE . This is partly because the deflation danger no longer seems so threatening and indeed higher inflation is in prospect , and partly because further monetary stimulus seems unlikely to do much good . Turning to the pound , its huge fall this year is widely attributed to the Brexit vote . In one sense , this is right . Brexit was certainly the trigger . But I feel sure that it was not the underlying cause . The UK has been running a current account deficit of more than 5pc of GDP , which has resulted in a loss of net national wealth of that same magnitude per annum . This could not continue . So the underlying cause of sterling 's fall was Britain 's woeful balance of payments position and the fundamental need for a lower exchange rate . The extraordinary thing that needs to be explained is not why the pound has recently dropped so sharply but rather why it was so strong for so long . Roger Bootle is chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com 'The thing that needs to be explained is why the pound was so high for so long '
Nothing to worry about when it comes to Brexit
Adopt the brace position , folks , here comes the latest Brexit bad news . Employment ? Up . Manufacturing and Services ? Up , sharply . The pound ? It was going down , after all our `` experts '' prophesied doom , but is now climbing back up again . Unsurprisingly , the majority of British people are feeling pretty chipper following the vote to leave the corrupt , bullying and economically stagnant EU . According to a poll for BBC Radio 5 Live , six out of 10 adults in the UK now say they are positive about Britain 's future after Brexit . But , wait a minute , not so fast . The BBC 's Brexit Balance reporter , Mick Taking , has managed to track down two people in Dunstable who are very worried . Here comes Pete , the Lettuce Grower ... Reporter : So , Pete , on a scale of nine to 10 , how worried would you say you are about Brexit ? Pete : Er , seven . Reporter : But it is very worrying , is n't it , that you wo n't be able to recruit a load of Eastern Europeans to pick your lettuces ? Pete : I was for Romaine , Cos we need the workforce . My contact , Miss Lollo Rosso , in Brasov , says they do n't want to take the risk hiding 50 pickers in the back of a van no more . Reporter : Quite . And that could be a very worrying consequence . Far fewer illegal migrants . And maybe having to pay British people a living wage to pick lettuces ? Pete : It 's a big worry for me personally , yes . Reporter : Well , we 'll be back for some more Little Gems from Mike later . I 'm joined now by Julie who is worried about the possible fallout from Brexit on her beauty salon . This is a scary time in the lash-extension business , is n't it , Julie ? Julie : I 'm not worried no more . Reporter : ( laughs nervously ) Ah , but surely you are worried . With people feeling nervous about spending on luxuries like beauty treatments . Julie : We 're fully booked till the end of October . Never seen nothing like it . Had to take on two new therapists . Reporter : Well , that is in itself a worry . As we 've just heard from Julie , people are so worried that they are spending to forget their troubles . Things are still deeply uncertain out here in Brexit Britain . Back to you in the studio , Sophie .
Rudd calls no-deal Brexit unthinkable after Davis says UK can 'walk away ' ; The path to BrexitRemain-supporting Home Secretary contradicts her Cabinet colleague 's stance on discussions with EU
A NO-DEAL Brexit is `` unthinkable '' , Amber Rudd said yesterday , contradicting the Brexit Secretary hours after he said the UK had `` the right to walk away '' . Speaking in the Commons , David Davis said the prospect of no deal should be on the table `` for negotiating reasons '' as he reiterated the importance of being able to leave talks if the only deal on offer is bad for Britain . He told MPs the Government was `` straining every sinew '' to secure a comprehensive deal but it was vital that in a negotiation `` you always have to have the right to walk away - if you do n't , you get a terrible deal '' . However , during a select committee appearance just an hour later , the Home Secretary said such an arrangement would be `` unthinkable '' because it would be bad for both sides . The prominent Remain campaigner later denied claims she had contradicted her Cabinet colleague , but her remarks sparked outrage and one Con-servative MP publicly tweeted his frustration . James Duddridge said : `` Far from being unthinkable , a no deal would be my preferred [ option ] to achieve a fast , clean and boring Brexit . The sooner we get on with it the better . '' The prospect of leaving the union without a deal has become more realistic in recent weeks after talks stalled and pro-Brexit MPs made public calls to leave without paying a large bill . However , sources believe moderate Tories who do not want to crash out of the union could work with Labour to block it using a Parliamentary vote , secured via an amendment to the Brexit Bill . Meanwhile , the head of the Home Office admitted the Army could be deployed to protect the border if Britain leaves the EU without a Brexit deal . Philip Rutnam said he could not rule out using the military if no deal were agreed because the Government did not employ enough staff to cope . His remarks came as Ms Rudd told MPs on the Home Affairs select committee that there would be a deal struck between the UK and the EU , particularly on security matters , because `` it is so much in their interest as well as ours to have something in place '' . The Home Secretary and her most senior civil servant were being quizzed by the group of cross-party MPs over the preparations for leaving the union . Asked by Labour 's Yvette Cooper whether he could guarantee the Border Force was ready for the UK to leave the EU without an agreement , Mr Rutnam said : `` We will continue not only to seek to reach a deal but keep our contingency planning under review . '' He added : `` I think it would be unwise to rule anything out but it seems to me clear that any use of the military would be a last resort . '' The Government is hoping to strike a deal with the EU so that current trading arrangements could continue and wants a new system of immigration that accounts for EU nationals who want to visit the UK for short periods of time . Ms Rudd told the committee that all three million EU nationals who live in the UK would be free to stay after Brexit , but refused to give the same guarantee if no deal is struck - simply stating it would be `` unthinkable '' that they would be asked to leave .
Scotland Former SNP deputy claims Sturgeon lacks 'strategic nous ' ; Ahead of party conference , veteran nationalist says leaders have made error in tying referendum to Brexit
A VETERAN nationalist and former deputy leader of the SNP has launched a stinging attack on Nicola Sturgeon on the eve of the party 's conference , claiming she is `` out of her depth '' and guilty of a `` monumental political misjudgement '' over Brexit . Jim Sillars said the First Minister had made a major error in tying the prospect of a second independence referendum to the issue of Brexit . He also suggested the independence movement should distance itself from the SNP to avoid support for separation being dragged down by an unpopular party , and in a separate broadside described the Scottish Government 's decision to ban fracking as `` cowardice '' . Ms Sturgeon announced in March that she planned to call a fresh vote on breaking up the UK by spring 2019 . The move was blamed for the party losing 21 MPs in the general election in June and she later `` reset '' her timetable on a new vote , but insisted Brexit meant it was still likely before the next Holyrood election in 2021 . Mr Sillars , who voted to leave the EU - a position thought to be favoured by up to a third of SNP supporters - said his public attack was prompted by the first resolution at the SNP conference , which begins in Glasgow tomorrow , describing it as an `` unthinking paean of praise for the EU '' . Writing in the Daily Record , he criticised the `` error-strewn course '' taken by the party 's leaders , claiming they had `` no strategic nous '' and were `` out of their depth '' . He added : `` They lunged into an exercise in monumental political misjudgement , the demand for a premature second referendum , leading to loss of majority at Holyrood and a near wipeout in the North East , Borders and Galloway in the Westminster election . `` The independence movement need their own guiding resolution - one welcoming Brexit as freeing us from EU one-size-fits-all rules that are inimical to the needs of small nations , which require maximum flexibility in a world dominated by economic giants . '' He claimed that Brexit was , in fact , the `` perfect template for harmoniously and civilly dismantling a UK union no longer fit for purpose '' . Mr Sillars also ridiculed the SNP 's `` comical '' position on Brexit , which demanded that Westminster should surrender repatriated powers to Holyrood , to make Scotland more successful , while at the same time the party was happy for an independent Scotland to `` hand them all back to Brussels on reentering the EU '' . In a separate broadside , Mr Sillars attacked the SNP 's `` cowardly '' decision this week to ban fracking in Scotland , describing the move as `` madness '' . He told the Daily Mail that thousands of families across Scotland would suffer a freezing winter to cut their energy bills , now the new source of gas has not been embraced . `` I think it 's cowardice . They 're not prepared to stand up against the green agenda , even though they have evidence that it is safe , '' he said . An SNP spokesman said Mr Sillars had contradicted himself as he backed an independence referendum at the last Holyrood election in advance of Brexit , adding : `` Now he finds himself against the majority of Scottish opinion , which is firmly opposed to the Tories ' extreme Brexit plans . '' 'They lunged into an exercise in monumental political misjudgement ... leading to a loss of majority '
Foreign criminals will stay post Brexit ; Brussels tries to block blanket checks that would ensure EU convicts are deported EU opposes criminal record checks of its citizens in UK
FOREIGN criminals will be allowed to remain in Britain after Brexit , it emerged last night , as a fresh row broke out over the UK 's right to deport European Union convicts . Brussels is trying to prevent Britain from rooting out and deporting EU citizens with serious criminal convictions by claiming that blanket criminal records checks are unlawful . In a major clash over citizens ' rights , the EU has demanded the Government drops plans to vet all three million European citizens who are expected to apply for the right to remain in Britain after Brexit . It would mean thousands of foreign criminals being allowed to stay in the UK . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , has insisted the checks will go ahead , but conceded that some EU citizens who have served jail sentences would be allowed to remain , because Britain will use a `` soft '' European standard to decide who can stay , rather than a stricter British standard . It came as the latest round of Brexit talks ended in deadlock , with both sides refusing to budge over the socalled `` divorce bill '' and the future role of the European Court of Justice . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , said talks could not move forward until Britain had set out exactly how it intended to calculate the size of the Brexit bill . British negotiators said it was their EU counterparts who were at fault by failing to provide enough detail on what they think Britain owes.Mr Barnier said there were `` fundamental '' disagreements between the two sides and a clarification of Britain 's position on the Brexit bill was `` indispensable '' to any progress being made . It raises the possibility of the two sides failing to meet the October deadline for agreeing on finances , citizens ' rights and the Northern Irish border , which would delay a trade agreement and potentially put at risk the chances of wrapping up a deal by March 2019 . The Government 's offer on citizens ' rights would allow EU nationals resident in the UK for five years to apply for `` settled status '' - effectively guaranteeing them indefinite leave to remain in the country once Britain is out of the bloc . As part of that process , Mr Davis had promised that all three million applicants would be subjected to a criminal records bureau ( CRB ) check , and that anyone convicted of serious crimes would be deported . However , EU negotiators have argued that CRB checks are only lawful if there are reasonable grounds to suspect someone of a criminal past . The issue of criminal checks has become a major sticking point in the second round of monthly face-to-face negotiations in Brussels , which started on Monday and concluded yesterday . Mr Davis is insisting the checks will go ahead , but had agreed that criminals would only be deported if they pose a `` present and sufficiently serious threat '' to society , the standard set out in the EU 's Free Movement directive , rather than using the UK test which requires that deporting someone would be `` conducive to the public good '' . The Brexit department confirmed last night that all three million applicants would be assessed under the EU test . Only those who apply for citizenship after Brexit will be assessed under the tougher UK standard , which usually applies to anyone who has been sentenced to 12 months or more in jail . The EU has also objected to the tougher British rules being applied to EU citizens after Brexit . MPs last night expressed dismay at the prospect of foreign criminals escaping criminal records checks . The Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg said : `` Even the strongest advocates of the free movement of people have never been in favour of freedom of movement for criminals . '' Sir Bill Cash , the Eurosceptic Tory MP , said : `` We have a massive problem with EU nationals who are in prison who ought to be deported but they ca n't be because of human rights legislation . We have to protect our borders but also our citizens from criminal activity . '' Even if Britain goes ahead with blanket CRB checks , people who have committed murder , rape and other serious crimes abroad might be allowed to stay , as they will only be checked against the UK police database . Many European countries do not have centralised police databases , making it impossible to carry out EU-wide checks . In a further rift , Brussels insisted British expats would not have the right to move to other countries in the EU under free movement rules and would only be guaranteed the right to remain in the country in which they are settled . The position appears to contradict Mr Barnier 's insistence that rights should not be watered down after Brexit .
Closer EU integration 'shattered by Brexit '
BREXIT has `` shattered '' the principle of ever closer union in the EU , according to the Belgian finance minister , who warned that the bloc must now transform itself if it is to survive . Johan Van Overtveldt said there was `` clearly a problem '' with the European Union and he called for a quick , comprehensive trade deal with the UK while warning that trying to punish Britain for leaving would be futile . Mr Van Overtveldt said a `` different '' and `` better '' EU , that focused on key areas such as security , migration , jobs and trade instead of policing trivial policies would help boost prosperity and remove the widespread discontent . `` Sixty years after signing the Treaty of Rome , and 25 years after the Maastricht Treaty , the European Union is in trouble and is certainly in need of new inspiration and new directions . The EU can not continue operating the way it does today , '' he said at an event organised by the European Economics and Financial Centre in London . He urged policy-makers to take a new approach to integration and said the idea of an EU , forged in crisis , that was put forward by Jean Monnet - dubbed the father of Europe - was `` dead '' . `` This principle has now been shattered by the Brexit vote , and the fact that one of the largest and most prominent member states will be leaving the union means the so-called Monnet doctrine of continuous steps towards further European integration , most of the time through crisis , seems dead . `` One should not underestimate the psychological effect the Brexit vote has had , not just in Britain but in other European capitals , '' he said . `` Long time achievements of European integration such as free movement are being fundamentally called into question . '' He also called on the rest of the EU to be pragmatic about Brexit , adding that smaller states such as Belgium , Ireland and the Netherlands had much to lose from a so-called hard Brexit . `` Everything in my way of thinking argues to get a good deal for the British and not have as an ultimate objective to punish them , '' he said . `` This is democracy . We should respect that . We should strike a good deal and be reasonable . '' Mr Van Overtveldt said securing a quick deal was also crucial to secure the confidence of investors , producers or consumers . And , asked to comment on reports that European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker believes Theresa May is `` deluded '' over Brexit talks , he suggested that it was part of political game playing . `` It 's very common in Belgian politics to say you only have an agreement when you have an agreement on everything , so in that sense Theresa May sounded very much like a Belgian politician , '' he added . He said it would be `` sad '' if the only way the EU could remain attractive to its members was `` by showing them you are able to punish the UK '' .
Scotland Swinney promises to continue subsidising EU students ' tuition ; SNP conference ; Education minister denies discriminating against English even though they must continue to pay
JOHN SWINNEY yesterday denied unfairly discriminating against the English after announcing that EU students who win a place at Scottish universities next year will have their tuition funded by the taxpayer even after Brexit . The education minister told the SNP conference that youngsters from the rest of Europe who enrol for the 2017-18 academic year will have their fees paid for the full four years of their degree even if Brexit happens in the interim . SNP ministers are currently forced by European anti-discrimination laws to offer `` free '' tuition to EU as well as Scottish students but this requirement will end after Brexit , which is expected to occur in spring 2019 . While they are choosing to provide free tuition to German , French and Spanish students after this date , those from England , Wales and Northern Ireland will continue to pay £9,000 a year . Asked whether it was unfair to provide Estonian students with free tuition but not the English , a spokesman for Mr Swinney said he was maintaining `` the current system '' . Pressed again whether it was discriminating against the English , he said : `` You have your view , we have ours . '' With 13,450 EU students at Scottish universities last year , the policy is estimated to cost Scottish taxpayers more than £75 million in tuition subsidies . The announcement came after Scotland 's universities this week demanded that ministers make clear whether EU students who win a place next year would get their tuition fees funded by the taxpayer after Brexit . Jo Johnson , the UK universities minister , announced that European students applying for places in England next year will continue receiving loans and grants for the duration of their studies , even if Brexit happens sooner . Principals were worried they could face legal action as prospectuses pub-lished before the Brexit vote in June guaranteed that EU students starting in 2017-18 would not have to pay fees . They were also concerned that they faced having to plug a financial gap of around £60 million if Brexit meant they were forced to provide `` free '' tuition for two years without Scottish Government funding . Mr Swinney said : `` I am proud that Scotland is a destination of choice for EU students . Therefore I am pleased to give them further reassurance . `` EU students will rightly have concerns about any change in their status half way through a course . These students deserve certainty . '' Mr Swinney announced in July that EU students starting university this year will not pay tuition fees for the duration of their degrees but had not previously made clear the status of those applying for places in 2017 . Alastair Sim , director of Universities Scotland , welcomed his announcement , saying it provided the certainty students and universities required . 'I am proud Scotland is a destination of choice for EU students . Therefore I am pleased to give them further reassurance ' £75m Estimated cost to the Scottish taxpayer of the pledge to continue paying European students ' fees after Britain leaves the EU
Politicians must stand firm and capitalise on Brexit
Ihave always been strongly in favour of Brexit for logical reasons . Being free to negotiate trade deals with the rest of the world without interference from Europe gives us a very clear advantage over our EU neighbours . Then there was the matter of the £8bn per year net contribution into Europe that could be used to bolster Britain 's economy . Cutting out all the bureaucracy was another major advantage . But talk of a £40bn-plus Brexit divorce bill and significant cuts to the UK 's growth forecast has dampened the spirits of even the most optimistic Brexit voter . The price tag placed on breaking the deadlock in negotiations is proof that Theresa May and key Cabinet figures have succumbed to EU bullying tactics . Politicians must regain their backbone to deliver the benefits of Brexit . The UK should have the upper hand in the exit negotiations because of our £70bn trade deficit with Europe . Logically it follows that their pain would be greater than ours , and that if they are commercially , and not just politically , motivated they should be desperate to do a trade deal . Our leadership has failed to make it clear that Britain is prepared to walk away from negotiations . The lack of courage shown by our elected officials during the negotiations has put key benefits at risk of being watered down at the expense of a true free trade deal . We had been told by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , in January that Britain would not take Brexit lying down . But where is the evidence ? The terms of our exit are being set not by the politicians voted for by you and me - nor even by the elected heads of our allied states in the EU - but by a small number of unelected bureaucrats , led by the EU 's chief negotiator Michel Barnier . Barnier 's recent comments are a clear threat to the economic freedom of the UK post-Brexit . He stated that the European Union would reject any future free trade agreement with Britain if we slashed regulation and red tape . His disregard for the UK 's desire to retain its sovereignty and its determination to frame its own laws and economic policies after leaving the EU is frightening . The EU 's chief negotiator also hypocritically chooses to overlook the activities of several key member states , who themselves have begun taking steps to cut regulation and lure businesses and high net worth individuals to their shores in anticipation of the post-Brexit era . A race to the bottom is already under way ; France has reduced corporate tax , given tax breaks to the wealthy , and even offered international school places to the children of CEOs and leading bankers . And it is not just France - Germany , Ireland and Luxembourg have all found their sweet spots in bidding to be new hubs for UK companies as people and capital look to relocate . We need to recognise our new reality ; we are competing with our European neighbours not just to retain our wealth creators and high net worth individuals , but to also win their business from abroad . Regulation and government policy must keep up , as the UK will fall behind if it continues to sing to the tune of the EU in the negotiating process . A £40bn divorce bill , compounded by the loss of banks , multinational businesses and high net worth individuals who pay millions of pounds worth of tax is the stark reality being offered to us by the politicians who had promised the UK public a Britain-first approach . I worry that we do n't have leadership strong enough to fight for the future of the UK and our national interest - strong enough to say no to a deal that is not fit for purpose and would not deliver the potential benefits of Brexit . A free trade agreement with the EU is only worth it if we do not have to sacrifice billions , remain tethered to restrictive legislation and continue along the same lines as before . A real free trade agreement with the EU should not in any way resemble membership of the EU . As David Davis has always stressed , it would be perfectly possible to leave the EU with no deal and trade with it on WTO terms , and it would certainly be preferable to do so than to adopt a deal that does n't allow us to take advantage of the opportunities presented by voting to leave in the first place . If our politicians are brave enough to take back control , we can create an economy which is competitive on the world stage , open to business and free from the shackles of European financial and employment regulation . A deal with Brussels and Barnier is the easy option for Westminster politicians , buckling under the pressure of the European machine . The Prime Minister must consider the possibilities that are within reach . A messy divorce is far better than a disastrous marriage , and May would do well to encourage her fellow politicians to stand firm and deliver the benefits of Brexit . John Caudwell is the founder of Phones4U 'I worry that we do n't have leadership strong enough to fight for the future of the UK and our national interest '
MP accused of 'witch-hunt ' after asking for list of Brexit lecturers
A CONSERVATIVE MP has written to all universities asking for details of their teaching on Brexit amid fears students are being brainwashed by Remain-supporting lecturers . Chris Heaton-Harris , a government whip , asked all vice-chancellors if they would supply the names of professors teaching European affairs `` with particular reference to Brexit '' , together with copies of their syllabus and links to online lectures . He has faced accusations of `` McCarthyism '' from some academics , but supporters said vice-chancellors were guilty of `` false outrage '' after being `` rumbled '' for indoctrinating students with their anti-Brexit views . Mr Heaton-Harris insisted he was not trying to stifle free speech , but Downing Street distanced the Prime Minister from his actions , saying Theresa May was `` very clear '' about the importance of universities ' independence . The MP wrote to university vicechancellors on Oct 3 saying : `` I was wondering if you would be so kind as to supply me with the names of professors [ ... ] who are involved in the teaching of European affairs , with particular reference to Brexit . '' He also asked for copies of syllabuses and online lectures . Lord Patten , former Conservative Party chairman who is now chancellor of Oxford University , said it was `` an extraordinary example of outrageous and foolish behaviour , offensive and idiotic Leninism . But Philip Davies , the Tory MP for Shipley , said Mr Heaton-Harris was perfectly within his rights to ask for the information . He said : `` Everybody knows universities are not opening the minds of their students ; they are just indoctrinating them with the Left-wing political propaganda of the lecturers . `` I suspect what has got them irritated is that they 've been rumbled . This false outrage does n't wash with me . '' Mr Heaton-Harris , the MP for Daventry , was appointed Vice-Chamberlain of the Household by Theresa May in June , making him the third most senior whip , but the Liberal Democrats have called on Mrs May to sack him for `` engaging in a witch-hunt '' . Andrea Leadsom , Leader of the Commons , said she was `` surprised '' at the reaction of universities to the letter , which contained `` nothing sinister '' .No 10 has refused to give Mr Heaton-Harris any backing . 'I suspect what has got them irritated is that they 've been rumbled . This false outrage does n't wash with me '
Scotland UK seeks customs deal to avoid border chaos ; Britain seeks agreement to avoid chaos at the borders
BRITAIN will seek to retain a temporary customs union with the EU for at least two years after Brexit to prevent border chaos , David Davis will announce today . The Brexit Secretary will today publish a paper in which he will agree not to implement any free trade deals during an `` interim '' period . The document states that Britain is seeking the `` freest and most frictionless possible trade in goods between the UK and the EU '' . The move is intended to reassure businesses that they will not face tariffs on goods and new customs checks when the country leaves the EU in March 2019 . However , Mr Davis will insist that Britain can use the time to negotiate formally and sign free trade deals with nations outside the EU that will be implemented after exit . It is likely to lead to an argument with Brussels , which has said that Britain should not be allowed to do so . The UK is also facing opposition from Ireland , which has threatened to block a transition deal amid concerns about customs arrangements on the border with Northern Ireland . The Continued on Page 4 Continued from Page 1 border with Northern Ireland . The dispute will deepen tomorrow when James Brokenshire , the Northern Ireland Secretary , publishes a paper setting out plans for `` light touch '' customs checks on the border between the North and the South . It will also lead to questions from pro-European MPs over why Britain is leaving the Customs Union at all during the transition period . Brussels is refusing to engage in discussions about its future relationship with the UK until after `` sufficient progress '' has been made in divorce talks , including the £36 billion Brexit divorce bill . Mr Davis wants talks about the future relationship in tandem with divorce talks amid fears that failing to do so could see Britain leave the EU without a deal . The Government said that setting out its position demonstrates the UK 's `` desire to ensure our exit from the EU is smooth , orderly and successful '' . A source close to the European Parliament 's Brexit team said Brussels was likely to fight Mr Davis 's plans . The source said : `` Any request for a bespoke arrangement would be certain to throw up legal and political hurdles . A transition deal must preserve the integrity of the EU 's legal order . Any sense Britain is getting a special deal because of Brexit is anathema to many MEPs . They believe , rightly or wrongly , Britain had a special deal before Brexit . `` It is hard to see them accepting , without a fight , a bespoke deal that gave Britain the ability to strike free trade deals while benefiting from the advantages of customs union membership . '' The Government is putting forward two options for customs arrangements after Brexit . One would see the UK manage a new customs border with a `` streamlined '' administration ; the other would be a customs partnership with the EU that would mean there is no need for a customs border between the UK and the rest of the bloc . 'Any sense that Britain is getting a special deal because of Brexit is anathema to many MEPs '
Robert Walters profits jump , with firms 'bored of Brexit '
COMPANIES have become `` bored '' with the Brexit negotiations and are hiring staff as normal , the chief executive of recruitment firm Robert Walters has said . Robert Walters , the boss of the eponymous firm , said there had been strong growth in financial services , IT and small businesses in London , as well as in regional markets such as St Albans and Milton www.Keynes.UK profits jumped 13pc to £24.3m in the second quarter , in contrast to rival PageGroup which reported a slump in UK hiring yesterday . Mr Walters said of the UK market : `` I think there 's a decent amount of confidence because I think everyone is bored of Brexit . '' There had been concerns that firms would freeze hiring in the wake of the Brexit vote , while negotiations about the shape of the country 's exit from the bloc were negotiated . A key concern for some London firms has been the issue of `` passporting '' , whereby financial firms can operate easily across the EU area . But Mr Walters said that even if financial firms were to leave the City of London following the UK 's exit then Robert Walters would still benefit . `` We 're in Frankfurt , Amsterdam , Paris and Dublin so if and when they do move we 'll be earning money in euros , and so that will have a currency benefit , '' he explained . The firm 's total profits , that is income it gets from fees , jumped 25pc to £86.3m , helped in part by the weakened pound . Almost three quarters of its earnings come from international markets . Across Europe , its profits rose 30pc to £20m , and in Asia it jumped 21pc to £35.8m . Shares in the recruitment company closed up 9.4pc at 465p on the back of the results . Mr Walters said he expected profits for the full year to be ahead of market forecasts .
Tusk tells Britain to pay up for a 'good basis ' for future
DONALD TUSK has told Britain to pay its Brexit divorce bill for the sake of `` future relations '' with the EU as he rubbished suggestions that Brussels might end up owing money to the UK . The president of the European Council poured cold water on suggestions by ministers including David Davis and Boris Johnson that Britain will be in credit when the final bill is worked out , saying : `` It 's not about money , it 's about rules . '' He also said President Donald Trump had agreed with him when he told him the remaining 27 EU member states are `` stronger after Brexit than before '' . Mr Tusk , who is attending the G7 summit in Sicily , was asked by The Daily Telegraph whether he agreed that Britain was owed money by Brussels , rather than the other way around . He said : `` No , we have to respect our obligations and I think it 's not about money , it 's about rules and also it 's about a good basis for our future relations . '' Mr Tusk said : `` I was positively surprised by President Trump 's comments on Brexit , because it was clear for both of us that in fact the EU as 27 is more united after Brexit than before Brexit and it was also his opinion . '' He added : `` Counter-terrorism was one of the main topics during our discussion with President Trump . I was impressed by the determination and toughness of President Trump when it comes to counter-terrorism . `` I totally agreed with him when he said that the international community , G7 , the United States , Europe , should be tough , even brutal vis a vis terrorism and Isis . ''
Finance firms 'have spring in their step ' as fear of Brexit wanes
BANKS and finance firms have a new spring in their step as Brexit fears have dissipated and the strength of the economy reasserted itself , boosting business confidence . Building societies , investment managers and insurers are all particularly upbeat as business levels are increasing and profitability is rising , a study from the CBI and PwC has found , overcoming concerns last year that the EU referendum would hold back growth in the UK . In contrast manufacturers are increasingly worried that Britain 's post-Brexit arrangements with the EU could undermine their success , leaving industry worried about the future . The idea that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' could mean leaving the EU with no free trade deal in place , trashing companies that rely on trading parts and goods across the EU which could end up facing taxes on those movements , according to the manufacturing group EEF . It is crucial that Britain has a say in setting rules across the EU even after Brexit to help keep trade going , the EEF said , while border taxes should remain at zero and customs rules should enable `` frictionless trade '' . `` A loss of access to both the single market and the customs union would condemn the manufacturing sector to a painful and costly Brexit , '' it said . `` Any suggestion that 'no deal is better than a bad deal ' is simply unacceptable to an industry that accounts for 45pc of all UK exports . '' Manufacturers are experiencing an upturn in profits as foreign earnings are worth more in sterling because of the fall in the pound . But last week the Bank of England deputy governor Ben Broadbent warned this may be a short-lived `` sweet spot '' if border taxes go up , or if the pound rises once more . Financial services firms , on the other hand , have already been through a period of gloom and are now recovering their confidence . The CBI 's chief economist , Rain Newton-Smith , said : `` It 's great that financial services firms have begun the year with a spring in their step , notwithstanding Brexit uncertainty , with volumes expanding at a robust pace , profitability improving and hiring on the up . `` Underlying business in the sector is holding up well , and optimism about global markets , along with stronger global growth , is having a positive knock on effect . However , whilst demand in the wider UK economy has proven resilient , growth is likely to slow as the year goes on , amid broader uncertainty and higher inflation . '' The law firm Baker McKenzie said that Brexit could result in a new wave of red tape hitting businesses if it makes trade and hiring across borders more difficult . `` The changes involved will require significant additional bureaucratic SHUTTERSTOCK REX/ ROUTLEDGE/ mechanisms and will add cost to the business of many of our clients , particularly those who move goods between the UK and EU 27 , '' the firm said . It said most free trade deals focus on the movement of goods across borders , but 80pc of the UK 's economy is based on services , so a radical new type of deal will be needed . HUGH
Deloitte makes amends with government for memo leak
ONE of the world 's biggest has agreed not to bid for central government contracts for six months following a furious row with Theresa May over a Brexit memo . Last month a consultant working for Deloitte claimed in a two-page memo that civil servants were struggling to cope with more than 500 Brexit-related projects amid Cabinet splits . The memo prompted a withering response from Downing Street , which dismissed the memo as `` unsolicited '' and accused Deloitte of `` touting for business '' . Deloitte last night said it had put forward `` a plan for working with central government to put this matter behind us '' . It said : `` Deloitte regrets the publication of the two-page note , and has apologised for the unintended disruption it caused the Government . The note was intended for internal audiences and was not a Deloitte point of view . '' The leaked memo , written on Nov 7 by Keith Leslie , a partner at Deloitte , suggested 30,000 more civil servants may be needed to cope with Brexit . The memo said : `` Every department has developed a 'bottom-up ' plan of what the impact of Brexit could be - and its plan to cope with the 'worst case ' . `` Although necessary , this falls considerably short of having a 'government plan for Brexit ' because it has no prioritisation and no link to the overall negotiation strategy . '' At the time the memo was leaked , former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith said the consultancy should be stripped of Government contracts , while other Eurosceptic Conservative MPs suggested the document had been released in an attempt by Remain campaigners to frustrate Brexit . 'Deloitte regrets the publication of the two-page note , and has apologised for the disruption it caused '
Scotland Sturgeon says Scotland is paying 'true cost of Brexit ' ; Autumn Statement 2016
THE CHANCELLOR 'S Autumn Statement exposed the reality of the `` Brexit con '' , the First Minister has said . Nicola Sturgeon said dropping the Leave campaign 's £350 million a week NHS funding boost pledge and the increase in borrowing shows the `` true cost '' of the vote to exit the European Union . Speaking at First Minister 's Questions , she said : `` The Autumn Statement starkly set out the cost of Brexit to the UK economy and public finances , with economic growth and tax revenue revised downwards and borrowing and inflation sharply up . `` In responding , the UK Government had the opportunity to end its failed austerity policies , instead the Chancellor has continued with the cuts that are reducing the budgets for public services and cutting the income of families across Scotland . '' She welcomed the `` small increase in capital investment '' , but said by 2020 the capital budget would be around 8 per cent lower in real terms than when the Tories took office . She added : `` The Tories do n't like to hear this because what we are hearing now is the reality of their recklessness on Brexit - £100 billion of additional borrowing , debt increasing by around £200 billion , debt-to-GDP ratio hitting 90 per cent , lower growth and lower real wages , a real squeeze on living standards . `` Yesterday we started to see , perhaps for the first time , laid bare the true cost of Brexit . Rather than there being the promise of £350 million extra a week for the National Health Service , what we saw yesterday is that the additional borrowing , just the additional borrowing , caused by Brexit will amount to £225 million a week . `` That 's the Brexit con that so many people in the Conservative Party have presided over . `` That 's why I 'm so determined that we continue to explore every option to protect Scotland 's interests and in particular to protect our place in the single market , because that 's how we minimise the costs of Brexit that are being imposed on us by the Conservative Party . '' Tory MSP Murdo Fraser said the Chancellor had announced £800 million extra capital spending for Scotland , £74 million extra resource spending , £3.3 million extra for Scottish charities , a freeze in fuel duty , an increase in the personal allowance to help the lowest earners , an increase in research and development spending , and a new City Deal . He said : `` Why ca n't the First Minister for once stop being so miserable and just welcome this good news ? '' Scottish Greens co-convener Patrick Harvie said the Autumn Statement had contained a `` great deal more good news for the wealthiest '' , and called for the Scottish Budget to include `` progressive '' tax policies as well as to go further on issues such as the living wage , energy efficiency and topping up benefits . He said : `` Does the First Minister agree that the Scottish Budget must not only avoid reproducing the same unjust policies that are being pursued south of the border but must result in a cumulative benefit to Scotland that closes the inequality gap and leaves far fewer people in Scotland genuinely struggling ? '' Ms Sturgeon said : `` The Autumn Budget statement yesterday was a case of taking money away from the poorest to give it to the richest in our society . I think it was us seeing the Tories showing their true colours . '' She said the Scottish Budget would not pass on the tax cut to the 10 per cent top-income earners . 'This is the Brexit con that so many people in the Conservative Party have presided over '
Grassroots Tories are heading for the Brexit ; Europe 2016 ; Major blow to Cameron 's attempts to win over his party as 42pc of Conservative local chairmen back Out , new poll shows
JUST one in four Conservative local chairmen will vote to stay in the European Union , according to the most extensive survey of Tory grassroots since the referendum was called . In a major blow to David Cameron 's attempts to win over his party , 42 per cent of constituency chairmen were found to back Brexit while just 24 per cent support retaining EU membership . The rest were undecided . The survey , conducted by BBC Radio Four 's World This Weekend , talked to around a third of all local Tory heads in seats with a sitting Conservative MP and reveals the full scale of Euroscepticism in the party . Chairmen said that Britain has lost control of `` our destiny and laws '' being in the EU and that immigration is driving down pay for low-skilled workers . Far more also said they were dissatis-fied with the Prime Minister 's renegotiation deal than those who said they were pleased with it . The findings boost the leadership prospects of Boris Johnson , the London Mayor backing Brexit , who is said to be battling pro-EU George Osborne to take over as party leader when David Cameron steps down before 2020 . Of the 128 Conservative local chairmen who agreed to reveal their voting intentions , 54 said they backed Brexit , 31 said they would be supporting membership and 42 were undecided . That means far more grassroots Tories are backing an Out vote than MPs - who are roughly split 50:50 - and Cabinet ministers , a clear majority of whom back the Prime Minister . One chairman supporting Brexit said : `` We are not in control of our own destiny and laws . We lose a lot of money to the EU and would be better off keeping it for ourselves . I am surprised my MP is voting to remain . He consulted no one and is wrong . '' Another said : `` I do n't like the arguments put forward for Remain . The fact that Cameron has enshrined our exemption from 'ever closer union ' does not address the impact of that ever closer union on the UK . '' Of those who responded just one third said they were satisfied with the quality of Mr Cameron 's EU renegotiation deal . One critic said : `` It was n't a deal . If you ask for nothing and you get even less then it 's less . Why would anyone want to stay ? I hate all the scare stories put about by Remain . It suggests the country is full of incompetence and that 's appalling '' . However , separately 40 Conservative council leaders urged Britons to stay in the EU in a letter to today 's Daily Telegraph . The letter , signed by the leaders of , among others , Oxfordshire , Essex , Monmouthshire , Surrey , Suffolk and Somerset county councils , said : `` The EU is , of course , far from perfect . But that is why the UK needs to continue sitting at the table , influencing the future direction of the single market and ensuring that British interests are protected and promoted . `` Our local communities are the lifeblood of our economy : and our continued membership of a reformed EU helps them to prosper . '' They added : `` We take a hands-on role in promoting the economic wellbeing of our local areas . That is why we support Britain 's membership of a reformed EU . `` The special status that David Cameron has secured for Britain - particularly in continued access to the single market and protections for the City of London as the world 's financial centre - will help to ensure prosperity . '' Brandon Lewis , the pro-EU local Government minister , said : `` There are clearly lots of the Conservatives grassroots that want to fight back and help David Cameron . They know that he 's secured a good deal for Britain and that being part of a reformed EU bolsters their local economies . '' Letters : Page 19
The lady 's not for turning ... so is this the package May planned to deliver all along ? ; Brexit deal
History will not remember Theresa May as one of Britain 's great prime ministers . Nor as one of its luckiest . But posterity might , just , afford her a place in the pantheon of most resilient leaders . Retrospect might even suggest she was more calculating than anyone suspected . The Brexit deal set out in Brussels yesterday is testament to Mrs May 's extraordinary toughness , a willingness to endure public abuse , collegiate acrimony and private despair , yet not give up . Her predecessor may have run away from the scale of the Brexit challenge he gave Britain , but Mrs May has stayed at her post . Whatever you think of it , whatever questions it leaves unanswered and whatever trouble it stores up for the future , remember this : many of those now passing comment on the deal were six months ago convinced that Mrs May would not be in office by now . Her capacity for pain and ability to survive apparently mortal wounds - including self-inflicted ones - are the foundations of this deal . The greatest of those wounds , the botched election , is perhaps key . For when Mrs May lost her Commons majority , she made compromises on Brexit inevitable , since she ( or any other Tory PM ) would lack the votes - and authority - to drive through the hardest form of exit sought by purist Leavers . Looking back , it is hard not to wonder whether , within hours of the June 8 disaster , she had already calculated that only by making the subsequent negotiating process look unendurably hard might she be able to placate those purists during the inevitable climbdowns to come . Anyone paying close attention to the election result or Mrs May 's words since would have picked up on her real intentions . Her pre-election claim that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' , for example , vanished from her Brexit script . The truth is that , whatever the political window-dressing and charade , she 's been telling us this was where she would go for months now - even if some did n't want to listen . Mrs May made an explicit acknowledgement of this reality in Florence with a speech confirming she was willing to accept a transition period after Brexit , a potential role for the ECJ , and to pay billions in a divorce settlement , if that 's what was needed to start trade talks . Colleagues lined up to take a shot at her . Mrs May , like a boxer on the ropes , absorbed the blows but did not hit back . Yet nor did she change course . Her offer to Brussels remained on the table , only more extensive . Such tolerance may best be ascribed to a post-election decision to play the long game and suck up the punishment . If she had made such a decision , by December it was paying off . For who was it who really backed down ? Why did MPs who once felt they could use Mrs May as a punching bag over Brexit fall meekly in line behind her compromises ? The answer was supplied on Sunday by Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , whose influence is quietly growing beyond his department . He publicly warned Tory Leavers to back Mrs May because without her , there might be no Brexit . And so May 's calculation has become the Leavers ' calculation : collapsing her deal might collapse her administration , unleashing political chaos in which the Article 50 process might just be put on hold . Still Mrs May had more to suffer . The election failure causing this week 's spectacle of a British prime minister seeming to dance first to the fiddled tune of the Irish Taosaich and then to the flute of the DUP . Again she soaked up the humiliation and scorn . Does the deal secure her in power for the foreseeable future ? Does it resolve the big questions at the heart of Brexit ? Will it unite the Tories around a single European position ? No , no , and no . There will be more trouble ahead , more drama and more torment for Mrs May . She may yet succeed and she may yet fail . But the endurance - and calculation - she has shown in the last six miserable months surely suggest she will stick at the job of Brexit through whatever it throws at her next .
Scotland Mundell challenges Sturgeon to rule out indyref 'once and for all ' ; Mundell wants a 'more mature approach ' from 'rejected ' SNP
DAVID MUNDELL will today challenge Nicola Sturgeon to drop `` once and for all '' her view that Brexit could justify a second independence referendum - and claim her administration is secretly cooperating with the UK Government . Speaking on the third anniversary of the 2014 referendum , the Scottish Secretary will state the SNP `` deliberately conflated '' last year 's EU vote with independence in the hope of re-opening the issue . But he will argue their gambit was `` roundly rejected '' when the Nationalists were mauled in June 's general election , and conclude the issues of Brexit and independence must now be `` decoupled for good '' . In a keynote address during a trade mission to Paraguay , Mr Mundell will urge Ms Sturgeon to put the link `` to bed '' permanently by ruling out a second referendum at next month 's SNP conference . He will also claim that the UK and Scottish governments are making `` serious and constructive progress '' behind the scenes on preparing for Brexit but this has Continued on Page 5 Continued from Page 1 been overshadowed by the Nationalists ' `` public rhetoric '' to the contrary . In a pointed intervention suggesting they are behaving childishly , he will urge them to adopt a `` more mature approach '' and argue that both sides need to `` pull together '' to get the country ready for leaving the EU . However , Keith Brown , the SNP 's economy minister , described the speech as `` rambling '' and claimed it exposed `` the UK 's own confused and chaotic approach to Brexit '' . The row broke out ahead of a meeting this week between senior SNP ministers and Tory MSPs in an effort to resolve a row of over the UK Government 's EU Withdrawal Bill and avoid a constitutional crisis . The Scottish Government has threatened to withhold its consent for the legislation , claiming it will result in a Westminster `` power grab '' of responsibilities repatriated from the EU that should be passed to Scotland . Ms Sturgeon last week urged Holyrood 's opposition leaders to `` put aside party interest '' and unite with her on the issue . However , she refused to abandon plans for a second independence referendum , and still intends to set out a new timetable in autumn next year . Mr Mundell was expected to use today 's speech to argue that having UK frameworks for some repatriated powers was `` common sense '' , as the alternative was creating trade barriers within the UK that `` would be extremely damaging for Scottish firms '' . Urging both governments to work closer together on Brexit , he will say : `` Behind the scenes , that work has been happening and I am pleased to report we are making progress . `` But frankly , up to now , private progress has been overshadowed by public rhetoric . '' The Scottish Secretary will reject the `` power grab '' accusation , saying that he wants post-Brexit devolution to be delivered in a way that `` strengthens our United Kingdom not undermines it '' . Arguing that this is `` the heart of the matter '' , Mr Mundell will say : `` The fact is , until the recent election in June the Brexit debate in Scotland was deliberately conflated with the question of Scottish independence . `` Despite the passage of only three short years - and despite the decisive result - the Scottish National Party sought to use Brexit to reopen the issue that divided our country so badly . `` Their attempt was roundly rejected in the recent general election so we now need the issues to be de-coupled for good . '' Mr Mundell will add : `` I look forward to the autumn heralding the start of a more mature approach , where public rhetoric on all sides reflects the serious and constructive work achieved in private . '' The Scottish Secretary 's trip to Paraguay is the first by a UK Government minister in 20 years and he will describe it as `` part of a fundamental stepchange in the UK 's global trade policy '' after Brexit . Leaving the EU will be `` transformative '' , he will say . But Mr Brown said Mr Mundell 's visit highlights the fact the UK currently has no trade deals with other countries , including Paraguay , and `` the ridiculous position that his party have left Scotland in and the damage that could be done to our exports '' . He added : `` Mr Mundell 's obsession with independence and failure to understand the impact of the EU withdrawal bill is at odds with the growing consensus across Scotland that we must protect the powers of the Scottish Parliament from this legislation and that any UK wide frameworks must be mutually agreed , not imposed by Westminster . '' 'Frankly , up to now , private progress has been overshadowed by public rhetoric '
Businesses and ministers must unite to make a success of EU deal
With every passing day , it becomes ever clearer that making a success of Brexit will require a deep , sustained partnership between government and business . Over the coming months , we must work tirelessly together at both a strategic and a technical level - to achieve both the best possible overall deal , and to deliver the answers to the practical , real-world questions that firms pose each and every day . Many of the business communities I repreRsent see the Westminster and media debates on Brexit as something occurring on a far-off planet , far removed from their day-to-day concerns . In truth , only a minority of firms are actively thinking about Brexit at all - with a majority far more concerned about the impact of government policies and decisions closer to home . Yet for those that see Brexit as a clear and present danger , the basics must come first . `` Will our goods get stuck at border crossings or delayed at the quayside ? Who can we hire , and from where , and for how long ? Who do we pay VAT to ? Whose regulations do we need to comply with ? Will change hit me all at once , or over time ? '' And so on . These vital and basic questions must be answered , along with the technical and legal issues affecting specific sectors . From aviation to agriculture , there are complex and detailed discussions on regulations , standards , and institutions that are vital to the UK 's future economic interests . Our business communities want clear answers . They want the UK 's negotiators to have the maximum flexibility possible to go out and secure those answers . And they tell us repeatedly that they have no appetite for a parting of ways with the European Union that does not include a deal . To be sure , individual businesses impacted by Brexit have a range of opinions on what our final deal with the EU should look like . Yet they are all clear that they only want to have to make one big adjustment to the conditions of that deal . Asking firms to incur the costs of one adjustment in 2019 , only to be followed by another a few years later , risks making UK businesses uncompetitive in an increasingly cut-throat global marketplace . For that reason , the British Chambers of Commerce and other business organisations have called on the Government to seek to maintain the economic benefits of the single market and the Customs Union , until a comprehensive final settlement between the UK and EU is agreed and implemented . This would also mean that businesses only face one set of adjustment costs . This sort of pragmatism , focused on real-world economic risks and opportunities , must be at the heart of the UK negotiators ' thinking . Businesses I speak with on both sides of the Channel would like to see flexibility not just from the Government , but from the EU27 as well - so that the trade elements of the talks can begin as soon as possible . The sooner Brussels agrees to discuss the outline of the UK 's future relationship with the European Union , and the length and scope of any transition period , the stronger business confidence , investment and hiring is likely to be - both here in the UK and among our trading partners . Attention is required away from the negotiations , too . Unless our firms have the best possible environment for business here at home , even a great Brexit deal will have little impact . Business communities want to be reassured that government will also be focusing on other issues that impact their competitiveness and their bottom line . That means bringing forward infrastructure projects that have already been approved , giving work to suppliers and confidence to wider business communities . It means doing more about the intermittent mobile and broadband connectivity that handicaps firms ' ability to do business . And it means a continued focus on training and export . Yet a great business environment is about more than infrastructure alone . It 's also about the tone of our political debate . In recent weeks , our business communities have become increasingly concerned that politicians and a segment of the public believe that significant tax rises on both businesses and individuals are acceptable and even desirable . Calls for additional taxes on businesses to pay for politically-expedient spending must be resisted , particularly in the context of a Brexit transition . A high-cost , high-tax Britain with patchy infrastructure and serious skills gaps would be no recipe for post-Brexit success . Firms are already buckling under the weight of the costs they bear before they turn over a single pound . Many have been hit by the impact of lower sterling , business rates , the Apprenticeship Levy , the Immigrant Skills Charge and pension autoenrolment - to name just a few . Any politician who seeks to raise the cost of doing business in the UK at such a critical moment will have to explain to the electorate why fewer jobs are being created , why investments originally slated for the UK go elsewhere , and why the tax receipts flowing into the Exchequer are lower than originally anticipated . Maintaining a strong environment for business in the UK is just as important as achieving a businessfriendly outcome to Brexit negotiations . All who care about business , whatever their perspective on how we leave the EU , must make this point loudly and clearly . Dr Adam Marshall is director general of the British Chambers of Commerce 'A high-cost , high-tax Britain with serious skills gaps would be no recipe for post-Brexit success '
Tusk says he 's a dreamer about Britain staying - but it looks like he 's the only one ; Brexit negotiations
DONALD TUSK yesterday invoked John Lennon as he said he `` dreams '' that Britain could still stay in the European union . The president of the European Council said it is not `` impossible '' that Brexit could be abandoned , adding : `` You may say I 'm a dreamer , but I 'm not the only one . '' It came on the day that Theresa May made a `` fair and serious offer '' to give EU citizens living in the UK the right to stay permanently after Brexit and be treated like British citizens . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , said that as a committed Anglophile he `` hates Brexit from every possible angle '' . Mr Tusk said : `` You can hear different predictions coming from different people about the possible outcome of these negotiations - hard Brexit , soft Brexit or no deal . Some of my British friends have even asked me whether Brexit could be reversed and whether I could imagine an outcome where the UK stays part of the EU . I told them that , in fact , the European Union was built on dreams that seemed impossible to achieve . So , who knows . You may say I 'm a dreamer , but I 'm not the only one . '' However , he was almost immediately contradicted by other European leaders including Jean Claude-Juncker , the president of the European Commission , who said : `` In Europe I never have illusions because I do n't want to lose them . '' Charles Michel , the Belgian prime minister , said : `` I am not a dreamer . And I am not the only one . '' It came as Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , said that Brexit was less of a `` priority '' than the future of the European Union . She said : `` I want to say clearly that , for me , shaping the future for the 27 takes priority over the negotiations with Great Britain over withdrawal . Naturally we will conduct these negotiations quickly and we will conduct them intensively . We will do everything to ensure that - as has been successfully done so far - the 27 states stick together . `` We want this negotiation to take place in a good spirit . We know that we will want to work with Great Britain later . But the clear focus must be on the future of the 27 , so that we have the best results . '' Emmanuel Macron , the French president , said he preferred to talk about Europe 's ambitions and plans than get involved in `` discussions lasting days and nights on its dismantling '' . Mr Macron repeated his position that the door remains open for a U-turn on Brexit , but warned that it will be-come more difficult the longer talks between David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Michel Barnier , the EU negotiator , continue . `` The door is open until the moment you walk through it . It 's not up to me to say it 's closed , '' Mr Macron told The Guardian . Mr Rutte suggested that he respected the outcome of last year 's referendum , even if he regretted it . `` I am an Anglophile , '' said Mr Rutte . `` You are one of our most beloved partners , so I hate Brexit from every angle . But you ca n't argue with democracy . '' Arriving at the European Council summit for the first time since this month 's snap election left her in a weakened position at the head of a minority government , Mrs May insisted that talks on withdrawal had begun in a `` constructive '' way . `` What I am going to be setting out today is clearly how the United Kingdom proposes to protect the rights of EU citizens living in the UK and see the rights of UK citizens living in Europe protected , '' she said . `` That 's been an important issue . We 've wanted it to be one of the early issues to be considered in the negotiations . That is now the case . That work is starting . '' The Prime Minister also urged European leaders to put pressure on social media websites such as WhatsApp and Facebook to give security services access to encrypted messages so they can tackle terrorists . Mrs May called on the EU to help `` rid terrorist material from the internet in all our languages '' in the wake of the Manchester , London Bridge and Finsbury Park terror attacks . Speaking at the European Council she said that the terror threat is `` evolving quickly '' , highlighting the fact that in Manchester an improvised explosive device was used while in London the attacks involved vehicles and knives . She said that technology companies must `` fulfil their responsibilities '' and automatically remove extremist content instead of acting `` reactively '' once they are notified by users . She said that `` concerted pressure '' is needed to stop end-to-end encryption , where even the social media companies themselves can not access the content of messages . Mr Juncker yesterday hailed a new deal on EU defence co-operation which will see Europe sharing defence procurement and working together on small projects such as logistics and officer training . He said : `` What was started in 1954 is happening now ... I said this was 'the sleeping princess ' of the Lisbon Treaty . Well , the Princess is now awakening . '' Up in the air Unanswered questions on migrant plan The cut-off date Mrs May did not clarify the date from when EU citizens will qualify for the offer to obtain settled status in the UK , instead she set a range - March 29 2017 to Brexit-Day , March 29 2019 . ECJ v UK Supreme Courts Mrs May is explicit that any commitment to EU citizens `` will be enshrined in UK law and ... enforced through our courts . '' The EU says the European Court of Justice should have `` full jurisdiction '' . Spouses and families At present EU nationals can bring non-EU spouses and family members here more easily than British nationals and the EU wants such rights to continue . It is far from clear if Britain agrees . Benefits and welfare The British offer is to treat EU citizens living here equally with UK citizens , but it is unknown if , for example , EU citizens will continue to be able to send child benefit back to children not living in the UK . Reciprocal deal While saying reciprocity is `` vital '' , Mrs May is not prepared to make a unilateral offer to EU citizens , leaving open the question about what happens if the talks break down .
Opposition calls for a soft Brexit only make no deal at all more likely ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - The opposition parties accuse Theresa May of opting for a so-called hard Brexit as her ultimate choice . They ignore her need to use the threat of a hard Brexit in order to win concessions from the EU . To set your sights on a so-called soft Brexit would only encourage the EU to make no concessions at all . The more the opposition parties fail to back Mrs May in this , the more likely Britain will end up without a deal of any sort . That is hardly what the opposition parties and Remainers , let alone the rest of the British electorate , want . Major David Riddick ( retd ) Cranbrook , Kent sir - `` Senior Whitehall sources '' ( report , April 26 ) say that Britain will have to pay billions into the EU budget . Yet Article 50 says nothing about an exit bill . The £50 billion demand was invented by the European Commission to solve a critical EU budget problem . Losing the British contribution will leave a large hole . Government legal advisers say we owe the EU nothing . A major concession at the start of negotiations would signal to EU leaders that they can walk all over us . Ken Worthy Esher , Surrey sir - You report Sir Keir Starmer as saying that Labour would `` not accept 'no deal ' as a viable option '' . This implies that Labour would accept whatever `` deal '' the EU negotiators had decided to impose on Britain . This in turn is an inducement to these negotiators to impose a settlement probably quite unacceptable to the majority who voted to leave last year . Not a very clever approach to negotiations . Dugald Barr London W8 sir - British Remainers often complain that fair attention should be paid to the views of the losing 48 per cent in the EU referendum . The number of votes for anti-EU parties in the first round of the presidential French elections exceeded this percentage , very narrowly falling short of a majority . How , then , should Emmanuel Macron , if he wins on Sunday week , accommodate the views of such a sizeable minority , rather than simply press ahead on a ticket of `` hard EU '' ? Quentin Skinner Hopfgarten im Brixental , Tyrol , Austria sir - Jean-Claude Juncker , the President of the European Commission , talks about the `` march of history '' , and seems to think that the EU is somehow in step with it . Actually , no such march exists . Some historical events appear to follow a pattern ; many others do not , as was shown conclusively by Isaiah Berlin 70 years ago in his short demolition of historical inevitability . Later , he adopted another more convincing historical theory that `` from the crooked timber of humanity nothing straight was ever fashioned '' - especially , perhaps , the EU . John Jolliffe Mells , Somerset
Grasp opportunity to sweep away Brussels red tape , urges Boris ; Brexit TELEGRAPH CAMPAIGN RED TAPE CUT EU Foreign Secretary hails Telegraph call to rid UK of 44 years of 'burdensome ' rules afflicting business
BORIS JOHNSON has called for more than 40 years of `` burdensome '' EU regulation to be swept away after Brexit as he backed a campaign by The Daily Telegraph to cut red tape . The Foreign Secretary said that Brexit will provide the UK with an `` opportunity '' to axe needless regulations that have `` accreted '' since Britain joined the European Union . This newspaper has called on the Conservative Party to promise a bonfire of EU red tape in its 2020 manifesto to put Britain on a radically different course . The proposal already has the backing of Iain Duncan Smith , a former Conservative leader , Lord Lawson , a former Tory Chancellor , and business leaders . Government sources said the pledge is likely to win the backing of most of the Cabinet , adding that they expect it to form a central part of Theresa May 's vision for Britain after Brexit . According to a House of Commons report , ministers will have to import up to 19,000 EU rules and regulations as part of the Great Repeal Bill , which will take the shape of a white paper published tomorrow . EU regulations are estimated to cost Britain a total of more than £120billion per year . The Common Agricultural Policy alone reportedly costs £10billion in direct costs and by inflating food prices . Mr Johnson told the Commons yesterday that he `` applauds '' The Telegraph 's campaign to axe red tape as he responded to a question by Michael Fabricant , a Conservative MP . He said : `` It [ Brexit ] will be an opportunity to get rid of some of the burdensome regulation that has accreted over the past 44 years , and I applaud the campaign that I know he supports and which has been outlined in the pages of this morning 's The Daily Telegraph . '' Mr Fabricant said : `` As someone who ran a business in 48 countries worldwide , I know how burdensome legislation can be in the EU compared with that of the US and Australia . I fully support The Daily Telegraph 's campaign to take full advantage of Brexit by cutting back on unnecessary red tape , holding back British competitiveness - though this does not mean endangering employees by reducing their rights and safety at work . '' It came as an analysis by Thomson Reuters found that more than 50,000 laws and regulations have been introduced in the UK as the result of EU red tape since 1990 , including those which are no longer in force . It said that EU regulations and directives have had a direct influence on swathes of British law including trade , agriculture , financial services and the environment . Since 2010 alone , 6,718 new EU laws have been introduced to the UK . Business leaders and doctors have called for the end of the working time directive , which imposes such strict conditions on shift patterns that workforces can not be as flexible as they need to be , and surgeons say it prevents them getting vital training . Builders have been frustrated by rules on preserving newts , which are classed as `` endangered '' in Europe even though they are relatively common in the UK . Consumers have also been angered by rules that have banned the most powerful vacuum cleaners and forced householders to use dim energy-saving lightbulbs . Open Europe , the think tank , has previously highlighted official figures showing that the top 100 EU regulations cost the economy £33.3billion a year - more than the Government raises in council tax . It says that the benefits of many of the regulations have been `` vastly over-stated '' . Henry Newman , the director of Open Europe , said : `` Ultimately , the winning argument for leaving the EU was for the UK to regain control over its own destiny . `` Although the first priority must be to give business certainty by protecting the legal status quo , the Government will need a careful process to review what is on the statute books . `` Rather than rules designed in Brussels to suit a union of 28 states , we can have regulations tailored to our own economy 's needs , designed to support growth and prosperity for all . '' The Prime Minister 's official spokesman said : `` The point of the Great Repeal Bill is that we will transfer all the existing European Union laws into British laws . That obviously means that in future decisions about those laws will all be made in Westminster , Cardiff and Belfast . '' During the EU referendum , Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptics who are now in the Cabinet raised repeated concerns about the impact of red tape . Mr Johnson said during the campaign : `` You can not sell bananas with abnormal curvature of the fingers . Why should they tell us how powerful our hairdryers should be ? This is not a matter for an international , supranational body to dictate to the British people . '' 'Rather than have rules designed in Brussels , we can have regulations tailored to the needs of our economy '
EU wants Britain to keep paying billions 4 years after Brexit ; France and Germany fear UK would not pay its debts if trade negotiations turned sour
THE European Commission wants Britain to be paying into EU projects for four years after it has signed a Brexit deal , with final payments continuing up until the end of 2023 , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . The plan is part of a EU demand that Britain settle a ( EURO ) 60 billion `` Brexit bill '' before being granted a deal that will govern future trade relations . The demand emerged after Theresa May appeared at the House of Lords in person as peers began a two-day debate on the Government 's Article 50 Bill . The suggestion that Britain should pay instalments until 2023 was made at a meeting earlier this month between Michel Barnier , the European Commission 's chief Brexit negotiator , and senior officials from the 27 remaining EU member states . The payments would to help smooth over the ( EURO ) 10billion-a-year hole left in the EU budgets by Continued on Page 4 Editorial Comment : Page 17 Britain 's departure from the EU , which could see richer countries like Germany and France paying more , or poorer countries , like Poland and Hungary receiving less . `` The Commission wants the UK to pay instalments from the day of departure in 2019 up until 2023 , which is when the financial demands of the EU 's seven-year budget cycle are at their highest , '' said an EU diplomatic source with knowledge of the meeting . Theresa May promised that Britain would stop making `` vast contributions '' to the annual EU budget after Brexit , but the EU will demand that Britain keeps making payments to honour commitments already made in the 2014-2020 budget round . The payments will reflect the reality that EU projects Britain agreed to support prior to departure in 2019 will not require funds to be actually disbursed until up to four years later . The prospect of paying into Europe for so long presents a political headache for Mrs May and has raised fears among major EU countries , led by France and Germany , that the Britain will not honour its side of the bargain if relations . subsequently sour . The meeting between Mr Barnier and the EU member states also revealed a deep split between France and Germany and the European Commission ' over how to calculate what Britain owes prior to departure in March 2019 . The EC believes Britain should be allowed to offset its share of the EU 's ( EURO ) 154billionassets against what it owes in annual budget commitments , pension obligations and other longer term liabilities . `` Both France and Germany objected , but the Commission'said it was hard to argue that Britain must pay up for its outstanding commitments while refusing to recognise its share of the EU 's assets , '' the source said . According to plans laid out in the meeting , the European side wants Britain to sign up an agreement in principle on how its owings should be calculated , before opening discussion on a future trade deal . Germany and France again raised questions about whether such an agreement on methodology would be `` written in stone '' or would be something looser that the British side would later seek to amend . In a hint of a possible compromise , EC officials told the meeting that while they would not bend on the principle that Britain must settle its bills , it could be flexible on how those owings were presented .
Servants of the European Union seek its interests in Lords Brexit debate ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Do Lord Mandelson and the other peers who have served the European Union in various offices declare their financial interests in the Brexit debate ? They are pensioners of the EU , and as such they have a lifelong obligation of loyalty to the EU . The Department for Communities ' guide to councillors advises that , if one has a pecuniary interest relating to any business under consideration , one must not participate in the discussion or in any vote taken on it . Does this rule not apply to the Lords ? Tom Bliss Fulbeck , Lincolnshire SIR - To overturn the referendum result , thereby defying democracy , Tony Blair seems happy to use the Lords , the very chamber he sought , in the name of democracy , to abolish . Georgina Stanger Caerwent , Monmouthshire SIR - Mr Blair held a referendum when he was prime minister on whether there should be a Welsh assembly . The vote was 50.3 per cent in favour and 49.7 per cent against . That result was not contested and an assembly was formed . If that was enough for Mr Blair then , why is 52 per cent in favour of Brexit not enough for him now ? Roger J Arthur Pulborough , West Sussex SIR - Tony Blair 's judgment is that Brexit is a mistake . Would this be the same Mr Blair whose judgment was that we should sign up to the euro ? Michael Knight Ascot , Berksire SIR - The breathtaking arrogance of Tony Blair never ceases to amaze me . He really seems to believe that those of us who campaigned and voted for Brexit were thick , deluded or worse . From February until referendum day last year I hammered my poor , knackered knees daily , spreading the gospel of liberty , democracy and the rule of law . Both sides emphasised that Brexit meant leaving the single market and customs union . People understood these implications . I only mentioned immigration in response to direct questions and referred only to the pressure of mass migration on the country 's infrastructure . Maintaining liberty , democracy and the rule of law has always cost : it is a cost usually measured in blood . If there is a cost this time , it will be measured in terms of a few pounds a week in beer money.John Hay-Heddle Sawley , Derbyshire SIR - You published a letter of mine in July 2015 . In it I pointed out that shortly after the 2015 election Mr Blair said that Labour 's lurch to the Left after Margaret Thatcher won the 1979 election was prompted by `` the theory that the electorate is stupid '' . He also said at the time that he was not in favour of an EU referendum , as people might not make the `` reasonable and sensible '' choice . Geoff Riley Saffron Walden , Essex
MPs have no right to try to thwart Brexit ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : To most people , the result of the referendum on the European Union was clear and easy to understand : Britain will leave . Yet the suspicion lingers that some of those on the losing side still do not accept that . Prominent Remainers , including Ed Miliband , are calling for Parliament to vote before Theresa May begins the process of making Brexit a reality by invoking Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty . Mrs May has rejected this suggestion . She is quite correct to do so , and well within her rights . Parliamentary votes before Article 50 could delay or even halt Brexit , something clearly at odds with the referendum result . Britain will leave , and neither MPs nor peers have any right to try to keep the country in the EU . Constitutional purists will argue that Parliament is sovereign and should be given the chance to make the major decisions on Brexit . Yet the constitution does not exist solely in the textbooks and seminars of the purists ; Britain 's system of governance is a living thing , constantly evolving in the light of political reality . That reality includes not just the biggest single popular vote in British history but the parliamentary failure that preceded it : Parliament for many years ignored the will of the people it is supposed to represent on the European issue , fuelling the resentment that contributed to the Brexit vote . It is , therefore , reasonable for Mrs May to hesitate before giving Parliament an opportunity to derail or delay the process of exit . The process that will take Britain from EU membership to independence will be long and could be complex . Many of the details should be worked out carefully over the coming months and years , not rushed or forced for reasons of shortterm partisan politics . When the outline of Britain 's exit agreement emerges , MPs will doubtless express a view , a view that ministers may well wish to take account of . Parliament will also scrutinise and vote on the Great Repeal Bill that will , in due course , abolish the 1972 European Communities Act that makes Britain an EU member . But that is for the future . For now , Mrs May has offered clarity on the elements of the Brexit process that need clarity : Britain will indeed leave the EU , and Article 50 will be invoked next spring . That is the basis of a sensible plan for Brexit and Mrs May should be allowed to get on with it , without interference from Parliament .
PERSONAL ACCOUNT ; Brexit and your pension : the importance of doing absolutely nothing
One of the problems with the Brexit debate has been the reduction of complex issues into `` binary '' outcomes . With pensions , for instance , the Treasury paints a Brexit scenario where pensioners ' incomes `` would be eroded by higher inflation '' and their `` assets and investments would decline '' . The underlying argument is that Brexit would result in a plunge in sterling , leading to a rise in the cost of living and higher interest rates . Whether you subscribe to this or not , what is more certain is that the impact would differ widely by group . Those already taking pensions It 's hard to see why many pensioners would suffer especially from the effects of inflation , if it arose . The Government 's triple-lock pension promise - to grow the state pension every year by the highest of inflation , earnings growth or 2.5pc - would protect this group from rising prices perhaps more than any other . Since the state pension is predicted to make up an increasing portion of retirees ' total income over time , this protection is going to be even more encompassing . Many existing pensioners have a salary-linked work pension in addition to their state one , and these , too , tend to be inflation-proofed . Could the latter payments be at risk ? As lawyers Allen & Overy have told their client businesses , EU and UK pension rules are currently largely aligned , so , `` to the extent that Britain is no longer bound by EU law , we do not anticipate any immediate change '' . It is true that annuities and other pension payments that are not index-linked would lose spending power if inflation took hold . But that 's quite an if . And it also discounts the potentially positive effect that a return to moderate inflation could have on pensioners ' other investments . Those with a long way to retirement The Treasury 's forecasts here are based again on the assumption that weaker trade links will affect the economy and cause `` a long-term fall in incomes and profits would mean future pensioners were able to save less and would earn lower returns '' . The Treasury put a figure on this , saying : `` An individual currently aged 50 on median earnings and with median pension savings could lose between £3,800 and £5,800 from their savings by 2030 '' . Arriving at such precise outcomes is ambitious where the timescale is 15 years . Anything could happen in that period , irrespective of the referendum outcome , which is my point : if you have more than 10 years to go to your likely retirement age , you have more room for manoeuvre . Excellent reason to sit tight . Those hoping to retire in the immediate future This final group is arguably most at risk from the effects of the referendum , whatever its outcome . If they need to encash pension assets to supplement an income or buy an annuity they could be vulnerable to volatile stock markets , currencies and interest rates . For them , even more than the other groups , the need is to do absolutely nothing . That could even include resisting , where at all possible , taking your 25pc tax-free lump sum . Stuart Bayliss , a pensions expert at Better Retirement Group , put it this way : `` People anywhere near retirement age should ask themselves : how can I avoid making any particularly significant decision for as long as possible ? '' The danger of taking the tax-free lump sum - which as Mr Bayliss says has for many become a `` knee-jerk reaction '' when retirement age is reached - is not only that you encash shares or other investments at an inopportune time . It 's that you 'll then need to take other decisions about where to invest it . And you 'll probably be investing it in a taxed environment , rather than leaving it where it is growing tax-free . And annuity rates ? Even if inflation were to take hold as the Treasury warns , it is unlikely that annuity rates would recover substantially . As the yield on UK government bonds fell to record lows this week , major annuity providers cut their rates . That is not promising . Sit on your hands .
Labour benches cheered with delight ; Reconstruction
FOR Labour , it was a moment of raucous celebration . Hours after Tory rebels helped them inflict an historic defeat on the Government over Brexit , the Christmas Party in Jeremy Corbyn 's office was in full swing with music so loud it could be heard reverberating outside the building . For the Tories , however , it was a moment of bitter recrimination . While the 11 pro-European rebels boasted that their rebellion had enabled Parliament to `` take control '' of Brexit , many of their colleagues were absolutely furious . The rebels further incensed their Eurosceptic colleagues when they took to the Pugin room in the Commons and drank a bottle of white wine . Nadine Dorries , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , called for her colleagues to be deselected while others accused them of handing a major `` victory '' to Labour and diminishing Britain 's negotiating hand with the EU . As the dust settled on a disastrous defeat for the Government , the Prime Minister , her Cabinet and Chief Whip were left asking the question - where did it go wrong ? The dangers were obvious from the start . In September Dominic Grieve , a pro-European Tory and former Attorney General , tabled an amendment demanding that the Government should give Parliament a legal guarantee of a final vote on the Brexit deal . With the support of nine other Tory MPs , the `` meaningful vote '' amendment soon drew the support of Labour and the Liberal Democrats . In a bid to defuse the rebellion David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , made clear in the Commons that the Government was prepared to offer a binding vote on the final Brexit deal . The concession , however , was not enough and after weeks of fruitless negotiations , matters came to a head in the most brutal fashion yesterday . Shortly after 5.30am David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , wrote to Tory MPs giving them an assurance that there would be a vote in Parliament as soon as possible . His commitment to the deal did little to placate the rebels . In a bid to make a breakthrough , the Prime Minister took to inviting the Tory rebels into Downing Street for one-to-one discussions about the bill . `` They were trying to pick us off , '' one rebel said . `` It did n't work . '' By the time it came to Prime Minister 's Questions shortly before lunchtime , it became clear that the Government was not going to back down . Accepting the amendment , the Prime Minister told Tory rebels , would put a `` smooth and orderly '' Brexit at risk . By the time the debate on the amendments started at 1pm , the mood was toxic . Pro-European Tory MPs accused Julian Smith , the Chief Whip , of attempting to bully a female Tory MP into backing down and claimed she was left in tears . The claim was strongly denied by Mr Smith , who in turn threatened to sue the rebels for making `` defamatory '' comments about him . The debate itself was just as bad tempered . When Bernard Jenkin , a senior Eurosceptic Tory MP , made an intervention he found himself heckled by pro-European Tory MPs on all sides . `` Read it [ the bill ] and sit down , '' they shouted at him . As rebel after rebel made clear that they were not backing down , the Government attempted one last climbdown . Less than half an hour before the vote was due to take place Dominic Raab , the justice minister , pledged to include a commitment to a legally binding vote at a later stage in the passage of the bill . Of the 16 Tories poised to rebel , some were swayed . Paul Masterton and George Freeman both abstained from the vote on the basis of the pledge . Vicky Ford , the Tory MP for Chelmsford , appeared in two minds and seemed on the verge of tears when it came to the vote . In the end she was ushered inside the Noe lobby by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who put his arm around her back and smiled at her warmly as they walked inside . It was not enough . Mrs May lost the vote by 309 votes to 305 with the result being greeted with cheers from the Labour benches as it was announced . Rebel roll call The 11 Tory MPs who defeated Mrs May Heidi Allen South Cambridgeshire Ken Clarke Rushcliffe Jonathan Djanogly Huntingdon Dominic Grieve Beaconsfield Stephen Hammond Wimbledon Sir Oliver Heald North East Hertfordshire Nicky Morgan Loughborough Bob Neill Bromley and Chislehurst Antoinette Sandbach Eddisbury Anna Souby Broxtowe Sarah Wollaston Totnes
Thatcher would have feared for deal , says Lawson
MARGARET THATCHER would have been `` deeply concerned '' by the concessions handed to the EU by Theresa May , who has `` lost her nerve '' on Brexit , Lord Lawson , the former chancellor , has said . Delivering the annual Margaret Thatcher lecture , Lord Lawson condemned the Government for `` wasting precious time '' on trying to achieve an unnecessary trade deal . Speaking at the Carlton Club yesterday he said : `` We find ourselves quite unnecessarily as a supplicant , in a humiliating state of cringe , begging for what is unnecessary and unattainable . The time has come to call an end to this demeaning process . We must get up off our knees . Enough is enough . '' The peer , who has previously said Brexit was a chance to `` finish the job '' that Baroness Thatcher started , said the former prime minister would have been `` deeply concerned at the current state of so-called negotiations '' . Lord Lawson suggested the UK should leave the EU without a deal and revert to World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules . He described Friday 's deal as `` just about acceptable '' , but emphasised that the UK 's regulatory autonomy must be freed if it is to achieve the national sovereignty and economic benefits that Brexit can deliver . `` [ Mrs May ] appears to have lost her nerve , and - no doubt encouraged by the bureaucracy , who are horrified by the idea of Brexit - has allowed herself to be manoeuvred into imagining that no trade deal would be a disaster . This is manifest nonsense . It is also the cause of most of her current difficulties . `` The provisional agreement that Mrs May secured last Friday is just about acceptable so far as it goes . But let us be quite clear . The UK 's regulatory autonomy , post-Brexit , must be unfettered . It is an essential attribute of national sovereignty , which is what Brexit is all about . '' 'The time has come to call an end to this demeaning process . We must get up off our knees '
Davis backs a 'Canada plus plus plus ' deal
DAVID DAVIS said Britain will strike a `` Canada plus plus plus '' Brexit deal as Labour signalled it wants to keep the UK tied to the single market forever . The Brexit Secretary said he believed a substantive deal could be struck with Brussels within a year , while Sir Keir Starmer , his opposite number , set out a blueprint which could result in the UK continuing to pay into the European Union 's budget after withdrawal . Sir Keir also refused to rule out calling another EU referendum which could reverse the 2016 result . The emergence of the parties ' opposing Brexit visions came ahead of a statement from Theresa May in the House of Commons this afternoon when she is expected to stress that there is now a `` new sense of optimism '' in talks with the EU . Mr Davis 's backing for a Canada-style trade deal appeared to place him on a collision course with Remain-supporting colleagues , and comes just over a week before the Cabinet is due to hold a crunch discussion over what it wants the `` end state '' of Brexit talks to be . Mr Davis said he wanted to see an `` overarching trade deal '' based on the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) which grants Canada increased access to the European single market and eliminates the vast majority of tariffs on goods traded with the EU . He suggested it could be used as a starting point for a wider-ranging EU/ UK deal which he described as `` Canada plus plus plus '' . He said : `` We will probably start with the best of Canada , the best of Japan and the best of South Korea and then add to that the bits that are missing - which are the services . '' The Brexit Secretary claimed the odds of a no deal Brexit had `` dropped dramatically '' , and rebuked Mr Hammond over the Chancellor 's recent suggestion the UK would pay its multi-billion pound Brexit bill even if a trade deal is not agreed . Mr Davis insisted paying the bill would be `` conditional on a trade outcome '' . Meanwhile , Sir Keir set out a Labour vision for Brexit which would see the UK remain closely aligned to the single market and continue to pay into the EU 's budget . It would also include `` easy movement '' for EU citizens while businesses would have to comply with Brussels ' rules despite Britain no longer having a say when they are written . He said he wanted the UK to strike a Norway-style deal with the EU . The Scandinavian country is a member of the European Economic Area which means it has full access to the single market but must accept freedom of movement and EU rules . Norway also contributes to the EU 's budget , and research undertaken by the House of Commons Library in 2013 showed that in 2011 it paid in £106 person while the UK 's net contribution was £128 per capita . Sir Keir suggested the UK could follow the same path . `` There may have to be payments - that would have to be negotiated , '' he said . On immigration , Sir Keir said `` the end of free movement does n't mean no movement '' , and when asked if he was advocating `` easy movement '' for EU and UK citizens , he said : `` Yes of course . '' Labour 's plan would also result in the UK having to adhere to EU regulations to maintain a `` level playing field '' . Mr Davis seized on Sir Keir 's comments and said : `` A Labour Brexit would betray voters and leave this country in the worst possible position . '' Sir Keir also refused to rule out calling a second EU referendum . `` Things are moving so fast it is hard to know what is going to come next but we are not calling for it , '' he said Editorial Comment : Page 19 What 's best for Britain ? How the possible deals compare Canada Plus The EU-Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( CETA ) promotes free trade and took seven years to agree . It is viewed as a potential starting point for a UK/EU deal but the UK would want it to go much further . CETA eliminates 98 per cent of all Canadian tariffs between the EU and Canada but the services sector is only partially covered . Canada does not have to pay for its increased EU market access and does not have to accept freedom of movement . The UK would want zero tariffs and special arrangements to allow the UK 's financial services sector to maintain its current access to the European market . It would also want the right to diverge from EU regulations in the future . Labour 's Brexit policy Sir Keir Starmer said he wanted the UK to strike a Norway-style deal with the EU . Norway is not an EU member but is part of the European Economic Area . It has access to the single market but must accept freedom of movement and EU rules . Under Sir Keir 's plan the UK would be very close to the single market and customs union and would accept the `` easy '' movement of EU citizens . Britain would likely continue to pay into the EU 's budget and UK businesses would have to accept EU regulations .
Belief in Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - The flaw in Christian Froggatt 's analogy - that he and his wife do n't believe in Father Christmas , yet deliver gifts to their children on his behalf every year ( Letters , October 12 ) - is that he and his wife are loyal to the concept , even though it is fictitious . Nigel Farage 's criticism of the Prime Minister is based upon fact . During a pre-election speech in June this year , Theresa May said : `` You can only deliver Brexit if you believe in Brexit . '' When asked recently on LBC about how she would vote on Brexit now , her response led many to believe that she does not believe in it . Eddie Hooper Gravesend , Kent sir - Brexit : cometh the hour , cometh the man ( woman ) . Where the hell is he ( she ) ? Philip Congdon La Bastide-d'Engras , Gard , France sir - Since the EU referendum , our company 's non-EU sales have risen from 4.6 per cent to 19 per cent of our annual turnover - which has also grown by a quarter . It is high time the Treasury caught up with Britain 's small exporters - we are not only ready for a `` no deal '' Brexit , we are looking forward to it . Peter H Jackson Castle Douglas , Dumfries and Galloway sir - Imagine if the EU negotiators were car dealers : EU : `` So you wish to purchase a car ? Please give me ( EURO ) 40,000 . '' UK : `` But what will I get for my money ? What size is the car ? Will it be automatic or manual ? New or second-hand ? '' EU : `` Give us the money now and then we will talk about it . '' If the customer paid upfront , he would get a seven-year-old Peugot 207 . Steve Cartridge Bolton , Lancashire sir - For major changes to happen in an organisation there has to be enough of a disturbance to galvanise people into action - what is usually described as a `` burning platform '' situation . Healthy organisations will act accordingly . The proposed Brexit transition period is simply another form of procrastination , giving opportunity for Remainers to sabotage the process . It is counterproductive and to be regretted . Dr Peter Grey Hurley , Berkshire
Tories must make Brexit plans clear BODY : With the Prime Minister holidaying abroad , Britain appears to be under new management . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , speaks like a man who is bidding to take over - and who is cooking up a softer form of Brexit , described as transitional , to be put to the public at the next election . If this is the case , the Government needs to be more honest about what is going on . And those ministers who oppose Mr Hammond 's plan - for they must exist - must be weighing up whether to speak out . The EU referendum was an exercise in democracy . It would disappoint many voters if we return to the politics of backroom deals . The case for Mr Hammond 's approach would be easy to make . The Chancellor has said that people did not vote to drive off a fiscal cliff in the 2016 referendum . Even if the Tories did think they were empowered to crash out of the EU , the general election has since clipped their wings . A divided Parliament , an uncertain economic picture and a bullish EU bolster the argument for a transitional deal that results in the softest Brexit possible : leave the EU but remain within the single market and customs union for two or three years . Thus , by the time of the next general election , Britain will be half-in and half-out . The voters can then decide if they want to complete the exit , maintain their position or even , for nothing can ever be ruled out in politics , vote to go back in . Mr Hammond has been crystal clear on some of these points , others we are forced to infer - and that is part of the problem . Government is proceeding on a wink and a nod . Another difficulty is that if everything we have described is indeed part of the plan , it is unclear where the democratic mandate for that plan comes from . In 2016 , Britons voted to leave the EU and handed the Government the task of implementing that decision . True , there are many Leavers who did not believe this meant quitting the single market . But there are many who did . At best , the latter group will be confused by this week 's news . For instance , Brandon Lewis , the immigration minister , insisted that it was still the Conservative Party 's goal to cut net migration to the tens of thousands and said free movement would end by 2019 . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , sent the opposite signal by commissioning a report asking what kind of labour market business wants after Brexit and by detailing an `` implementation period '' , which is essentially pro-free movement , that will last until around 2022 and is eerily similar to Mr Hammond 's transition . Again , Mr Hammond and Ms Rudd would probably say they are only being reasonable . But the deal they appear to prefer is far from the reassertion of popular sovereignty the country voted for . Britain will lose its voting powers in Brussels but still have a form of free movement , be under the cover of the European Court of Justice , have to swallow EU laws and even pay into the EU budget for a few years . Even if these are cast as sacrifices worth taking to avoid economic chaos , Brexiteers can retort that voters were wellinformed of the risks posed by Brexit yet still backed it - and that decision ought to be respected . Some Eurosceptics will mutter that this is what happens when Remainers are in charge of implementing a Leave vote - and what happens if you enter negotiations with Brussels believing EU propaganda about Britain 's weakness . If a `` stabbed in the back '' myth emerges , it will divide the Tories . There are senior Conservatives who believe that Britain can compete in the wider world whether it is inside the single market or not . There are those who think that controlling immigration is more important than sustaining growth . And there are those , surely , who are frustrated with the notion that the voters did something foolhardy by voting for Brexit - as if Brexit were a toxic spill that has to be handled with care . The Prime Minister once said that Brexit should mean Brexit . The Foreign Secretary has spoken eloquently of Britain 's tremendous economic potential . If an alternative to the Hammond plan exists , the debate needs to happen sooner rather than later .
Scotland Corbyn accused of trying to sabotage Brexit ; Special Leaving the EU Opposition leader has put near-impossible conditions on Labour support for the final deal in Parliament
JEREMY CORBYN has been accused of trying to `` sabotage '' Brexit talks that begin this week by setting Theresa May a near-impossible target if she wants Labour 's support for the final deal . The Leader of the Opposition said Labour MPs would only support the deal if it guaranteed `` unfettered access '' to the European market - something that has already been ruled out by the European Union . By raising the prospect of a Parliamentary rebellion against the deal Mrs May secures , the Labour leader has given EU members a stick with which to beat the Prime Minister as she tries to get the best deal for Britain . On Wednesday Mrs May will open the way for two years of negotiations when she invokes Article 50 , the formal process of withdrawing from the EU . She will set out her key demands in a letter to the European Council . Setting out his own demands , Mr Corbyn told ITV 's Peston on Sunday : `` We 're very clear that there has to be unfettered access to the European market , otherwise the threat to jobs in this country is absolutely huge . `` Most of our manufacturing industries have a European sale and European supply chain in them . And if we do n't maintain this unfettered access to the European market then quite clearly those industries are very much at risk . '' When it was pointed out to him that European leaders had ruled out access to the single market , he was asked if he was `` basically committing Labour to voting against Brexit '' . Mr Corbyn replied : `` No we 're not ... we 're not at the position of knowing what the deal is yet . '' If Labour voted against the Brexit deal and persuaded enough Tory rebels to join them , it is possible that Mrs May could be defeated in Parliament when she presents the deal in two years ' time , meaning Britain would crash out of the EU with no deal at all . Tory MP Philip Davies said : `` He may be trying sabotage but it would be futile sabotage as we are either leaving with a deal or leaving without a deal . If he wants to leave without a deal then clearly he would be voting for the hardest possible Brexit . Is that what he is advocating ? '' Mr Corbyn 's comments echoed the stance of shadow Brexit minister Sir Keir Starmer , who told the BBC 's Andrew Marr that Labour expected the Government to negotiate the `` exact same benefits as the single market and the customs union '' . He said he was simply quoting an undertaking given by David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , to Parliament . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader , said Mr Corbyn 's demands were `` absurd '' and would be ignored . He said : `` What they are trying to do is sound like they have a view . They are being heavily criticised by their own party for having no line , and he is trying to give them something to hang onto . ''
May must show Brexit leadership to win over our divided country ; The Prime Minister has huge popular support , now she needs to talk the language of business
There are , once again , several Britains , and they are no longer even speaking the same language . Middle England is delighted by our new Government and its take on the world . The latest opinion polls are phenomenal : the Tories have hit 43 per cent , the sort of heights last reached at the 1983 general election ; Theresa May 's party , buoyed by huge support from women and older voters , has taken a 17-point lead against Labour , according to ICM , its largest while in power since 1987 . This triumph has gone almost unnoticed , for one simple reason : Elite Britain , a much smaller but hugely influential section of the population , is aghast and in open revolt . It can not believe that the Tories are truly intent on pulling us out of the EU and that they even want to limit immigration . In provincial , post-referendum , post-Blair/Cameron England and Wales , the Prime Minister 's style , approach and rhetoric chimes with the new mood ; in Westminster , the City and Canary Wharf , her pronouncements have been met with incomprehension , anger and another substantial sell-off of the pound . The problem , of course , is that both groups are getting this wrong . Elite Britain is hopelessly over-gloomy about the future and chillingly contemptuous of democracy . Bizarrely for a meritocratic class that is usually so self-confident of its own abilities , it is convinced that the UK is a desperate supplicant , with little to offer . A small minority of its members even seem , at times , to be willing on Armageddon , deducing that only a full-blown financial crisis could yet stop Brexit and convince the public it now so despises of the error of their ways . This is madness . But Middle England and the Government are also mistaken . Brexit is a great opportunity for Britain , but it needs to be executed correctly . Bashing business and the free market never works ; crude combinations of populism , socialism and nationalism inevitably end in tears . The City is a crucial source of jobs and wealth : it is worth fighting for . We need deregulation , not more labour market rules . We need a migration system that is acceptable to a newly empowered country and that works for an economy at full employment , not one that is obsessed with a target made up on the hoof by the previous government . The Government must also remember that kite-flying is not a good way of making economic policy : its loose thoughts on quantitative easing , fiscal policy and companies that hire migrants have rattled the financial markets , adding to the sense of doom in some boardrooms . In reality , the pound had long been overvalued . Its decline will reduce the current account deficit by redirecting consumers to domestic goods and services and making it easier for firms to sell their wares abroad . But caution is essential in this febrile , nervy atmosphere . The Government 's biggest mistake so far lies in its approach to Brexit . Plan A was to disclose as little as possible for as long as possible , apart from emphasising that there would definitely be greater controls on immigration , and get government departments to engage in a thorough fact-finding exercise . Every side would then present its case , the Prime Minister would decide and then she would go into battle . The mantra was all about not giving a running commentary and not revealing the Government 's negotiating hand . The problem is that this worthy , rational approach has failed . The Cabinet is at loggerheads on all the fundamental questions ; it is unclear whether the Treasury was really planning to recycle the mendacious , appalling forecasts of the supposed long-term hit to growth from Brexit it produced under George Osborne , but the fact that many Brexiteers are convinced that this was the plan shows how toxic the situation has already become . Private memos are being leaked ; officials are briefing contradictory messages . All of this has created a vacuum which the Remainers have filled ; and traders have become obsessed with every line of every statement , briefing , or rumour , sending the pound and gilt yields yo-yoing . The more we hear , the less we know about what the Government would like to achieve in the negotiations , let alone what we will actually end up with . It 's time for a completely new approach , a Brexit Plan B - and by that I do n't mean a different outcome but a different way of reaching it . This is not really about debates in Parliament or clashes between David Davis and Sir Keir Starmer , his Labour shadow , though they may help . This is about the Prime Minister leading from the front and the various Brexit departments accelerating their work and upping their game . May needs to start off by making a major , defining speech targeted clearly at Elite Britain in which she paints a picture of a successful , prosperous and open post-Brexit Britain . She has spoken to Middle England ; now she needs to address business , making it clear that she is confident she will be able to make Brexit an economic success . She needs to stress her commitment to maximising free trade , not just with the EU but also with the rest of the world ; she would also be well advised to float the possibility of transitional arrangements after 2019 . She needs to name-check key industries , including investment banking and carmanufacturing , and make it clear that she understands their concerns about market access and the need for skilled workers . Last but not least , the speech would explain that Britain is a powerful country that makes a huge economic , financial , cultural and military contribution to Europe and is therefore in a strong negotiating position . It would need to be accompanied by a series of publications from the Brexit departments reassessing the costs and benefits of aspects of our EU membership , and creating much needed intellectual ammunition for Brexit . Take the single market : the European Commission thought that it had boosted EU-wide GDP by just 2.1 per cent in 2008 . David Davis needs to produce a new estimate of this as soon as possible , and he and Liam Fox must commission studies showing what the gains to the UK would be were we able to sign free-trade deals with the world . May is in an enviable position : she enjoys huge backing from the public . But the UK 's establishment is increasingly and dangerously alienated from Middle England . To ensure that the UK 's economy does as well as possible over the next few years , the Prime Minister must now focus her efforts on reassuring corporate Britain . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Our trade prospects are on a virtuous cycle ; The more Britain expands its global trade , the more our existing partners will want to preserve their share ; THE BREXIT DIVIDEND
In the 10 weeks since Britain voted to leave the EU , the contours of our future have emerged far more clearly than Theresa May 's critics will admit . We are well-placed to seize the opportunities of Brexit and to allay the fears of those who voted Remain . First , the immediate economic aftermath defied the referendum scaremongering . The FTSE 100 and 250 are higher now than before the referendum campaign was launched in February . Consumer confidence has rebounded , employers are hiring more staff , and export orders are rising . The pound has rallied , and its residual devaluation has boosted exports . Lord King , former governor of the Bank of England , argues that the UK economy since the referendum is `` now in a better position to rebalance '' away from consumer spending towards exportdriven growth . It 's early days , but the British economy has proved resilient enough to weather the immediate shock . Die-hard Remainers , unwilling to acknowledge these facts , are pitting themselves against the 62 per cent of Britons who , according to a poll by ComRes , now feel positive about Britain 's Brexit future . On Monday , Labour decried the lack of detailed proposals to attack . In fact , the parameters of the negotiations are already reasonably clear . Preparatory discussions are under way . The UK will trigger Article 50 in the new year ( probably by Easter ) , giving us two years to finalise the deal , well before the 2020 general election . Using Article 50 means the deal will be voted on by `` qualified majority '' in the EU , not unanimity , leaving it less vulnerable to being hijacked by special interests or isolated opposition . Brexit Secretary David Davis made it clear we wo n't be paying a fee to access the single market , or offering up national control over immigration as bargaining chips . This is crucial , and not just because it was central to the Brexit mandate . Both Remainers and Leavers believe the top priority now is to retain strong trade with the EU . If Britain signalled a willingness to barter free movement for access to the single market , it would consume the negotiations from start to finish . Instead , diplomacy will focus on where , between the range of tariff-free trade ( that we already enjoy ) and average EU external tariffs of 3.6 per cent , we end up . There is strong mutual interest in avoiding new tariffs . Yet any new trade barriers would hit Continental businesses far harder , because they sell £68 billion more to us each year than we do to them . In response , Labour demand that Parliament vote on the Brexit deal , a thinly veiled effort to frustrate the democratic verdict - even though Parliament voted by 6 to 1 to hand this decision to the people . These democratic contortions are echoed by SNP demands for a second referendum on independence - which are out of step with the majority of Scots , who oppose another referendum , on the EU or independence . Opposition parties are inserting a hefty wedge between themselves and the voters , including those who voted Remain . Meanwhile , at the G20 in China , Theresa May pledged to make Britain a global leader in free trade . Ignoring all the positives , the BBC homed in on a letter from the Japanese government , expressing concerns about the impact of Brexit on Japanese firms based in Britain and trading in Europe . In fact , the letter was addressed to both the EU and the UK , making the case against erecting trade barriers . Such pressure will help Britain 's negotiations with the EU . Equally , the chief executives of Toyota and Hitachi have said their firms will stay in the UK regardless of Brexit , and in July Japanese IT firm Softbank announced £24 billion more investment in the UK . Among the good news airbrushed out , there have now been the numerous pledges , from Mexico to India , to negotiate free-trade deals with the UK . At the G20 , the Chinese president added his country to the list , despite uncertainty over Chinese investment in the Hinkley Point nuclear reactor . This is essential to driving Brexit 's virtuous cycle . The more Britain expands its global trade , the more competitive pressure is exerted on existing trade partners to preserve their UK market share , and the stronger the EU interest in minimising trade barriers . Opposition to tariffs on Britain from business groups such as Medef in France ( with its 750,000 firms ) and the German BDI ( representing more than eight million employees ) will help temper the risk of spiteful reactions to Brexit . Speaking in China , EU president Jean-Claude Juncker called for partnership , not revenge , while German European minister Michael Roth says that Britain 's size and status means it must be given `` a special status '' with the EU . Theresa May won the Conservative leadership as a `` safe pair of hands '' for uncertain times . It is telling and welcome that she now declares herself `` optimistic '' about Brexit . A shrinking minority wo n't make their peace with the referendum . But Britain under May 's leadership looks increasingly well-positioned to grasp both the opportunities and mitigate the risks . This will be crucial to delivering Brexit in full and reducing the 48 per cent who counted themselves Remainers on June 23 . READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Project Fear was wrong and UK economy will overtake France in 2020 , say economists
PROJECT Fear was wrong about Brexit , an economic report concludes today as it reveals the UK will bounce back to overtake the French economy in 2020 . The World Economic League Table says that Britain has recovered from an initial economic blip after the vote to leave the European Union and now looks set to maintain its position in the rankings and even improve by 2020 . However , the data , compiled by the Centre for Economics and Business Research ( CEBR ) , also shows that India will leapfrog Britain and France to become the world 's fifth largest economy in dollar terms by 2018 as it grows at a faster rate . The table tracks different economies around the world and projects forward 15 years . It shows that despite warnings of a `` significant '' effect on the UK 's fortunes after the decision to back Brexit , `` fears were exaggerated '' . The CEBR also said there would be a significant impact in the previous economic forecast a year ago . However , correcting that prediction , the report states : `` A year ago we feared that Brexit would have a significant transitional effect on the UK economy that would leave it behind the French economy for five years . It now looks as though our fears were exaggerated . The post-Brexit fall in sterling meant that the UK economy was smaller in dollar terms while growth was impeded . `` But sterling has since recovered and with a transitional deal with the EU now in place the country seems likely to overtake France again as soon as 2020 , driven by the UK 's particular blend of the tech sector and the creative sector which CEBR has called The Flat White Economy and by the probability of a fairly soft Brexit . '' It came as a second report by the British Retail Consortium ( BRC ) warned that shoppers will lose out if the UK fails to hold on to global trade deals struck by the European Union . Andrew Opie , director of food and sustainability at the BRC , said : `` While securing a deal with the EU to enable tariff-free trade to continue remains the priority , the deals the EU has negotiated with countries around the world also contribute to the choice and affordability of goods that UK shoppers purchase every day . `` People need reassurance from Government that these deals will be transferred in time to ensure that UK consumers do n't lose out . '' Overall the CEBR report forecasted that the UK will fall from sixth place in 2017 to seventh in 2032 in the league table , overtaking France but being overtaken by India and Brazil as emerging economies grow stronger .
The Brexit mutineers ; Remain-supporting Conservatives rebel against May 's move to enshrine in law the date Britain leaves EU Brexit debate 'With regret , I must say it was a mad amendment '
THERESA MAY is facing a rebellion from at least 15 Conservative MPs who are threatening to block her plans for Brexit in Parliament . The group , which includes several former ministers , have informed senior party figures that they will join forces with Labour to block new measures that would enshrine the date of Brexit in law . All the disaffected members , with the exception of Kenneth Clarke , voted to invoke Article 50 , which gives Britain two years to leave the EU . However , they are refusing to fix the date - giving rise to accusations of a `` mutiny '' that threatens to wipe out the Prime Minister 's majority and plunge the party into crisis . Some of the MPs , who all backed Remain but mostly represent Leave constituencies , are understood to have had a `` stormy '' meeting with the whips earlier this week . They are braced to come under intense pressure to reverse their opposition before a key parliamentary vote next week . Ministers have already announced a major concession by handing Parliament the opportunity to debate and vote on Britain 's final deal to leave the EU in 2019 . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , said that if MPs voted to reject the deal , Britain would simply depart without one . However , there are fears among some Brexit-supporting Tories that if the date of Brexit is not written into law , there will be a last-minute attempt to keep Britain in the EU if Parliament rejects the final deal . The extent of Tory divisions over Brexit were laid bare in the Commons yesterday as pro-European Conservative MPs condemned the Government 's plans - first revealed by The Daily Telegraph last Friday - as `` mad '' . Bernard Jenkin , a senior Leave-supporting MP , said : `` Anyone who voted for Article 50 , but then does not wish to fix the date , they are open to the charge that they do not actually want us to leave the European Union . '' Sir Bill Cash , another prominent Eurosceptic Tory , accused Conservatives opposing the amendment of `` collaborating '' with Labour . The `` mutinous '' MPs are led by Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general , and include a total of seven former ministers and two select committee chairmen . Among the most prominent members are Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , Anna Soubry , a former minister , and Mr Clarke , the former chancellor . MPs usually loyal to the Government - including Tom Tugendhat , the chairman of the foreign affairs select committee , and Oliver Heald , a former solicitor general - are also in the group . All voted for Britain to stay in the EU in the referendum but only Mr Clarke has said that he wants to reverse the result of the historic vote . Labour yesterday announced that it would vote against the Government 's amendment , dismissing it as a `` gimmick '' and accusing the Prime Minister of `` pandering '' to Eurosceptics . Jeremy Corbyn 's decision to oppose the amendment means the Government is likely to face defeat or will be forced to drop the measure , which specifies the time and date that Britain leaves the EU . But there were also rifts on the Labour benches as Frank Field , a Eurosceptic MP , was heckled by his own benches for saying that his party `` needs educating '' about the fact that many of its voters back Brexit . Labour MPs gave Mr Clarke an ovation as he concluded his speech by saying after half a century of being loyal to his party , `` I am the rebel '' . He said : `` He [ Sir Bill Cash ] now represents orthodoxy , party loyalty . I 'm the rebel . I espouse the policies that the Conservative Party has followed for the 50 years of my membership of it until we had a referendum 18 months ago . I regret I have not yet seen the light . There are some very , very , very serious issues to settled in this Bill . '' Mr Grieve said : `` Everyone has got more and more brittle , more and more unwilling to listen ... culminating last Friday with a mad amendment . '' Last night , 19 Labour MPs voted against repealing the European Communities Act of 1972 , which takes Britain out of the European Union . It came as George Freeman , a Conservative MP and former chairman of Mrs May 's policy board , was criticised by colleagues after suggesting that Brexit could turn Britain into an `` old people 's home that ca n't pay for itself `` .
Red lines will have to move to fire up new world of trade ; The man in charge of striking deals with countries beyond the EU can do nothing until we decide on the best version of Brexit
If he does n't have the most difficult job in Whitehall - there are quite a few people vying for that title - he must be near the top of the list . Last month , Crawford Falconer started work as the UK 's chief trade negotiator . He 's in charge of striking deals with countries beyond the European Union once the UK has quit the bloc . That will be no easy task . But the hardest part of the lavishly monikered New Zealander 's new role must be that he ca n't even really get on with it yet . That 's because the UK Government has yet to decide what its future relationship with the EU should look like . And , until that has been decided , it ca n't start working on what our future relationship with the rest of the world looks like . The crunch , however , could be coming . As Brexit red lines have advanced and retreated , blurred and disappeared , the UK 's ability to strike free trade agreements around the world has come into focus . Indeed , it appears to be the yawning fissure into which the Cabinet could now collapse . The debate - over which , if reports are to be believed , the Foreign Secretary is prepared to resign - centres on whether the UK 's new relationship with the EU should be EEA-minus ( what some people are calling a Swiss-style deal ) or Ceta-plus ( that is , a bit better than the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement that Canada recently struck with the EU ) . Essentially , this is a more refined version of the long-running debate over whether the UK 's best interests are best served by a `` soft '' or a `` hard '' Brexit . Different people mean different things by these terms . But the philosophical motivations of the two sides seem clear : those who advocate a soft , EEA-minus deal with the EU are hoping to minimise the economic damage caused by Brexit , those who advocate a hard , Ceta-plus deal are hoping to maximise the economic upside of the UK 's departure from the EU . Staying in the single market - a soft Brexit - would allow the UK to maintain the best possible access to the European Union but would diminish its control because it would have to abide by the EU 's rules while having little or no say in their formulation . A hard Brexit , on the other hand , would mean less access but more control . What 's more , that control would extend to striking trade deals with other countries , which could be precluded by single market access . We can argue long into the night about the pros and cons of these two paths . We could even come up with competing forecasts ( not that anyone would believe them ) . But it seems clear that the political battle lines within the Conservative Party have been set . Those who criticise Boris Johnson 's intervention at the weekend for its inconsistencies and lack of depth are missing the point . He was not trying to set out a blueprint vision for Brexit ( how could he be when point seven of his 10-point plan for a successful Brexit was : `` Brexit will be a success '' ? ) . What he was trying to do was define the debate in his own terms , portray one side as the optimists and the other as pessimists , and place himself firmly atop the sunlit uplands . That is why striking trade deals with countries outside the EU - allowing Falconer to get on with his job - has become the most crimson and immutable of red lines for some Brexiteers . That does n't , of course , mean it will be easy.The Department for International Trade has been staffed up in fairly short order . The trade policy team , for example , has grown from 45 to 325 since June last year . But on a trip to Pakistan this week , trade minister Greg Hands said Britain only had the resources to focus on major deals . Which then are the priority countries ? Should we be focusing on those countries with which we trade most now or those with the greatest potential for future growth ? What is the UK prepared to offer to get these agreements ? On agriculture , for example , what are we going to do about food standards ? The issue of chlorine-rinsed chicken has become totemic for good reason . US chickens are banned from import in the EU . Will the UK waive the rules in order to get a `` very powerful '' trade deal with Donald Trump ? And , if so , what will that mean for our food exports to the EU ? Ultimately , the UK will have to jump one way or the other . If we are prepared to open up our farmers to competition with their US counterparts , are we also prepared to open up our healthcare market ? What will this mean for the NHS ? Then there 's immigration . Free trade is often accompanied by free ( or at least freer ) movement . One of the stumbling blocks to trade deals with , for example , India is the issue of student visas . Will Falconer and the DIT even hold the UK 's main bargaining chip in these negotiations or will that be controlled by the Home Office or , more likely , No 10 ? And will there be a transition period as the UK exits the EU ? Both Brexiteers and Remainers are worried that a long transition perpetuates the status quo . For Brexiteers that looks like membership of the EU by stealth ; for Remainers it means further uncertainty . Can a transitional agreement be set up to allow the UK to start trade negotiations with other countries ? These are all questions Falconer needs to answer . But not yet . First we must find out if the self-styled Brexit optimists will prevail or whether the champions of a softer form of Brexit can fight back . There is a thin line between pessimism and pragmatism . ben.wright @ telegraph.co.uk 'Johnson was trying to define the debate , with himself on the sunlit uplands '
We must help Europe 's pragmatists to win the Brexit argument ; The Government must use its valuable 'soft power ' to improve communication and prove its credibility
Brussels : the very word conjures up an image of a single , monstrous entity doing everything it can to thwart our interests . Indeed , Brexit has generated an unprecedented show of unity and anti-British feeling on the Continent , where it is seen as an act of madness and an insult . But behind the façade , `` Brussels '' is not a monster . It is a complex network of interests and perspectives . On Brexit , there are broadly two constituencies : those focused on `` winning '' and ensuring Britain `` loses '' to shore up the EU ; and those with a broader eye on our future , strategic cooperation , who are more inclined to compromise . Britain can not ensure that the latter group wins , but we can do a much better job of boosting its chances . The slow pace of negotiations so far is not Britain 's fault . The process insisted upon by EU officials , in which the `` divorce '' is decided before any trade deal , makes no logical sense . It is clearly impossible to decide how to keep the Northern Irish border open before broaching the broader topic of EU-UK customs and tariffs , for example . Privately , former EU officials admit as much . Still , Britain is going along with it for political reasons , knowing that the EU must be allowed to claim some sort of `` progress '' before it can admit the pressing need to discuss the future . This artificial hiatus before any trade negotiations should not be wasted , however . It should be used to prepare the ground for a deal . And yet , more than a year after the referendum , Britain has not managed to convey any kind of consistent or definitive message about the future . `` What does Britain want ? '' I was asked , over and over , at meetings in Brussels last week . Who speaks for it ? Are the Brexit hardliners in control or did the election change everything ? Many people are convinced the UK will stay in the single market and customs union ; a few are still unsure whether Brexit will happen . Their confusion leads them to draw the conclusion , fair or not , that the UK is in a blundering mess . The most enthusiastic proponents of this view , when I visited , were not posturing EU bureaucrats , but non-European officials . You might think that none of this matters , because hard economic interests will win out in the end . That is naïve . The mood music makes a difference . It is generating a political atmosphere that goes against our interests , in which both our threats and promises have no credibility . As David Cameron found , ignoring the Brussels mood and then hitting it with a list of demands is not a successful strategy . It would be nice to blame the European Commission for all of this . But the EU 's chief negotiator , Michel Barnier , is hardly holding back a tide of pragmatism towards Britain . He is currently under no pressure to shift the EU 's position . European politicians resent having to think about Brexit and , convinced that Britain is simply being difficult and will roll over in the end , have put it on the backburner . In turn , aware of the toxic atmosphere , the British Government is treading carefully . Its position papers have avoided extensive technical details and certain urgent topics , like the Brexit transition , have barely been broached . It is feeling its way forwards , afraid of triggering backlashes at home and abroad if it tables concrete proposals . This ca n't last forever and is currently feeding the impression that Britain has no coherent position . There are ways to counter this impression , however , and they are not being used enough . The first should be to draw on Britain 's large network of European contacts . Our regulators , MPs , ministers , bureaucrats , lawyers and business groups all have contacts on the Continent . The Government ca n't divulge technical details of its negotiating plan to them , but it could brief them on the message Britain wants to send , the arguments in its favour , the consequences if the EU refuses to budge , and our broad vision for the future . Confused European journalists and MEPs should also be briefed and told exactly who to call for clarification when documents leak or Tony Blair shows up in Brussels . Yet the Government seems to have no strategy for deploying this valuable soft power . It has only just set up an engagement team in the Brexit Department to widen its channels of communication beyond the official negotiation . The second way to improve the UK 's position is for Theresa May to give a more detailed speech about Brexit . Her impressive Lancaster House address is now nine months old . She has said nothing substantial since losing her majority . She needs to say more about where Britain is going not just to EU governments and officials but to the British people . What possibilities await a post-Brexit UK and why should voters believe in their country ? At the same time , she must prepare voters for certain compromises : a proper Brexit can not be achieved overnight and requires a transition ; and Britain will put up some cash , provided the EU fulfils certain conditions . These beliefs are generally accepted in Westminster , including by staunch Brexiteers , but this consensus is not shared by the country at large , nor is it understood in Europe . It is not enough to allude to them once and then rely on rigid repetitions . They must be explained in a human way , made explicit , and discussed openly . The third and final task is for the Tories to demonstrate credibility by delivering functional government . First and foremost , this means getting legislation through Parliament , for which the Conservatives must rediscover a sense of discipline . It means ministers agreeing to execute a single Brexit strategy and avoiding off-message remarks . It means firing those who break ranks . It means backbenchers must avoid writing self-indulgent letters and the Home Office should stop wrongfully sending deportation notifications and leaking half-formed policies . It is shameful that the EU , managing 27 countries , has so far exhibited greater discipline than the UK . I still believe the pragmatists will win out in the end on both sides . But their victory can not be taken for granted . Angela Merkel will not simply fly to our rescue at the behest of her carmakers . The UK must do more to make it clear that cooperating is worthwhile for Europe . It does not have much time to get it right . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; READ More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Focus on our strengths , not negotiation tactics BODY : The behaviour of EU officials during the Brexit talks only validates the vote to leave . Britain 's approach is flexible and rational : tie any financial settlement to a free-trade deal that benefits us all . Europe prefers melodrama . It says that Britain must pay up to ( EURO ) 100 billion gross , even though there is no legal basis for such a figure . Britain might be kicked out of Europol , warned chief negotiator Michel Barnier , even though the European Commission contradicted him . And in the very building where these talks take place , Jean-Claude Juncker greeted Tony Blair with a kiss - their meeting emblematic of the elitist politics that British voters rejected in 2016 . Much of what we see of the negotiations is for show ; Mr Barnier and David Davis square up like boxers at a weigh-in . But it can affect morale . British media often repeats EU claims without questioning them and the Government has failed to present an alternative narrative . Mr Davis is doing his best , but he needs support on three fronts . First , the Tories have to remind the public why Brexit is a good thing . The Government 's obsession with minimising risk has resulted in some bad ideas - such as a permanent transition , which has now been dropped - and a `` steady as she goes '' economics that limits our ability to compete . Secondly , the Tories should be talking up the UK 's strengths , which were on show during Theresa May 's visit to Japan . Nissan and Toyota have both invested in the UK since Brexit ; Aston Martin has just announced a £500 million agreement between Britain and Japan . And , yesterday , Mrs May secured a formal agreement to replicate any EU-Japan trade deal with an equivalent for the UK . In addition , Mrs May 's pledge to stand `` shoulder to shoulder '' with Tokyo against North Korea is a reminder of the UK 's diplomatic and military significance . Finally , the Government has to prepare the voters for the possibility that Britain will pay something as part of Brexit , if not as much as the Eurocrats want . Mr Davis has suggested that while Britain owes nothing , it is mindful of its `` moral obligations '' . Failure to explain that concept , combined with failure to explain the upsides of Brexit , could lead many voters to ask what the point is . The point is that Brexit is a reassertion of self-government that could , if exploited correctly , make Britain even richer . The case for it needs to be made over and over again .
Brexit threat to European banking system ; Impact on London 's financial hub will be felt years down the line , says head of new UK lobby ' Banks would be quick to move should a new EU hub emerge '
A CLIFF-EDGE Brexit in early 2019 would pose serious dangers to the whole European financial system and will be avoided at all costs by both the British Government and EU authorities , the City of London 's top financial consortium has concluded . The much greater threat to London 's banking , insurance and fund industry lies further ahead , several years after the UK has left the single market and has lost its full `` passporting '' rights for financial services . This may be hard to head off even if there is a transition phase . `` A hard rupture from day one would be very disruptive on a Continental scale . The European banking system does not have the infrastructure capable of absorbing these activities , '' said Stephen Jones , head of the newly formed mega lobby UK Finance . `` Everybody realises this and I can not believe that either the UK or the EU would let it happen . Wolfgang Schauble 's cabinet totally understands it , '' he said , referring to Germany 's all-powerful finance minister . London handles the lion 's share of debt and equity securities issued in Europe , as well as much of its syndicated lending and risk management . Roughly 40pc of the $ 5trillion of global currency trades every day are booked in London , as are two thirds of all interest rate derivatives in euros - chiefly for European firms . `` Our working assumption is that EU regulators will be flexible from day one , but over time they will require more infrastructure to move , '' he told The Daily Telegraph . Banks and finance houses are already drawing up contingency plans and acquiring permits for EU branch offices . `` They are establishing a presence that could be dialled up significantly if required to by regulators , '' he said . Just how much they will have to `` dial up '' is the elemental question for the City . Mr Jones , former finance director at Santander and Barclays , was born in Brussels and grew up in Germany . He has a `` Fingerspitzengefuhl '' ( fingertip feeling ) for the EU scene that is vitally www.needed.UK Finance was launched last month after a merger by the British Bankers ' Association , the Asset Based Finance Association , the Council of Mortgage Lenders , and three other entities . He said it is not yet clear whether the EU will insist that all syndicated loans , capital markets , and interest rate derivatives based in euros , will have to move to Europe , or how much `` local content '' the EU will demand . `` We just do n't know . We would like mutual recognition where we accept each other 's supervisory regime . If there is the political will , this might be possible . We hear different things , '' he said . While the process of setting up footholds inside the eurozone usually begins as a paper exercise - more of an option if need be , rather than an actual switch - it risks turning into a relentless drain from Britain as the EU builds up its own hubs and gradually imposes stiffer demands . RBS revealed last week that it was eyeing Amsterdam as a new home for its European banking arm if there is a hard Brexit , a move that could lead to 150 NatWest Markets staff migrating . `` It 's in case we need it . We 'll be operationally ready if required , '' said the chief executive Ross McEwan . The charms of the EU single market can be exaggerated . The latest version of the Market in Financial Instruments Directive ( Mifid II ) is something of a horror story in itself . Critics say it is so restrictive that it will ultimately render Europe a global backwater in finance . `` I am far more worried about the damage from Mifid than I am about Brexit , '' said one London banker from a eurozone state . The drip-drip of Brexit-linked announcements is unsettling - and easily manipulated by Brexit foes - but it has not reached the point of mass exodus . A recent report by consultants Oliver Wyman said that loss of privileged access to the EU market would drive 35,000 to 40,000 financial jobs out of the UK , half in wholesale banking . `` So long as the outcome of the Brexit negotiations remains unpredictable , banks must act as if a hard Brexit is coming . Some of the fragmentation and inefficiency that would result from a hard Brexit will likely occur even if a closer relationship between the UK and the EU is ultimately negotiated , '' it said . The report said the process has reached a `` critical stage '' for banks . They are trying to devise ways to keep some EU-linked trading and risk man-agement in the UK . While regulators in EU states are signalling leniency for the first `` interim '' phase of Brexit , they will tighten the rules over time . The concern is that commercial logic will compound this effect as chunks of the financial market `` ecosystem '' migrate to the EU , pushing total jobs losses in banking alone to 40,000 in the long run . Yet one major danger has for now been averted . `` At present , none of the other European banking centres seem set to replace London as a pre-eminent global financial services hub . Should a new EU hub emerge , banks would be quick to re-orient their operations towards that location , '' it said . The picture is messy . Some are going to Frankfurt or Dublin , others to Amsterdam , Luxembourg , Paris , or Brussels . This is a risk for the EU itself - and why it may force a policy - since a fragmented system is likely to force banks to raise the $ 30bn to $ 50bn in extra capital , shaving two percentage points off their return on equity . `` These new challenges from Brexit will raise difficult questions about the viability of some activities over the medium term . Some banks may even choose to withdraw capacity from the European market as a whole and redeploy to other regions , such as Asia or the US , '' it said . The City has few friends after banking debacle in 2008 , but the Square Mile quietly butters a lot of turnips . Financial services generate £71bn in taxes - roughly 10pc of government revenue , or two-thirds of the NHS budget - and help to plug a big hole in the UK 's trade deficit . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , has told business leaders that he wants an `` off-the-shelf `` transition deal . It is far from clear what this actually means and whether the European Commission will agree at this late stage . The EU has developed its strategy based on the core assumption that the UK will leave both the single market and the customs union as stated in Theresa May 's Article 50 letter to Brussels . This will remain the case until the EU is informed otherwise in categorical terms with the full force of the British GovernSome ment and Parliament behind it . 40pc The percentage of global currency trades that are booked in London every day 'None of the other European centres seem set to replace London as a pre-eminent global financial services hub '
Put sugar tax back until after Brexit , says soft drinks trade
THE implementation of the sugar tax on soft drinks makers should be put on ice until greater certainty surrounding Brexit has been established for businesses , the trade has said . The Food & Drink Federation 's director general , Ian Wright , said given the range of other pressures on food and drink makers , such as rising costs on ingredients and the increase in the national living wage , it would be reasonable to give his members a hiatus where the forthcoming sugar levy was concerned . `` The Government would be welladvised to pause it during Brexit negotiations , '' he said . `` With all the new burdens on businesses , Brexit will be a massive period of uncertainty and potentially one of great turbulence . Any extra burden on businesses is unwelcome . '' The sugar levy was announced in the 2016 Budget by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer , George Osborne . The current chancellor , Philip Hammond , confirmed this year it would be levied at 18p a litre for drinks with 5 grams of sugar per 100ml and a higher band of 24p a litre for those containing more than 8g per 100ml . Many companies have already moved to reformulate recipes , including Britvic 's move to only produce and sell Robinson 's `` no added sugar '' squash in 2015 , but Mr Wright said some members would still appreciate a pause . Mr Wright , whose body boasts 300 members ranging from sole traders through to giants such as Nestle and Coca-Cola , said many food and drink companies had seen the costs of some of their ingredients rise because the fall in sterling has made it more expensive to buy many foreign-sourced ingredients . In addition , Mr Wright said , many food and drink producers who sold into supermarkets were under the constant pressure of that industry 's price war . Mr Wright also said some of his members were also vulnerable because they had high numbers of EU workers . He said roughly one third of the 420,000 or so workers in food manufacturing were from mainland Europe and with the fall in the pound , the value of their way when they send some of it home had fallen . `` They have had a 20pc pay cut [ due to the fall in sterling ] and that means a number are beginning to go elsewhere , '' he said .
The new battle for Britain ; PM rules out new independence vote before Brexit and delays Article 50
THERESA MAY last night ruled out Nicola Sturgeon 's plans for a new Scottish independence referendum before Brexit , but postponed triggering Article 50 after the First Minister 's demands caught her by surprise . In a day of high drama , Ms Sturgeon appeared to wrong-foot No10 when she announced she would set the wheels in motion for a second referendum next week , and insisted the ballot should take place between autumn 2018 and spring 2019 - while the Brexit negotiations are still going on . The Prime Minister issued a stern rebuke , telling her `` politics is not a game '' , and accusing her of `` tunnel vision '' . Sources close to Mrs May said she would not allow a referendum until several months after Britain 's EU exit . Hours after Mrs May 's riposte , Downing Street made the unexpected announcement that the Prime Minister will not now invoke Article 50 before March 27 . The Article 50 Bill is expected to receive royal assent from the Queen this morning , and it had been widely anticipated that Mrs May would choose today to make the historic announcement . Whitehall departments had been told to work to a March 14 deadline . Downing Street yesterday insisted that the Prime Minister had always intended to wait until the end of the month , but Ms Sturgeon 's announcement left Mrs May scrambling to seize back the initiative . The referendum row overshadowed Mrs May 's achievement in successfully steering the Article 50 Bill through Parliament last night . A threatened Tory rebellion on the issue of giving MPs a `` meaningful vote '' on the final Brexit deal failed to materialise , with the result that two Lords amendments to the Bill were defeated in the Commons . Mrs May and Ms Sturgeon now appear set for a prolonged and bitter fight . And Mrs May now faces the unprecedented challenge of negotiating Brexit while attempting to see off a new campaign for Scottish independence . The Prime Minister said : `` The tunnel vision the SNP has shown today is deeply regrettable ; it sets Scotland on a course for more uncertainty and division , creating huge uncertainty . `` And this is at a time when the evidence is that ... the majority of the Scottish people do n't want a second independence referendum . '' Drawing attention to Ms Sturgeon 's questionable record on domestic policy , Mrs May told her that `` instead of playing politics with the future of our country the Scottish Government should focus on delivering good government and services for the people of Scotland '' . Ms Sturgeon claimed she had been forced to act because Mrs May had refused to consider a special Brexit deal for Scotland that would allow it to remain part of the single market . Her decision to call for a referendum as early as next year represents a huge gamble ; a BMG poll for the Herald newspaper yesterday showed 44 per cent of Scots opposing independence , with just 41 per cent supporting it . Equally significantly , 49 per cent said there should be no referendum before Brexit , with just 39 per cent wanting one . The First Minister said she would next week ask the Scottish Parliament to agree the details of a Section 30 order with Westminster - the legal process that allows a referendum to be held . She argued that by autumn next year the shape of the UK 's Brexit deal with the EU would be clearer , giving Scots a chance to decide between a future as part of the Union but outside the EU , or a future outside the Union but as part of the EU . If Mrs May refused , the Government would not only have `` sunk the ship '' for Scotland , which voted overwhelmingly to remain in the EU , but would be `` puncturing Scotland 's lifeboat '' as well , it was claimed . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , said the timetable demanded by Ms Sturgeon would `` force people to vote blind on the biggest political decision a country could face '' because they would not know the details of the Brexit deal by then . Although Downing Street would not officially be drawn on the timing of any referendum - or even if Mrs May would allow one - it is understood that Mrs May will put off a ballot until several months after Brexit . It means she will block a referendum until at least summer 2019 , though she is unlikely to refuse one altogether , as doing so would risk stoking nationalist fervour north of the border .
Tebbit : Heseltine deserves to be kicked out ; Tory peer accuses fellow Thatcher contemporary of trying to wreck Brexit Bill of party he 'clearly loathes '
LORD HESELTINE should be sacked as a government adviser and `` kicked out '' of the Conservative Party after he vowed to rebel over Brexit , one of his former Cabinet colleagues said yesterday . Lord Tebbit , who served alongside Lord Heseltine under Margaret Thatcher , accused him of `` descending from on high '' and trying to `` wreck the Brexit Bill '' . It came after Lord Heseltine said he would defy Conservative whips and vote with Labour and Liberal Democrat peers to change Theresa May 's Brexit Bill and give Parliament an effective veto on the outcome of negotiations with Brussels . Lord Tebbit told The Daily Telegraph : `` I can not remember when he last bothered to look into the Lords , let alone spoke there . `` Now he promises to descend from on high to try to wreck the Brexit Bill in company with the Lib Dems and some Labour peers . I , and I think many of my colleagues , think that it is time he was kicked out of the party he clearly loathes . '' Other Tory MPs have also called for Lord Heseltine to go . Andrew Bridgen , the MP for North West Leicestershire , said : `` It is difficult to see how he can stay on as an advisor to a Secretary of State when he is leading a rebellion against government policy . Phillip Davies MP added : `` If Lord Heseltine is going to rebel and encourage others to do so , then his role in the Department for Communities and Local Government becomes untenable and if he does n't resign he must be sacked . '' Lord Heseltine has defended his intentions , saying that while he is not engaging in a `` confrontation '' with the Government he wants to ensure that its commitment to a vote on the Brexit deal , which it has made on the floor of the Commons , is `` legally intact '' and written into the Article 50 bill . He said he had `` agonised over few positions more than this '' and that it was an `` incredible privilege '' to work as an adviser at the Department for Communities and Local Government . Labour is increasingly confident that it will defeat the Government on two key amendments - giving Parliament a `` meaningful '' vote on Brexit and guaranteeing the rights of EU citizens living in the UK . It has the support of the Liberal Democrats , a large number of cross-benchers and around a dozen Conservative peers who are prepared to rebel . However , Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , said that there was no possibility of Mrs May agreeing to any amendments to the Bill . She told ITV 's Peston on Sunday : `` No , I do n't think there is any possibility and I do n't think there should be . This is a process bill . '' In an article in the Mail on Sunday Lord Heseltine said : `` In the end the outcome of Brexit will have to be confirmed by Parliament . It will also have to pass in 27 national European parliaments , several sub-national parliaments and the European Parliament . `` It was perhaps unwise for our Government to suppose that our Parliament should be excluded where all others were included . Very sensibly , after the Supreme Court interpreted the law , that position was reversed and Parliament was restored to its rightful constitutional role as the ultimate authority . `` I will vote in the House of Lords to ensure that position is legally intact . This is not a confrontation with the Government which has already made such a commitment . '' Andrew Lloyd Webber , the Conservative peer and composer , said he would vote with the Government this week and warned that peers must not `` overrule the will of the people '' . The Tory peers Karren Brady , a judge on The Apprentice , and Michael Dobbs , the writer of the House of Cards television series , will also come to the House of Lords to back Brexit this week . Government sources suggested Lord Heseltine will not be sacked because he is not a minister . Editorial Comment : Page 17
Fight looms over key panel to oversee EU withdrawal
A FIERCE row is brewing over the make-up of a powerful new Brexit committee after Tory MPs demanded that pro-Leave campaigners make up the majority of the all-party panel . Eurosceptics said pro-EU colleagues must not use the committee to `` challenge '' the Brexit referendum result and warned of `` political war '' if it was used to subvert the people 's will . Up to 21 MPs will be elected this week , including 10 Tories and six from opposition parties , to join the panel chairman , Labour 's Hilary Benn , who backed the campaign to stay in the EU . Leave campaigners said MPs who call for Britain to stay in the single market should not be elected to the panel , which is intended to scrutinise the Government 's approach to Brexit . One Eurosceptic MP said : `` What 's going on at the moment is a tremendous political war to avoid actually leaving the EU . When [ Remainers ] say we need to stay in the single market what they are really doing is trying to prevent actual exit from the EU , because if you are in the European Economic Area you are subject to the jurisdiction of the EU and that is just not Brexit . '' Andrew Rosindell , Tory MP for Romford , warned that if the committee is used to challenge Brexit `` we 've got rocky times ahead '' . Fellow Tory Anna Soubry said the panel 's work was not about Remain versus Leave , but `` how we get the best deal for our country '' . Editorial Comment : Page 17
Scotland Scotland 's universities 'need clarity now ' on fees post-Brexit
SCOTLAND 'S universities yesterday demanded that SNP ministers make clear whether EU students who win a place next year will get their tuition fees funded by the taxpayer after Brexit . Principals , staff and students joined forces to issue a joint call for the Scottish Government to say for how long their `` free '' tuition policy will apply to EU students , who are already applying for degree programmes starting in autumn 2017 . Their demand for clarity came after Jo Johnson , the UK Universities Minister , announced that European students applying for places in England next year will continue receiving loans and grants for the duration of their studies , even if Brexit happens sooner . SNP ministers are currently forced by European anti-discrimination laws to offer `` free '' tuition to EU as well as Scottish students . However , Brexit will spell the end of this requirement . If Britain leaves the EU in 2019 , as expected , this would be halfway through a fouryear degree that starts next year . Universities at that point could then theoretically charge EU students fees in the same way that English , Welsh and Northern Irish applicants already have to pay £9,000 per year to study in Scotland . But principals are worried they could face legal action as prospectuses published before June 's Brexit vote guaranteed that EU students taking up places in the 2017-18 academic year would not have to pay fees . They are concerned that universities face having to plug a financial gap of around £60 million if Brexit means they are forced to provide tuition for two years without Scottish Government funding . John Swinney , the Deputy First Minister , announced in July that EU students starting university this year will not pay tuition fees for the duration of their degrees but is yet to make clear the status of those applying for places next year . Applications for 2017 places opened last month and will close on Saturday for medicine , veterinary and dentistry courses . The deadline for other courses is Jan 15 . Alastair Sim , director of umbrella group Universities Scotland , said : `` Scotland 's universities and EU applicants applying here really need certainty from the Scottish Government on the fee status for courses starting in 2017 . `` Universities are already receiving thousands of applications and they need to start making offers now . It is very difficult to ask EU applicants to make decisions about the next four years of their life without knowing if they are entitled to fee-free higher education or not . '' He said universities are in the `` extremely difficult situation '' of deciding whether to make offers to EU students without knowing if or from the funding for their tuition might be coming from . Theresa May said last week that the two-year Article 50 process for leaving the EU will be triggered by the end of March 2017 . NUS Scotland and UCU Scotland , the union representing academics and lecturers , called for the Scottish Government to guarantee tuition fee funding for the full four years . Liz Smith , the Scottish Tories ' education minister , called for an `` urgent response '' from ministers . `` For three months now , the SNP has done little else other than criticise the Westminster Government , keeping entirely silent about its own policies in the process , '' she said . A Scottish Government spokesman said ministers are `` currently considering '' the issue and urged the UK Government to give assurances `` that the immigration status and rights of EU nationals living in Scotland will not change in the future '' .
Scotland Brussels : we 'll make Britain beg ; European officials believe they can exploit 'disarray ' in May 's government at negotiations on split
BRITAIN has become `` completely lost '' post Brexit and can eventually be expected to `` plead '' for a deal when it realises the weakness of its position at the negotiating table , senior European Commission officials believe . While officially pressing for Britain to invoke Article 50 and begin divorce talks , officials in Brussels are taking growing satisfaction in what they believe is paralysis and disarray in Theresa May 's new government , according internal discussions seen by The Daily Telegraph . The spectacle of Mrs May rebuking David Davis , the Brexit minister , at Prime Minister 's Questions for prematurely revealing the government 's hand was taken as further evidence in Brussels that Downing Street does not have a coherent strategy for Brexit , according to one Commission insider . Officials are also jubilant that the United States , Japan and India all gave the UK what one EU diplomat described as `` the cold shoulder '' at the recent G20 Summit in Hangzhou , heeding Brussels demand that Britain can not begin independent trade negotiations before Brexit . The mounting internal frictions come as Europe stages a post-Brexit display of unity this week , when Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , delivers his 'State of the Union ' address on Wednesday followed by a meeting of all 27 EU leaders in Bratislava on Friday . Mrs May has pledged not to trigger Article 50 until at least 2017 , but is likely to face rising pressure from European capitals if she does not act soon after the New Year . The Prime Minister stuck to her guns this week during a visit to London by Donald Tusk , the European Council president , who hinted at rising impatience in EU capitals , saying Britain should trigger talks `` as soon as possible '' .UK officials concede privately that the Whitehall bureaucracy is still `` miles and miles '' from being ready to conduct detailed negotiations as it comes to terms with a new departmental structure created by Mrs May . However , officials contend that Europe is equally in disarray . British negotiators are determined that the European Commission , with its more `` theological '' approach to issues like free movement , must not be allowed to dominate the Brexit negotiations but wants them controlled by EU leaders who , Britain feels , may take a more pragmatic approach . The Commission hopes that divisions among the remaining 27 member states will enable the Brussels bureaucracy , with its mastery of the legal details , to insert itself more forcefully into the coming talks - a strategy that some analysts warned could backfire . `` Member states are n't on the same page following Brexit , and the Commission clearly sees this space and wants to exploit it for its own ends , to push its agenda , '' said Mujtaba Rahman , managing director for Europe at the Eurasia Group risk consultancy . `` It 's a high risk strategy , and is likely to fail , further alienating Juncker from the member states . '' Analysis : Page 20 'Member states are n't on the same page after Brexit , and the commission wants to exploit this for its own ends '
Scotland Davis writes off UK 's future in single market
BRITAIN 'S Brexit minister has said it is `` very improbable '' that the UK will remain a member of the single market if the country is to get control of its borders after leaving the EU . EU leaders have repeatedly said that Britain will have to accept freedom of movement rules if it wants to remain part of the single market after Brexit . In his first statement to the Commons about Brexit , David Davis was asked for `` clarity '' over whether Britain will retain membership of the single market , which gives UK firms access to the EU 's 500 million consumers . Mr Davis said : `` This government is looking at every option . But the simple truth is that if a requirement of membership is giving up control of our borders , I think that makes it very improbable . `` Mrs May has previously refused to say whether the UK will remain a member or attempt to maintain access to the single market , insisting that she does `` not want to adopt a particular model '' . In a sign of Italy 's concerns about Brexit , the country 's economic development minister , Carlo Calenda , said measures to curb free movement would be met with trade barriers from Brussels . `` The more they are going to regulate and limit the presence of EU citizens in the UK , the more we are going to limit the presence of UK goods into Europe , '' Mr Calenda told Bloomberg Television . Mr Davis also pledged that Britain 's immigration system after Brexit would be `` more rigorous '' than the one which Leave campaigners called for before the referendum . It follows criticism of Mrs May 's decision to rule out the introduction of an Australian-style points-based system , a central pledge of the Leave campaign . Meanwhile , former Lib Dem leader Lord Ashdown prompted controversy amid the row over proposals for a pointsbased system . He compared Tory Eurosceptics to Nazi thugs and wrote on Twitter : `` The Tory Brexit brownshirts are stirring . Betrayal is the word most likely to be heard in the run up to the Tory conference . '' Mr Davis also described calls by MPs for a second referendum as `` anti-democratic '' . He said : `` There will be no attempt to stay in the EU by the back www.door.No attempt to delay , frustrate or thwart the will of the British people . '' Nicola Sturgeon : Page 7 G20 reports : Pages 8-9 John Eliasch : Page 17 Editorial Comment : Page 17
Scotland Sack Boris and he will refuse to go , May warned ; Johnson 'wo n't go quietly ' if demoted in reshuffle
BORIS JOHNSON will `` just say no '' if Theresa May tries to demote him , his allies have said as they warned that sacking the Foreign Secretary would undermine Brexit and destabilise the Government . The Prime Minister is instead being urged by members of her Cabinet to remove Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , for `` making Brexit hard '' and being `` miserable '' . Mrs May indicated yesterday that Mr Johnson could be moved into another Cabinet role in a reshuffle at the end of the month , saying that she would not `` hide from a challenge '' . Her comments prompted a furious response from Mr Johnson 's supporters , with one minister saying there was a `` stench of death '' emanating from Downing Street . They warned that the Prime Minister lacked the authority to demote Mr Johnson in the wake of her disastrous general election performance and chaotic party conference speech . One ally of Mr Johnson said that removing him as Foreign Secretary would go down `` like a bucket of cold sick '' with Brexit voters amid concerns that key Cabinet roles are dominated by Remain campaigners . Even a minister who is critical of Mr Johnson 's recent interventions on Europe told The Daily Telegraph that removing him would `` undermine public confidence in Brexit '' . Eurosceptic Tory MPs turned on Mr Hammond yesterday , saying that he should be demoted for `` deliberately trying to make Brexit negotiations difficult '' . They were backed by a Cabinet minister , who said : `` He has completely failed . He has not given her any domestic announcements that she can sell . He is miserable , he talks people down , he is making Brexit hard . He just saps everyone 's self-confidence . '' An ally of Mr Hammond said : `` The Chancellor has made very clear that we 're leaving the customs union and single market when we leave the EU in March 2019 . He is not trying to frustrate the process at all . '' The Prime Minister is attempting to re-assert her authority after Downing Street saw off a coup by around 30 Tory MPs who wanted her out by Christmas . She will this week attempt to get her Government back on track as Parliament returns by telling MPs that she will `` prove the doomsayers wrong '' over Brexit . She will tell Brussels that `` the ball is in their [ the EU 's ] court '' to break the deadlock in negotiations . Mrs May will tomorrow launch an audit highlighting racial inequalities across society as she seeks to address the `` burning injustices '' in modern Britain . It follows a calamitous speech at the Conservative party conference in which she was handed a P45 by a prankster , suffered a coughing fit and the set behind her began to fall apart . She is now considering a reshuffle to ensure that she has `` the best people in my Cabinet '' . Asked about Mr Johnson 's future , the Prime Continued on Page 4 Juliet Samuel : Page 14 Minister told The Sunday Times : `` It has never been my style to hide from a challenge and I 'm not going to start now . '' Several Cabinet ministers have made it clear that Mrs May would have their support if she removed the Foreign Secretary , whom they blame for `` destabilising '' the party . Mr Johnson has been accused of disloyalty over his decision to announce a series of Brexit `` red lines '' on the eve of the party conference , including warning that the transition should not last `` a second longer '' than two years . However , Mr Johnson 's allies said that removing him would be `` insane '' . One Tory minister highlighted Andrea Leadsom , who threatened to resign after being sacked as Environment Secretary . Following a stand-off with Mrs May , she was offered a high-profile media role in promoting and defending the Government alongside her position as Leader of the Commons . The minister said : `` Let 's say she tries to move Boris to defence secretary . Leadsom said no thank you , and Boris carries significantly more influence . He 'd just say no - what is she going to do about it ? There 's a stench of death emanating from Downing Street . If you were a Brexiteer you would be worried [ if Mr Johnson was demoted ] . You 'd look around the Cabinet table and see Remainers occupying the key positions . '' Another minister said : `` Brexit is absolutely crucial to democracy in this country now . If we fail to deliver that , the public will never forgive us . A reshuffle would be a huge distraction , we do n't need to replace people for the hell of it . It [ removing Mr Johnson ] will undermine public confidence in Brexit . It would be counter-productive . '' Lord Heseltine , the former deputy prime minister , also suggested that Mrs May would be taking a `` high-risk '' gamble if she sacked Mr Johnson . He said : `` I think that if she wants to assert her authority she would have to sack him , but of course it 's a high-risk AFP/ OLIVAS/ policy because he will be on the back benches and he wo n't go quietly . '' Nadine Dorries , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , said Mr Hammond should be sacked instead . She said : `` I think he 's been deliberately trying to make the Brexit negotiations difficult .
Scotland Osborne accused of Brexit plot as critics hit out at newspaper role
GEORGE OSBORNE was unveiled as the new editor of the London Evening Standard yesterday in a surprise announcement that led to accusations that he is plotting to undermine Theresa May 's plans for a clean Brexit . The former chancellor was facing open calls from Tory MPs to quit Parliament amid concerns about a series of conflicts of interests over the appointment . Mr Osborne now has six jobs and will earn more than £1.5million this year . His appointment provoked fury in Downing Street and allegations from Mrs May 's allies that he will use his `` new power base '' to `` slam '' the Government 's Brexit plans . A senior Government source told The Daily Telegraph : `` It 's all about establishing a power base . He lost the argument last year in the referendum , he lost influence in Parliament . `` Now he thinks he can start a new debate as the editor of a newspaper . As a major newspaper that represents the City and has a huge voice , you can kick up quite a stink and absolutely slam the Government 's Brexit plans . It 's not subtle , he wants to keep Britain in the single market . He can not stay on as an MP , it 's absolutely disgraceful . '' Mr Osborne has warned Mrs May he is prepared to `` fight '' the Government over Brexit issues , including access to the single market , free trade and immigration . He said yesterday : `` We will be fearless as a paper fighting for their interests . We will judge what the Government , London 's politicians and the political parties do against this simple test : is it good for our readers and good for London ? If it is , we 'll support them . If it is n't , we 'll be quick to say so . '' A senior Tory MP said : `` He wants to use this to bring Theresa down , to oppose the referendum , to campaign relentlessly on the Remain ticket . '' Philip Davies , a Conservative MP , said : `` I am sure there are many newspaper editors who will be interested to know that their job is not a full-time job . '' David Cameron , the former prime minister , described the appointment as a `` great move '' after he bumped into an Independent journalist while shopping at an organic food store close to the Evening Standard 's office . Carla Flynn , editor of the Knutsford Guardian in Cheshire , questioned how Mr Osborne could meet the needs of his constituents in Tatton . She said : `` Given the huge reaction we 've already had from readers today since the news broke , I think this will be the final straw for a lot of constituents . '' Mr Osborne has limited journalistic experience . After leaving Oxford University he failed to get a place on The Times trainee scheme and worked briefly as a freelancer for The Daily Telegraph 's Peterborough diary column . Editorial Comment : Page 21 The other side Politicians who made the switch CP Scott Edited the Manchester Guardian from 1872 until 1929 while sitting as a Liberal MP . Bill Deedes Edited The Daily Telegraph from 1974 to 1986 after stepping down as Tory MP and minister . Michael Foot Edited Evening Standard in 1942 at 28 before becoming MP . Boris Johnson Edited The Spectator before standing as an MP in 2001 . Telegraph columnist until last year . EYEVINE STANDARD/ Winston Churchill He was a Daily Telegraph journalist before he became an MP in 1900 . EVENING Conflicts of interest ? MP for Tatton Can Mr Osborne represent his constituents given the Commons sits four mornings he is editing ? Press regulation Will he be able to vote without prejudice on the issue ? Membership of 1922 Committee Will Tory MPs be afraid to speak up with a journalist among them ? Privy Council Can he hold his tongue as a member of the Privy Council ; members swear to `` keep secret all matters treated in council '' ? Loyalty to party Can he follow the Tory whip despite his newspaper 's stance ? Standard 's City coverage Can journalists cover BlackRock when it employs him ? Advertising : Can he hold big business to account if he is relying on them for advertising ?
Scotland May accused of 'losing momentum ' by delaying formal start to Brexit talks ; Brexit : Parliament ; Prime Minister will miss chance for discussions at EU summit by triggering Article 50 too late , MPs say
THERESA MAY has been accused of `` losing momentum '' and `` making errors '' by delaying the formal start of Brexit talks in the wake of Nicola Sturgeon 's shock demand for a Scottish independence referendum . The Prime Minister was expected to formally start negotiations with other European Union member states as early as this week once Parliament had passed a law allowing talks to begin . The Daily Telegraph understands that the Queen is likely to give legal assent tomorrow to the law that allows Mrs May to start Brexit talks . However , Mrs May is understood to be targeting triggering Article 50 on Wednesday March 29 , after a speaking tour of Britain when she will sell her vision for the UK outside the EU . This delay has led to concerns that Mrs May now can not begin formal talks until May , missing the chance of talks with EU leaders on April 6 . Lord Jones of Birmingham , a crossbench peer who was a trade minister in the last Labour government , said he `` can not understand why she has done it '' . The peer , who was head of the CBI for eight years , praised Mrs May for the way she has `` handled '' the period leading up to the start of negotiations . But he told The Telegraph : `` If she has delayed it by two weeks , I am disappointed ; it is an error . '' Lord Jones said : `` The issue is momentum . She is in mid-innings , she is dealing with the bowling . Do n't declare your innings now ! '' Other MPs urged Mrs May to trigger Article 50 to avoid the chance of another legal challenge to the process being made to the High Court . Sir Bill Cash , the euro-sceptic Tory chairman of the EU scrutiny committee , said it was `` essential that ministers take the best possible legal advice and act as quickly as possible . Getting the Article 50 letter out is an absolute priority '' . Former Ukip leader Nigel Farage added that he was worried the start of talks had been `` kicked into the long grass in May '' . He said : `` Now that we are delaying the triggering of Article 50 , what it means is that we will miss the summit of European leaders on April 6 at which Brexit could practicably have been discussed . '' Senior government figures admitted talks will not get under way properly in April because of the long Parliamentary recess and Easter . But the source denied that the delay would damage Britain 's interests because preliminary talks had been going on `` for weeks '' between the UK and European Union . This is despite EU leaders insisting that Brexit talks can not begin formally until Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty has been triggered . One said : `` Despite the fact that they say there is no negotiating there is contact going on with the Commission . `` The officials have been in contact and met personally . It is under way , preparing the ground for negotiations , so we are not starting totally from cold when the notice has been served . The end of the month was what we were always aiming at . '' Gina Miller , the fund manager whose legal challenge forced the Government to legislate for the start of Brexit talks , threatened more legal action if MPs and peers were not given a proper vote on the final package . She said : `` If they do n't deliver on that I will take them back to court to find out whether they can do as they are intending to do . '' The Prime Minister 's official spokesman played down suggestions of a delay due to Ms Sturgeon 's announcement , saying Mrs May had always said she would trigger Article 50 by the end of March . PIXEL8000
Like wagging a dog 's tail to make it happy , EU exit warnings are flawed
The Treasury recently brought out its report on the long-term effects of Brexit , saying they will be dire . This week it followed that up with equally severe warnings about the short-term impact . Both are flawed . George Osborne was forced to admit to Jacob Rees-Mogg in a Treasury select committee hearing that he has made unfavourable assumptions about Brexit in the crucial `` World Trade Organisation option '' . The Treasury assumes that if we left the EU we would erect the same trade barriers on the whole world , including the European Union . These barriers are around 20pc on both agriculture and manufacturing , so that is a huge negative assumption . It would be a retreat from free trade ; it is certainly not the best `` WTO option '' . As Economists for Brexit has repeatedly explained , the best option would be for the UK to abolish all the EU trade barriers and trade freely with the world , including the EU , at world prices . Mr Osborne 's excuse for the Treasury 's assumption is that he thinks Leave proponents favour some protection , such as on steel . But this is no excuse . First , it is perfectly consistent with general free trade to have some protection of particular industries : look at the free-trading US where a 267pc anti-dumping duty has just been levied on Chinese steel . Second , whatever the views of Leave proponents , it is the Treasury 's duty to work out the best available options in the national interest . The Treasury has deliberately cooked the books in its `` assessment '' of the Brexit outlook - both long term and short . The IMF and the Bank of England have now signed up to the International Friends of Messrs Cameron and Osborne Club . How could anyone resist such an establishment consensus ? But have they understood the deceit at the heart of the Treasury calculations ? Brexit , like the repeal of Corn Laws nearly two centuries ago , will lower the prices of imports by abolishing the EU tariffs enforced by the EU Customs Union . These EU tariffs have a huge effect on our cost of living , through higher food and manufacturing prices . What about the threat that countries who have a trade agreement with the EU will not replicate them for a post-Brexit UK ? There is no reason to think these agreements would not continue . But , if one country puts up a barrier , it would have a tiny effect on world demand . The prices of our products , sold to buyers from all over the world , would not change ; we would simply trade with other countries . In order to create their case against Brexit , the Treasury has used a `` gravity model '' approach . The basic idea is simple : the amount of trade that people do with other countries depends on basic measures of `` mass '' ( GDP , population ) and the costs of `` transport '' , meaning all the costs associated with distance , whether geographical , political or tariffs and other explicit barriers . To measure trade barriers , the Treasury uses the supposed effect of membership in the EU , EEA and other trade agreements ; it gets these effects measuring what happened to trade from the date they occurred . The problem with these gravity equations is that they are mere associations from past data , which resulted from the policies and shocks of the past . They are not causal relationships and so you can not assume they will be repeated in the future when the policies and shocks will be different . In other words , they ca n't be used to predict the effects of a Brexit , which is taking place in quite different circumstances . The Treasury then repeats the same gravity model for foreign direct investment ( FDI ) , again using data from many countries and time periods . The same critique applies to this . Matters do not end there . To link the economy to trade and FDI as predicted by these gravity models , equations are estimated for the average relationships of productivity with trade and FDI . The problem is that these relationships too will vary according to the shock the economy faces and will not predict the effects of Brexit . This matters because the gain to welfare of UK citizens comes from the effects on household living standards and on the industrial structure of output . More productive industries attract more FDI . Trade changes mirror sectoral changes in production and consumption . Hence measuring these shifts in the economy is vital to a proper assessment . An analogy might help . We can see that when a dog is happy ( perhaps because it has been chasing squirrels ) it wags its tail vigorously . There is an association here between happiness and tail-wagging . One conclusion might be that , to make the dog happy , you should wag its tail for it . That is the wrong conclusion . So it is with trade and FDI . We observe that reforming economies generate a lot of trade , FDI , and productivity ; some countries joined the EU to buttress their reforms . Is the conclusion that we can make these countries more productive by forcing up trade and FDI ? Or , is it that , with those reforms established , their achievements would be destroyed if they left the EU ? Clearly not . It is in costing the WTO option , as I explained at the start , that the Treasury comes most spectacularly to grief , bizarrely calculating that GDP will fall by nearly 8pc . In our standard model of trade , with proper free trade assumptions , Brexit gets rid of EU protection and reduces consumer prices by 8pc . This , in turn , impacts on wages and competitiveness throughout the economy . The structure of production shifts towards non-protected sectors , increasing productivity overall , and consumers no longer transfer resources to foreign EU producers . GDP rises by 4pc . This WTO option allows the UK to abandon all EU regulation within the Single Market and politically gives us full freedom from the EU in every respect - for example we need not negotiate a new trade agreement with the EU . This option is not dependent on good will from the EU , which may be in short supply on June 24 . It can be implemented by simply repealing the 1972 European Communities Act . The establishment is wrong over Brexit , as it was repeatedly wrong on major UK policy issues in the past 40 years . Brexit will be a major liberal supply-side reform of the British economy . We should embrace it . Patrick Minford is co-chairman of Economists for Brexit 'The problem with these gravity equations is they are mere associations from past data , which resulted from the policies of the past '
Hundreds of business leaders back Brexit
MORE than 300 business leaders today call on Britain to vote to leave the European Union , saying that the country 's competitiveness `` is being undermined by our membership '' . In a letter published in today 's Daily Telegraph , the business leaders say that Brussels ' red tape `` stifles every one of Britain 's 5.4 million businesses '' and claim that a Brexit would allow them to `` create more jobs '' . Signatories to the letter include Peter Goldstein , a founder of Superdrug ; Steve Dowdle , a former vice-president Europe of Sony ; David Sismey , a managing director of Goldman Sachs and Sir Patrick Sheehy , former chairman of British American Tobacco . The letter is also signed by hundreds of people linked to small and mediumsized businesses . The letter 's backers employ hundreds of thousands of staff . It will be seen as an attempt to redress the balance after the Bank of England and the International Monetary Fund last week warned that a Brexit would damage Britain 's economy . It came as : ? Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , said that Brexit campaigners are in denial about the economic risk of the UK leaving the EU , in an intervention described as `` incredibly dangerous '' by a minister . George Osborne , the Chancellor , will today make a speech warning about the economic cost of a Brexit . Boris Johnson prompted a row by comparing the EU to Nazi Germany . Senior Conservatives said that as many as 100 Tory backbenchers could back a `` no confidence '' vote in David Cameron even if Britain votes to remain in the EU . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , said that he will under no circumstances share a platform with Mr Cameron ahead of the referendum . Three million EU citizens in Britain could have to be deported in the event of a Brexit , a Home Office minister suggested . The letter in today 's Daily Telegraph is signed by 306 business leaders in a personal capacity . It states : `` Brussels ' red tape stifles every one of Britain 's 5.4 million businesses , even though only a small minority actually trade with the EU . `` It is business - not government - which generates wealth for the Treasury and jobs for our communities . Outside the EU , British business will be free to grow faster , expand into new markets and create more jobs . '' Meanwhile , Lord Farmer , the former treasurer of the Conservative Party and the founder of Red Kite Group , who is also a signatory of the letter , writes on the Telegraph website that warnings of the risk of a Brexit are `` misguided '' . Lord Farmer writes : `` Britain , the world 's fifth-biggest economy , should be confident that others will want to trade freely with it especially if , like the EU , they already do so . `` Nor will EU countries want to restrict their access to the London markets . Canary Wharf alone does more business than Frankfurt and we are Europe 's financial outlet to the world . '' David Cameron 's Remain campaign believes that it can win the June 23 vote by focusing on the risks of a Brexit to the economy . Mr Osborne is in the coming days expected to announce a major report into how the value of houses will fall if Britain leaves the EU . Reports : Pages 8 and 9 Boris Johnson : Page 18 Editorial Comment and Letters : Page 19
We need Tory talent to fight the Blairites ; established 1855 BODY : Tony Blair 's call for a second EU referendum showcases the arguments that Remain will use in 2018 : Brexit threatens the economy and the NHS is hemorrhaging foreign staff . Few voters trust Mr Blair enough to believe him , but his real audience is the EU , which could scupper the Brexit negotiations , and the MPs who could undermine the withdrawal legislation . The message to both is to play tough : if Brexit is perceived to be going badly , the voters might be persuaded to change their minds . Mr Blair 's arguments , as always , are disingenuous . We still ca n't judge Brexit 's impact on the economy because it has n't happened yet ; all we do know is that the predicted economic crash was nonsense . As for the reported fall in recruitment of some EU staff , it 's important to remember that EU citizens only account for about six per cent of staff in an English health service that , if managed properly , should n't be reliant on foreign workers anyway . Why is it ? Partly for the same reason that housing or teachers are in short supply : Mr Blair 's policy of welcoming cheap labour to Britain in the Noughties put enormous pressure on infrastructure and services , creating a cycle of demand and supply that drew more and more migrants to an overcrowded Britain . Indeed , one of the biggest causes of Brexit was New Labour . Mr Blair led us further into Europe without proper consultation ; and although Gordon Brown vetoed membership of the euro , he signed the Lisbon Treaty without first putting it to the public . New Labour 's obsession with centralisation and regulation fed popular resentment towards the status quo . The lingering influence of Blairites today points to an elite that has learnt nothing . Alan Milburn and Lord Adonis have both resigned from government jobs in protest at Brexit , jobs the Tories should never have allowed these faded bureaucrats to hold . The Tories must let a Blairite cabal monopolise debate . After Mr Blair spoke on the Today programme yesterday , he was answered not by a Cabinet Minister or even a sitting MP but by Lord Lamont , who last served as a minister in 1993 . Lord Lamont did a superb job , as ever , but the Government has to join the fray , lest Remain makes ground by sheer attrition . It is time to promote some Tory talent dedicated to making the case for Brexit just as doggedly as Mr Blair opposes it .
Settle the Brexit bill deadlock or we will 'shake the tree ' , warns EU ; Pressure mounts on May as Wall Street bankers threaten to pull jobs out of the City
THE EU will look to use the Brexit deadlock and rising uncertainty in the business world to `` shake the tree '' and force lucrative companies to relocate to Europe if Downing Street fails to make a move soon to settle the socalled `` Brexit bill '' , The Daily Telegraph has learnt . The hard-nosed EU stance comes as ambassadors met in Brussels yesterday for discussions about the shape of a possible Brexit transition and deal . The European Parliament warned that there were still `` major issues '' stopping a deal on citizens ' rights , contradicting Theresa May 's assertions that the two sides were within `` touching distance '' of a deal on the issue . The parliament rejected British plans to require the 3.2million EU citizens already in Britain to register after Brexit , subjecting them to blanket criminal records checks and charging the cost of a British passport - £72.50 - to obtain `` settled status '' documents . The ambassadors ' meeting before today 's Brexit negotiations was designed to begin `` scoping out '' options for the next phase of talks , according to a seven-page discussion document seen by The Telegraph , but also to put pressure on the Prime Minister to make commitments on the ( EURO ) 60billion ( £53billion ) Brexit bill . `` The plain fact is that , as Mr Barnier repeatedly says , 'the clock is ticking ' , and time is not on the British side , '' said an EU source with knowledge of the plans for discussion . `` The longer the UK waits , the more the pressure will build , the more we shake the tree . '' EU officials told Reuters that failure to reach an agreement on the principles behind the bill before December could lead to delaying the opening of trade talks until March , heaping more pressure on the government to secure a transition deal early in 2018 . `` Some believe that the worse it gets for the British , the better for us ... that maybe we could delay it all until , for instance , March , increasing the uncertainty and triggering the contingency plans in the corporate sector , '' the official told the agency . Pressure to make progress is growing , amid reports that Wall Street bankers had warned Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , on a visit to London that they were preparing to move thousands of jobs from the City as confidence waned in Mrs May 's ability to cut a deal . Independent analysts warned that time was running out for a deal by December . Mujtaba Rahman , the head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group , a risk consultancy , warned clients that the UK would need to make a move by `` the end of the month '' . The hardening tone reflects mounting EU frustration with Mrs May 's refusal to elaborate on the pledge made in her Florence speech , that the UK would `` honour the commitments '' made during the UK 's 43-year EU membership . `` Essentially , nothing is happening on the ground . We are not lacking public announcements , but progress in Brussels , '' said a second EU source . Mrs May indicated that the UK would pay some ( EURO ) 20billion ( £18billion ) for a transition deal in 2019 and 2020 , which would fill the immediate hole left in the EU budget by Brexit , but the EU says it wants an additional ( EURO ) 30billion . The UK disputes the EU 's arithmetic but could agree ( EURO ) 50billion if the EU offers the UK a `` deep and special '' trade partnership , but officials said Mrs May was in `` no mood '' to make concessions . Empire building Balkans could enter EU after Brexit is a chance for the EU to welcome western Balkan countries into the bloc , the prime minister of Bulgaria said yesterday at the European Commission headquarters in Brussels . Boyko Borissov called for the inclusion of Macedonia , Montenegro , Albania , Serbia , Kosovo , and Bosnia-Herzegovina . Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the European Commission , said he thought Serbia and Montenegro would be members `` before 2025 '' . By James Crisp
UK 's 'readiness for change ' rating boosts Brexit hopes
BRITAIN has been ranked 10th in an index of the nations most ready for political and economic change , easing concerns it will struggle to deal with financial uncertainty caused by Brexit . The Global Change Readiness Index , produced by KPMG , examines 30 indicators across 136 countries , gauging their ability to deal with upheaval . Factors include the flexibility of labour and financial markets , adaptability of government fiscal policy and the versatility of a country 's workforce . The UK ranked highly in enterprise potential , coming seventh , and in societal robustness , where it placed eighth . Government capability was also strong , rating 13th . `` Our country 's spirit of entrepreneurialism , mastery of technology and renowned business environment all point to a long-term , collective ability to rebuild our economy after Brexit , '' said Karen Briggs , head of Brexit at KPMG . The UK was one of only two major nations rated as being capable of responding to `` shock '' financial instability and political uncertainty in the top 10 . The other leading economic power was Germany , which was placed ninth . The findings come as a lift after claims that the UK will struggle to adapt to the uncertainty surrounding Brexit negotiations . Smaller European countries including Switzerland ( 1st ) , Sweden ( 2nd ) , Denmark ( 5th ) and the Netherlands ( 7th ) were seen as best prepared for change . However , the UK rated higher than heavyweights such the US ( 12th ) , Hong Kong ( 13th ) and France ( 20th ) . The UK also ranked highly in subindicators including economic openness ( 5th ) , business environment ( 6th ) and financial sector ( 6th ) . Scoring high in these categories is suggestive that the UK is more prepared for the financial volatility of Brexit than anticipated . 10 Britain 's position in the KPMG index of 136 countries , suggesting it is well placed to deal with financial upheaval
How Project Fear got it all wrong over Brexit
It 's one year to the day since the UK voted to leave the European Union after a bitter campaign in which the Remain camp consistently promised that Brexit would bring economic doom . In his Treasury assessment of the impacts of leaving the EU , George Osborne claimed that a vote to leave would `` cause an immediate and profound economic shock '' , with the effect being `` to push the UK into recession and lead to a sharp rise in unemployment '' . Growth was to be affected and lending rates were to go sky high . In short , the former Chancellor said that a Leave vote would push the country into economic meltdown . He was wrong . The economy has continued and will continue to grow The economy grew by 0.2pc in the first quarter of 2017 , which , although low , marks the 17th consecutive quarter of growth in the UK . That 's the third longest period of consecutive growth that the UK has experienced since 1955 , and means that it has now been nearly eight years since the last recession . The latest forecasts indicate that this growth is expected to continue , with the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) estimating growth of between 0.3pc and 0.4pc in every quarter until the end of 2018 . If a vote for Brexit was a vote for an immediate recession , then these forecasts would be significantly gloomier than they are . Another area of continued growth is house prices , which keep ticking along despite a long forecasted fall . Prices grew by 5.6pc in April , the most they have increased since November last year . While growth has slowed , the market is still resilient to Brexit uncertainty , and stamp duty changes - from April 2016 an additional rate of stamp duty applied to buyers of second homes , buy-to-lets or other `` additional properties '' - will also have played a part . Employment has hit record highs with figures at 74.8pc Osborne 's report claimed that an extra 500,000 people would be unemployed as a result of a Brexit vote - something which has failed to happen so far . Indeed , quite the opposite is true . In the latest set of figures from the ONS , the UK 's unemployment rate was 4.6pc , the lowest it has been since 1975 . This is down from 5pc at the time of the referendum and from 8pc when the Conservatives came to power in 2010 . Employment has reached new heights over the same period with figures standing at 74.8pc at the latest count - the highest ever recorded by the ONS . Foreign investment has increased to £197bn There were worries that taking the UK out of the single market will make the country a less attractive venue for investors . A good way of measuring whether this is happening is by looking at inward foreign direct investment , a measure of the value of significant business investment into a given country . A recent OECD report revealed that Britain was the number one destination in Europe for foreign direct investment last year , with inflows reaching levels not seen since before the financial crisis . In a vote of confidence in Brexit Britain , UK FDI inflows soared to $ 253.7bn ( £197bn ) in 2016 , up from £33bn the previous year . This represents the highest level of inflows since 2005 . The figures also showed the UK drove the bulk of the 17pc increase in FDI inflows to the European Union . Britain climbed above Ireland , Switzerland , the Netherlands and France to become the top destination for inward FDI across Europe and second only to the US in the OECD club of 35 rich economies . The UK 's improved performance owes a lot to several big investments including ABInBev 's £79bn takeover of SAB Miller to create the world 's largest beer company , oil major Shell 's £34bn acquisition of BG Group , and Softbank 's £24bn purchase of ARM Holdings . While two of these were announced well before the Brexit vote , the data also showed the UK remained the top FDI destination in Europe even when these deals were excluded . The stock market has hit new highs despite poll blip The FTSE 100 suffered a short blip after Theresa May called the General Election in April , but recovered to reach record highs at the end of May and start of June . The index has shown a consistent rise since the referendum vote last June , with its value now 22pc higher compared to its pre-Brexit vote level . Similarly , the FTSE 250 has recovered after an initial post-Brexit drop in value and now stands at more than 19,600 , having been slightly above 17,000 at the beginning of June 2016 . Reasons to be cautious despite a strong FTSE Although many of Project Fear 's predictions have so far been proved wrong , there are some notes of caution to take heed of . Despite strong performances from the FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 , the FTSE local index , which only includes businesses that conduct more than 70pc of their sales in the UK , has n't performed so well since Brexit . The strength of the pound - which has fallen since the referendum and then took another brief hit after the General Election - has made it more expensive for British companies to conduct their business and easier for foreign companies to launch takeovers . Inflation is also increasing at a faster rate than had been forecast , and this will have an effect on the cost of living in the UK as wages struggle to keep up in the short term . With interest rates still very low there is little the Bank of England can do to help out with this . However , even with these notes of caution , the majority of the stark predictions made by Project Fear have very obviously not come to pass . Since the referendum , the UK 's headline economic performance has continued to be mostly strong , and the country shows little sign of heading into an immediate
Britain votes for chaos ; Tories left short of majority as election shock throws country into uncertainty ; May 's gamble backfires to leave her future in doubt and Brexit under threat ; We 've changed the face of politics , says Corbyn as young voters flock to Labour ; The Telegraph Election 2017
BRITAIN was facing political turmoil this morning after Theresa May 's election gamble backfired , putting her Brexit plans in chaos as the Conservative majority was predicted to be wiped out . With more than 500 results counted , Labour was taking constituencies from the Tories all over the country , with the Conservatives forecast to take 318 seats - down 13 - and Labour expected to gain 35 seats to put it on 267 . The vote meant a hung parliament was the most likely outcome . It left Mrs May 's premiership in serious doubt and raised the possibility of Jeremy Corbyn in Downing Street leading a minority government - the `` coalition of chaos '' of which Mrs May had persistently warned . Mrs May was determined to fight on this morning , though she appeared to concede she would have to lead a coalition rather than a majority government . She said : `` At this time , more than anything else , this country needs a period of stability and if the Conservative Party has won the most seats then it would be incumbent on us to ensure that we have that . '' She said her `` resolve '' to lead the country through Brexit `` is the same this morning as it has always been '' . But senior Tories cast doubt on whether Mrs May would still be Prime Minister by the end of today . Asked if she would `` survive the day '' , Sir Craig Oliver , David Cameron 's former director of communications , said : `` It 's certainly looking increasingly difficult . '' Boris Johnson 's odds of being the next prime minister were slashed from 66/1 before polls closed to 5/1 . Brexit negotiations , due to begin in 10 days , would have to be postponed if neither party is able to form a government , and senior Conservatives suggested another election might now have to be called . The result was being watched almost as keenly in Brussels as it was in the UK . Mrs May called the election hoping to `` strengthen her hand '' in Brexit talks , but her authority would be hugely weakened if the predicted result proves correct . Mrs May would be unable to form a coalition without the support of the Democratic Unionist Party , but this morning DUP leader Arlene Foster said she did not favour a hard Brexit - an indication of the upheaval to come . Mr Corbyn said Mrs May 's mandate `` is lost votes and lost support ... and I would have thought that was enough to go '' . By the early hours , Conservative losses were racking up , with ministers among those losing their seats . Ben Gummer , the Cabinet Office minister who helped write the manifesto , lost to Labour in Ipswich . Jane Ellison , the Financial Secretary to the Treasury , was beaten by Labour in Battersea , forfeiting what had seemed a safe majority of 7,938 . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , faced a recount in her seat in Hastings and Rye , where she had a 4,796 majority . The Liberal Democrats were predicted to gain seats - and retook Twickenham with a return for Sir Vince Cable - but Nick Clegg lost his seat in Sheffield Hallam in one of the biggest shocks of the night . It was a disastrous poll for the SNP and Ukip . Nicola Sturgeon 's party was predicted to lose 24 seats to end on 32 , a result that will hugely undermine her hopes for a second Scottish independence referendum . Angus Robertson , Ms Sturgeon 's deputy and the SNP 's leader in Westminster , and former SNP leader Alex Salmond lost their seats to the Conservatives in a Tory surge north of the border , led by Scottish leader Ruth Davidson , that saw the party capture at least nine more seats . A total collapse in Ukip 's vote appeared to have been decisive in the overall result . Predictions that Ukip voters would flock to the Conservatives proved wide of the mark , with Labour and the Tories appearing to pick up votes in roughly equal numbers . It meant the Tories failed to make as many gains in northern Leave-voting seats as expected , while Labour did well in southern Remain-voting seats . The pound tanked by 1.7 per cent against the dollar as soon as the first exit poll was published . Kenneth Clarke , speaking after retaining his Rushcliffe seat in Nottinghamshire , said the country was in the middle of `` great events '' and added that it was one of the `` most remarkable general elections '' he could remember . Mrs May had a working majority of 17 seats and repeatedly told voters that if she lost just six seats , Mr Corbyn would be prime minister . Turnout across the country was high , with young voters apparently out in force to back Mr Corbyn 's tax-and -spend manifesto . Prof Michael Thrasher , Sky News 's election analyst said `` the kinds of people that have n't been voting in the past do appear to be voting in this election '' . A senior Conservative source said : `` Whether or not we get over the line , there are going to be big changes . '' George Osborne , the former chancellor , said the result was `` ghastly '' for the Tories and `` catastrophic '' for Mrs May . A source close to Mr Corbyn said Mrs May 's reputation had been `` shot to pieces '' while John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , said her position appeared `` increasingly untenable '' . Mr McDonnell said : `` She went for it to secure a mandate that she already had and people saw through that . It was for party advantage . `` People saw this as opportunism . Even if the result is anywhere near this , it was a catastrophic error and people have seen through it . '' Emily Thornberry , Labour 's shadow foreign secretary , accused Mrs May of `` hubris '' in calling the election , saying : `` I think we 're on a verge of a great result . I think she should go , because she has manifestly failed . '' David Gauke , the Chief Secretary to the Treasury , hit back by saying Mrs May 's position `` is n't in question '' . He said : `` I do n't think there 's anyone else who could lead us into the negotiations so effectively . The idea that we should ignore that and navel-gaze would be a big mistake . `` Theresa May continues to be the right person to lead that . She 's the right person for the job , clearly . `` Given that we 've got really important negotiations beginning in 10 days ' time , the responsibility of those of us who hope to be elected as Conservative MPs is to continue to support her . '' Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , refused to be drawn when asked whether Mrs May should be forced to step down . He told the BBC : `` It 's very early in the evening and I think we have to wait and see . We will see what happens in terms of the numbers of seats we get and the vote share before we make any assumptions . '' Ms Thornberry said that if there was a hung parliament `` what we will do is we will put forward a Budget we will put forward a Queen 's Speech and Labour MPs will support it and we will ask MPs from other parties to support it as well . If they do not , it will be for them to explain to their constituents why they have allowed a highly unpopular Conservative Government to carry on with the same old same old . ''
'Dinner with the Donald ' : Farage joins inner circle ; Former Ukip leader briefs White House aides on Brexit and echoes Trump 's attacks on 'hostile ' media
NIGEL FARAGE enjoyed a dinner with Donald Trump and his daughter Ivanka on Saturday after visiting the White House and discussing Brexit with senior aides . The former Ukip leader was photographed dining with the president , his family and close advisers at the Trump International Hotel in New York . It is understood that he met Steve Bannon , Mr Trump 's chief strategist , and updated him on Brexit . The visit comes after Mr Farage became the first foreign politician to meet Mr Trump following his election . Mr Trump has suggested that Mr Farage should become Britain 's ambassador to the US in a snub to Sir Kim Darroch , Britain 's man in Washington . Theresa May subsequently established a strong relationship with Mr Trump after becoming the first foreign leader to visit him . However , Mr Farage 's latest trip to the US demonstrates that he still has access to Mr Trump and his inner circle . One source told the Sun that Mr Farage spent three hours at the White House and updated staff on `` how Brexit is going and discussed the wider political situation in Europe '' . Another added that Mr Farage and Mr Trump `` discussed the Brexit progress , global politics and the wider conservative movement '' . On Saturday night , Mr Farage posted on Twitter a photograph , captioned `` Dinner with the Donald '' , of himself grinning at table with the president , Ivanka Trump , her White House adviser husband Jared Kushner , and Florida governor Rick Scott . It came as Mr Farage travelled to Washington to tell Mr Trump 's followers that they are part of a `` global revolution '' that began with Brexit . He was greeted with a standing ovation at the Conservative Political Action Conference ( CPAC ) , where he spoke of the `` Brexit mania '' he had witnessed after travelling to the US to take part in a Trump rally . `` I 'm proud to be a part of that campaign , I really am , '' he said , adding that he was beginning to feel `` more American '' ever since Mr Trump 's victory . Ahead of his speech , he spoke with The Daily Telegraph about the first time he met Mr Trump . He said : `` The first thing he told me when I met him was , 'You 've done a great thing , but when I win I 'm going to supersede you . ' I said , 'You sure are . ' '' Speaking in Maryland on Friday , Mr Farage spoke out against globalism , saying `` our real friends in the world speak English '' , and alluded to upcoming European elections . His latest visit to America came as the Trump administration barred the BBC and several major American news organisations from a White House press briefing . Mr Farage appeared to back the president 's aggressive dismissals of the media , telling US broadcaster Fox Business Network it was `` losing this battle big time '' . He said : `` They are simply not prepared to accept that Brexit happened , that Trump happened . They kind of want to turn the clock back and what they do n't realise is they are losing viewers , they are losing listeners , they are losing this battle big time . `` I am pleased that the president is not afraid to stand up to them . '' Mr Trump continued to attack the media yesterday , singling out the `` failing New York Times '' for criticism . A spokesman also said his decision to skip the annual White House correspondents ' dinner , during which presidents typically give a self-deprecating speech , was due to `` tension '' between him and the press . `` I think it 's kind of naive of us to think that we can all walk into a room for a couple of hours and pretend that some of that tension is n't there , '' she told ABC News . Security riddle Adviser not ours , say Swedish officials ? Sweden 's defence ministry and foreign office have denied that a man introduced in a Fox News segment as a `` Swedish national defence and security adviser '' works for the government . On the prime-time O'Reilly Factor show , Nils Bildt suggested there was a migrationdriven crime wave in the country that was being suppressed by political leaders . Ten days ago , President Donald Trump suggested , inaccurately , that the country had been hit by a terrorist attack . He later clarified that he meant problems caused by `` large-scale immigration '' to Sweden . Mr Bildt said : `` There is a problem with socially deviant activity , there is a problem with crime . '' He added that `` these things are not being openly and honestly discussed '' .
Scotland Warnings on single market 'ignored ' in Brexit report
REMAIN MPs on a powerful Brexit committee have been accused of ignoring expert evidence about Britain leaving the single market and customs union as a major report is published today . The report from the Exiting the European Union committee urges Theresa May to publish a detailed White Paper on her plans for Brexit by the middle of next month . The MPs also ask the Prime Minister to make clear whether she wants to keep Britain in the European single market and customs union . The report was signed off by senior Conservative Brexiteers including John Whittingdale , Michael Gove , Dominic Raab and Peter Lilley . However , there was frustration among Conservative members of the cross-party committee that the report ignored experts who had told the MPs that Britain would have to quit the customs union and single market after leaving the EU . One MP who argued for the warnings to be included in the report said it was `` the most interesting bit of evidence that the committee left out . Conservative efforts to address this were rebuffed . '' Mr Raab said : `` The published evidence the committee heard is crystal clear . The expert witness consensus is that Britain will not stay formal members of the single market or customs union , but aim to maintain barrier-free trade . '' The Prime Minister signed up to a Labour motion requiring her to publish details of her plans for Brexit before the invocation of Article 50 by the end of next month . But she has so far held back from saying whether MPs will be granted a vote on the Brexit deal . The report says ministers should seek an outline framework of the future trading relationship with the EU as part of the Article 50 negotiations , with transitional arrangements to allow trade to continue if a deal is not reached in time for the expected Brexit in 2019 . Hilary Benn , the Labour chairman of the committee , said : `` Whatever deal is concluded , Parliament must be given a vote on it and the Government should make this clear now . '' 2019 The year that Britain is expected to exit the EU . The MPs ' report said a plan for trade must be in place before then
Scotland Carney to quit straight after Brexit ; Bank Governor will stay at helm through EU talks but wo n't serve full term
MARK CARNEY yesterday told Theresa May he will quit as Governor of the Bank of England months after Britain leaves the European Union . The Governor said he will stay until June 2019 - leading the Bank while Britain conducts Brexit negotiations - but will not serve his full eight-year term . There had been expectation that Mr Carney would stay in post until 2021 - and last night it was said that Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , wanted the Governor to extend his initial five-year contract for an extra three years . His decision to sign just a one-year extension follows days of speculation over Mr Carney 's position during which it was suggested that he would either quit immediately or stay a further three years . The announcement comes amid a deterioration in relations between Mr Carney and Downing Street . He clashed with Mrs May after she gave a speech in which she appeared to criticise Bank of England policies . Meanwhile , senior Conservative Eurosceptics have called for his resignation in recent months after his dire warnings about what Brexit would mean for the economy . Ahead of the EU referendum , Mr Carney predicted that Britain would face a recession if it voted to leave the EU . In the hours before Mr Carney announced his decision , Mrs May 's official spokesman had suggested that the Prime Minister was `` supportive '' of him serving until 2021 , saying that he was `` absolutely '' the best man for the job . Last night Mrs May `` welcomed '' the neAL/ news that Mr Carney would stay in post during the Brexit negotiations , with a spokesman saying that it was `` good news for the UK '' . Government sources LEON said it was `` entirely '' Mr Carney 's decision to step down post-Brexit and it is understood Mrs May did not attempt to convince him to stay during a meeting in Downing Street which lasted one hour and 40 minutes . However , it is believed that Mr Hammond has in recent weeks been calling for Mr Carney to stay at the Bank until 2021 . `` Ultimately the decision on how long he is staying is up to him , '' a source said . It was also claimed that Mr Carney had decided to return to Canada in 2019 for `` family reasons '' because his children are almost at the age where they will attend university , and that his wife wants to return home . In a letter to the Chancellor last night , Mr Carney said that extending his tenure by one year would `` contribute to securing an orderly transition to the UK 's new relationship with Europe '' . Mr Hammond responded by praising Mr Carney for continuing his `` highly effective leadership of the Bank through a critical period for the British economy as we negotiate our exit from the European Union '' . Mrs May has said she will trigger Article 50 , which begins the formal Brexit negotiations , by the end of March next year . Britain will then have two years to leave the EU , meaning Mr Carney will depart around three months after Brexit . Tory MPs last night continued their attacks on Mr Carney , accusing him of `` talking down the economy '' after his allies said he believed 2018 `` could be the darkest days '' for the British economy . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , said : `` It is not the job of the Bank of England to talk down the economy . `` I 'm deeply saddened by the fact we now have a soap opera at the Bank of England . '' Sterling yesterday reached its highest level against the dollar of $ 1.2240 shortly after the announcement was made at 6pm , and was up 0.2 per cent against the euro at ( EURO ) 1.114 . The news came after equity markets in London closed for the day , but City traders suggested the FTSE 100 , which ended down 42.04 at 6,954.22 , was likely to be reassured by the confirmation . James Kirkup : Page 16 Editorial Comment : Page 17 Business : Pages 1-3
Brexit will not harm Europe 's economy , says German banker
A GERMAN central banker has claimed that Europe 's economy will emerge from Brexit largely unscathed , and has taken an apparent swipe at Theresa May for criticising the Bank of England 's response to the vote to leave the European Union . Andreas Dombret , a member of the Bundesbank 's executive board , said that he did not share fears that `` if Brexit hampered the banking sector , it might impair the financing of the European economy '' . In a speech to a British Bankers ' Association conference , he argued that `` Brexit and its possible repercussions for the City of London are unlikely to be an issue for financial stability or the financing of the EU 's real economy '' . In an unusual move , Mr Dombret also intervened in the simmering dispute between the Prime Minister and Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , by issuing what he called `` a friendly reminder that central bank independence is not debatable '' . Earlier this month , Mrs May criticised the Bank 's reaction to the Brexit vote by warning that there were `` bad side-effects '' from quantitative easing and rock bottom interest rates . Mr Carney responded to the comments saying that he would not `` take instruction '' from politicians . Mark Garnier , an international trade minister , meanwhile sought to reassure the City about negotiations over the terms of Brexit , telling the BBA that `` we have to find a mechanism that behaves exactly the same as passporting . ''
German threat to Brexit trade deal ; Merkel 's strong opposition to bespoke agreement may torpedo British blueprint
BRITAIN 'S plan for a bespoke Brexit trade deal is at risk of being derailed by Germany , even before negotiations on the future EU-UK relationship begin later this year , The Daily Telegraph can reveal . Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , is against a British plan for so-called `` managed divergence '' from the EU , with senior EU officials and experts warning that she considers the idea another ruse for Britain to `` have its cake and eat it '' . The staunch German opposition to the UK 's position comes as Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , arrive in Germany today for a joint charm offensive . The pair will travel to Berlin and Munich , respectively , to appeal for more pragmatism from Europe as a reward for the UK 's decision to agree to a ( EURO ) 45billion Brexit bill last December . Mr Hammond and Mr Davis will argue that the UK is not trying to cherry-pick , but that `` it makes no sense '' to erect unnecessary barriers to trade in goods and services `` that would only damage businesses and economic growth on both sides of the Channel '' . The British overtures came as sources said that Berlin remains implacably opposed to what UK officials have nicknamed the `` three baskets '' approach to Brexit , in which the UK would identify where it wants to stay close to Europe , where it will diverge and a regulated middle ground . A senior German diplomat working on preparations for the next round of negotiations said : `` The 'three baskets ' sounds like the latest episode in the 'cake and eat it ' sitcom series , '' adding that Germany saw a `` serious risk to the integrity of the EU and its single market '' . Regional analysts warned that the British plan to diverge from the EU over time risked being stillborn if ministers could not convince Europe to take a more flexible approach . `` Hammond and Davis are going to have their work cut out to convince the EU that the UK 's 'three baskets ' approach is n't another attempt to cherry-pick and sow division within the EU , '' said Mujtaba Rahman , head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group consultancy . `` Germany is going to play hardball . Senior officials in Berlin are clear that Angela Merkel is determined not to award the Brits a deal that gives Eurosceptics and future trade partners a precedent to point to . `` UK ministers have been encouraged that some EU states - notably the Nordics , Netherlands , Italy and Luxembourg - have questioned the hardline approach by Berlin and Paris , and are now beginning a month of intensive lobbying with member states . Both sides will now engage in a crucial month-long war of ideas , with British ministers urging a pragmatic approach , while the 27 member states try to reach agreement on how to tackle the trade talks . A formal EU `` mandate '' is promised in March . Report : Page 4 Editorial Comment : Page 17
Mrs May 's Brexit quandary deepens BODY : Theresa May heads to Brussels today for a meeting with Jean Claude-Juncker that promises to be crucial for the prospects of a harmonious and mutually beneficial Brexit agreement . Whether the unfolding deal will be politically acceptable at home remains to be seen . Over the next few days , the UK government needs to convince the EU negotiators that `` sufficient progress '' has been made on the three issues deemed by Brussels to require prior consideration before moving on to discuss the wider post-Brexit relationship , including trade . So far , this has essentially involved the Government agreeing to the EU 's terms . Even though theoretically nothing is agreed until everything is agreed , their financial demands have been largely accepted . The European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) is set to retain a role overseeing the rights of EU citizens after Brexit ; and Britain is being forced to contemplate treating Northern Ireland differently from the rest of the UK , with uncertain implications for peace in the province . At her lunch today with the EU Commission president , the Prime Minister will be looking for some indication that the Brussels summit later this month will give the go-ahead to the next stage of the Brexit process . When Mrs May outlined Britain 's position in Florence in September and put some money on the table , she was rebuffed just days later by her fellow heads of government . After almost doubling the financial offer and making concessions in other areas , another repudiation would be politically damaging and raise questions as to whether the process is worth continuing if a succession of UK compromises is greeted with obduracy on the other side . Yet difficulties remain , even to get past this stage - notably over the status of the regulatory framework in Northern Ireland . In addition , Brexiteers are alarmed at the possibility of a residual role for the ECJ in the legal system of the UK , which would negate one of the key reasons many voted to leave . How will it fulfill the pledge to `` take back control '' if rulings of the ECJ are still binding in UK courts ? Mrs May is walking a fine line between her understandable anxiety to move on from the current stalemate and the risk of doing so at a price that few - Leavers and Remainers alike , for different reasons - are prepared to pay .
The Chancellor fails to grasp that sovereignty lies at the heart of Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Philip Hammond is quite wrong when he says that our first priority in negotiating Brexit must be prosperity ( report , June 28 ) . When we voted for Brexit , we voted to leave the EU : nothing more or less . Of course prosperity is important , and it will come when we reclaim our sovereignty and control of our own affairs . We have always been a successful trading nation , and have no place in an inward-looking , protectionist federal Europe . Bob Pugh Ringwood , Surrey sir - I am fed up with commentators and politicians lazily trotting out the line `` people did n't vote to be poorer '' to justify any proposed violation of Brexit . In fact , the people did just that . The logic is clear . Since everyone from the Governor of the Bank of England to the Chancellor of the Exchequer threatened that we would be financially worse off after Brexit , even with drastic economic measures and emergency Budgets , any vote for Brexit was an indication that this was a price worth paying . An unambiguous majority of those who voted showed that it was n't about money at all : they simply wanted to live in a sovereign country again . It is disingenuous to say that people did n't know what they were voting for and therefore the vote is invalid . The point is that people did know what it was like to be in the EU , and almost any alternative was better than that . Jane Biggs Taunton , Somerset sir - As Google , which has been fined £2.1billion for failing to adhere to EU competition laws , will attest , the European Commission has become a punishment mechanism . If only its commissioners would spend as much energy creating an environment in which great companies can innovate and prosper , the EU might create national wealth rather than destroy it . John Maloney Biggar , South Lanarkshire sir - Although I voted for Brexit , having been opposed to our membership of the EU since the time of Ted Heath , I have now concluded that we must remain as full members . Events over the last year and the result of the general election have shown that leaving the EU will cause damage to our economic prosperity and our influence in the world . Unpicking EU-inspired legislation will be tantamount to changing elements of our constitution . Most countries require safeguards to ensure that important constitutional changes are supported by more than a simple majority . While it is true that a majority of those who voted in 2016 backed Brexit , the Leave vote represented only 37.4 per cent of the electorate . This means that a majority were either opposed or too indifferent to vote . It is time that our MPs did what they are paid to do : act in the best interests of the country as a whole . This means withdrawing our Article 50 notice . Paul Laing Dereham , Norfolk
Scotland Is Ukip 's Frank Sinatra ready for one last comeback ? ; Brexit Sketch
Great minds think alike . Yesterday morning , Labour announced the six things they wanted from Brexit . Then Ukip revealed the six things they wanted from Brexit , too . Disappointingly the Lib Dems did n't join in the fun , but I suppose we can guess what their six demands would have been . ( `` 1 . Remain in the EU . 2 . Do n't leave the EU . 3 . Avoid exiting the EU . '' Etc . ) Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , spoke at Chatham House in London . Labour , he said , wanted `` a strong and collaborative relationship with the EU '' ; `` the exact same benefits as we currently have as members of the Single Market and Customs Union '' ; `` fair management of migration '' ; `` defend [ workers ' ] rights '' ; `` protect national security '' ; `` deliver for all regions and nations of the UK '' . Sir Keir did n't sound optimistic that Theresa May would achieve them . Then again , Sir Keir rarely sounds optimistic about anything . He has the perpetual air of a policeman on a doorstep , removing his helmet to deliver bad news . `` Failure to meet these tests , '' he said glumly , `` will affect how Labour votes in the Commons . '' An interesting strategy . Voting against Mrs May 's deal would surely mean leaving with no deal at all : in the language of Remainers , the hardest possible Brexit . Which would make Labour the party that warned us against this calamity - and then delivered it . Paul Nuttall , Ukip 's current leader , made his own six demands at a hotel near Parliament . His audience consisted of journalists , plus a special guest : one Nigel Farage , who sauntered in and sat at the back . Mr Farage had n't come to speak ; in fact , it was never made clear why he was there . Both before and during Mr Nuttall 's speech , photographers spent a lot more time taking pictures of Mr Farage than they did of Mr Nuttall . Their cameras clicked like crickets . Mr Farage beamed . Although the room was small , Mr Nuttall read out his speech at the top of his voice . Perhaps , for some reason , he felt a need to assert his authority . Ukip 's six demands , he bellowed , were : full Parliamentary sovereignty ; full control of borders ; full control of fishing waters ; leave the Single Market and Customs Union ; finalise Brexit by 2019 ; and do n't pay a penny more to the EU . Suddenly I remembered something . After he resigned as Ukip leader last summer , Mr Farage was asked whether he might ever return . `` If Brexit was n't delivered , '' he replied , `` then I would have to think seriously about plunging back in . '' I raised my hand . If Mrs May failed to pass Ukip 's six tests , was Mr Nuttall worried that the gentleman at the back of the room would demand his job back ? Both Mr Nuttall and Mr Farage laughed loudly . Perhaps a little too loudly . 'Both Mr Nuttall and Mr Farage laughed loudly . Perhaps a little too loudly '
A profit from Brexit is more likely than the Chancellor 's gloomy forecast ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - The `` cost of Brexit '' highlighted in the Autumn Statement will undoubtedly be wrong . The independent Office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) has previously made 15 fiscal forecasts . The average cumulative upward revision has been £49.9 billion in nine of them . In four , the average cumulative downward revision has been £37.6 billion . The margin of error on these budget forecasts is very high . They are sensitive to economic forecasts and also , as the OBR itself has previously stated , its judgment on fiscal policy . My detailed research shows that leaving the EU and taking a global approach produces higher growth and more employment than remaining in an unreformed EU . Far from a cost , Brexit is more likely to produce a significant gain.Gerard Lyons Chief economic advisor to Policy Exchange London SW1 SIR - The OBR claims the cost of Brexit might be close to £60 billion . With HS2 forecast to cost approximately £80 billion , the price to regain our sovereignty is a bargain.Alan Belk Leatherhead , Surrey SIR - In spite of the efforts of political journalists , particularly on BBC television , to create an atmosphere of crisis , Philip Hammond succeeded in presenting a calm and unruffled demeanour while announcing his view of our economic outlook . Mr Hammond 's use of the OBR 's figures was skilful . He made no attempt to disguise the fact that the figures showed the Brexit vote had had a negative effect . At the same time , he gave the clear impression that everything was under control , and that growth would continue . His transparent honesty completely undermined the feeble response of John McDonnell , the shadow Chancellor . The OBR 's figures are pessimistic , but by sticking to them he will reap the benefit when things turn out to be better than originally predicted . David Kidd Petersfield , Hampshire SIR - One must welcome the Chancellor 's pledge to spend £23 billion on `` innovation and infrastructure '' over the next five years . This citizen , however , would welcome the chance to get a usable signal on his mobile phone , be able to navigate the pot-holed and unsalted Sussex lanes in winter , and to commute on a train that was not delayed , cancelled or overcrowded . How about a little bit of that £23 billion to fix this ? Neil Mackwood Dallington , East Sussex SIR - If the Chancellor is so concerned about the British economy , why was he seen leaving Downing Street in a BMW ? Ian Maddock Alveley , Shropshire
Scotland Mundell : do n't let SNP doom-mongering overshadow risks of separation ; SNP is using Brexit fears to downplay risk of breaking up Union , says Mundell
DAVID MUNDELL will today accuse Nicola Sturgeon of using `` increasingly alarmist '' rhetoric about Brexit to distract Scots from the fact that it has made independence even riskier . Speaking on the eve of the second anniversary of the referendum on breaking up Britain , the Scottish Secretary will attack the First Minister 's `` doom-mongering warnings '' and suggest they are designed to make separation appear the safest option rather than provide a truthful analysis . He will argue that Brexit has made independence less attractive than two years ago , citing the prospect of Scotland joining the euro , having a hard border with England and losing access to the UK single market . A separate Scotland 's EU status would bear little resemblance to the proposition Remain voters backed in June , he will claim , with the country facing a `` major downgrade and loss of control '' thanks to a voting system that favours the larger member states . His intervention came after Alex Salmond yesterday predicted that Nicola Sturgeon will call an independence referendum in the autumn of 2018 after the Brexit negotiations fail to keep Scotland in the EU single market . But writing in today 's Daily Telegraph , Ruth Davidson describes the SNP 's decision to agitate for a rerun in the wake of the EU referendum vote as `` unjustified , infuriating and wrong . '' The Scottish Tory leader argues that `` the very worst response is to doubledown on uncertainty '' and the correct response to leaving one political union Continued on Page 8 Continued from Page 1 `` ca n't be to withdraw from a much more important one too . '' Ms Sturgeon this week warned that Britain faces a `` lost decade '' while it deals with the consequences of Brexit . She argued that this should make Scots `` sit up '' and consider independence . But , in a speech hosted by the IPPR Scotland think tank in Glasgow , Mr Mundell will argue that the country 's political leaders have a responsibility to take a `` positive approach '' to the future . He is expected to say : `` Part of that means using temperate language . Doommongering warnings of a 'lost decade ' and 'deep and severe ' damage are becoming increasingly alarmist . `` Objective observers might wonder if the aim is to provide bracingly frank analysis , or to try and talk up the challenges of Brexit in the hope of making Scottish independence seem less of a risk . '' Mr Mundell will argue that the case for Scotland staying in the UK has got stronger since the 2014 referendum , adding that the Brexit vote has not substantially weakened it . `` It certainly does not make Scottish independence any more attractive , viable or beneficial a prospect than it was in 2014 . Indeed quite the reverse , '' he will say . The Scottish Secretary will note that `` full and unrestricted access '' to the UK single market is `` far more important '' to businesses than the EU single market . Scottish exports to the UK are worth £48.5 billon compared with £11.6 billion to the EU . If there is a `` hard '' Brexit , which leaves the UK outside the EU single market , aca-demics have warned that an independent Scotland would face a choice between free trade with the EU or the UK but it could not have both . Mr Mundell will warn that a separate Scotland would be one of the EU 's smallest member states , and it could be marginalised in Brussels . He will add : `` It is , in truth , a very different proposition from that which Remain voters in Scotland backed in June . '' In contrast with Scotland receiving a `` fiscal transfer '' from the UK every year of £15 billion , Mr Mundell will argue that Scottish taxpayers would have to pay into the EU pot at a higher rate as they would no longer benefit from Margaret Thatcher 's rebate . Ms Sturgeon has recently shifted the focus of her demands from Scotland retaining its EU status to maintaining membership of the EU single market . Mr Salmond said yesterday he would expect her to give Theresa May `` the opportunity to embed Scotland '' in the Brexit talks to make that happen . But he told RT UK 's Going Underground programme : `` My reading of the situation is , the UK will not be flexible or wise enough to do that , and therefore I expect there 'll be a Scottish referendum in roughly two years ' time . '' Mike Russell , the SNP 's Brexit negotiations minister , said : `` David Mundell represents a Tory government which the people of Scotland overwhelmingly did not vote for , trying to sell them an EU referendum result that they overwhelmingly did not vote for - and these comments would be laughable were they not so ridiculous . `` Just a few months ago Mr Mundell , Ruth Davidson and many other Tories warned us of the disastrous consequences of leaving the EU - yet now they try and pretend that the UK offers some sort of stability or certainty for Scotland . ''
We have Brexit allies out there - but we 're too busy going round in circles ; Tory MPs are in such a state of confusion that they are not picking up signals from Ireland and others
If in doubt , blame the civil servants . That seems to be the strategy adopted by disgruntled backbenchers and ministers who are n't happy with our rudderless Government . But ask anyone who has to deal with the Government from the outside , from foreign diplomats to businesses , and the civil servants are the only ones singled out for praise . A bad workman blames his tools and a poor political class blames its bureaucrats . MPs do have much to be unhappy about . The UK is squandering its best opportunity to shape European attitudes in our favour . Even as EU governments are at their most open to influence , Downing Street is dithering . This week , the EU will finalise its negotiating guidelines on the transition , deliberations over which are likely to follow the pattern seen last autumn : a long , painful spectacle in which Britain will concede nearly every point . Rather than getting it over with and moving on to what matters - our future long-term relationship with the EU - our Government looks set to waste more time fighting itself . In the meantime , European governments will be agreeing their position on the more important question of the UK-EU trade deal . Britain has a window of opportunity to influence that process , but our Government is so divided that it can not take advantage of it . To see what could be , consider the position of Ireland , where I spent most of the past week . Brexit will have almost as big an impact in Dublin as it does here , since half of all exports by Irish companies are bought by Britain and many have to cross UK territory to reach buyers in Europe . And although Ireland is a small nation , bullied by Europe 's larger states as it once was by the UK , it has a clever , energetic leader , a deep understanding of Britain and a strong interest in making sure Brexit does n't go pear-shaped . Last week in Davos , the Irish Taoiseach , Leo Varadkar , directly contradicted Brussels dogma by saying that the EU should aim for a bespoke deal with Britain to take account of our deep trading ties . Ireland 's preferred outcome would be for everything to stay the same - that is , for Britain to remain in the single market and customs union . But many of its politicians also understand that doing so could prove politically impossible , unleashing chaos in Westminster . They conclude , therefore , that it is in their interests to soften the hard line so far taken by France and Germany . In other words , Dublin is a potential ally . It is not the only one . Several other northern European countries with strong UK trade ties have given signals suggesting they could take a pragmatic approach to Brexit , if the right arguments were made . Sweden has said explicitly that any Brexit deal should be extensive and go further than the EU 's deal with Canada . Denmark and the Netherlands have both commissioned reports showing the disruption their industries would suffer from failing to reach a deal and , at different times , suggested that a comprehensive trade deal would be in their interests . Luxembourg 's prime minister , Xavier Bettel , recently criticised the EU 's `` binary thinking '' on Brexit . Spain and Italy , while echoing French and German rhetoric more closely , have emphasised the importance of keeping Britain close . All of these countries make pro-EU sounds and believe sincerely in the importance of EU projects such as the single market , but they are not quite as attached to its dogmas as France and Germany . It 's no wonder . The Franco-German engine has done more than any other alliance to shape the union , and its institutions therefore suit them best . The point , though , is not to sow division among Europe 's governments on Brexit . It is to help the moderates win the argument . Beyond Brexit , Europe is facing a crucial choice between a hyper-federalist leap forward , favoured by France 's Emmanuel Macron and Germany 's centre-Left SPD , and a series of incremental reforms . Ireland , like other nations with strong national identities and a naturally sceptical outlook on the EU political project , is anxious about being railroaded into a union that goes beyond the pure economic advantages it seeks . Britain is now an outsider in this debate . But there is a growing conversation across the Continent about which of the two outlooks should win . Ireland 's politicians talk hopefully about forging a northern European alliance with likeminded trading nations . On Brexit , there is talk in Dublin about drawing up a new framework for `` a '' customs union to facilitate trade , which could give Britain more flexibility than staying in `` the '' existing EU customs union . If the UK could look up , for just a minute , from the briefing wars in Westminster , it might well find fertile ground on the Continent for a reasoned argument about pragmatism , shared values and a model of free trade that does n't revolve around building a super-state . Instead , we 're sabotaging ourselves . In Ireland , attitudes to Britain range from frustration to resentment . One senator recounted the reaction when he stated the obvious at a local party meeting : `` A good deal for Britain is a good deal for Ireland . '' An irate party member responded : `` I did n't come here to listen to this pro-English s -- -- . '' Mark Daly , an opposition senator involved in parliamentary committee work on Brexit , describes Britain 's MPs as `` astoundingly ignorant '' on basic trade policy issues . It 's hard to argue with that when , as Buzzfeed revealed on Saturday , staunch advocates of a hard Brexit , like Nadine Dorries , are still posting questions on social media groups asking fellow MPs what exactly membership of the customs union involves . The UK is counting on Ireland and likeminded nations to win the argument , softening the stance taken by Berlin and Paris . Government insiders point to unmoving polls and the steady state of the British economy as evidence that everything is fine . But the management of Brexit is in chaos and we should n't be relying on our allies to manage it for us . When push comes to shove in the EU , it 's the big nations that tend to steamroller the smaller ones . We are at a point in history when all the pieces have been thrown into the air . They could land in any formation . Yet at this crucial moment , even as the future is decided , Tory MPs are still struggling to understand the most basic aspect of the choices they have to make . Our allies ca n't help us unless we help ourselves . FOLLOW Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Employers hand PM a tight Brexit deadline ; Theresa May moves to reassure businesses as CBI president warns 'clock is ticking ' on EU trade talks
MOST businesses will start moving jobs across the Channel and slashing recruitment in the coming months as 60pc plan to launch no-deal Brexit plans before the end of March . However , 75pc of big businesses told the CBI they would put these plans on hold if a Brexit transition deal was agreed between the Government and the EU by the end of March . `` The clock is ticking , '' Paul Drechsler , the CBI 's president , told the business group 's annual conference . `` The Government and the EU need to get a move on , making progress , remaining flexible and , first of all , sorting out transitional arrangements . '' After that he wants the focus to switch to longer-term negotiations for `` the biggest prize of all ... a trade deal for goods and services that is right for the people of Britain '' . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , told the conference that the negotiators were making progress and she hoped to make a move on the transition and trade talks `` as quickly as possible '' . `` During this period our access to one another 's markets should continue on current terms , '' she reassured businesses . Both the Prime Minister and Mr Drechsler used their speeches to make the case for capitalism with moderate governmental support . Free markets are `` the best way to spread opportunity and lift people out of poverty '' , Mrs May said . She told the business audience that the Government should seek to foster business growth , particularly in hi-tech sectors , seeking to emulate the success of the UK in growing a world-leading financial services sector , while limiting the risks of under-regulation and over-reliance on one sector . `` By setting the right frameworks and investing in skills and infrastructure , we can help broaden our economic base , build a more balanced economy and make Britain a true global leader , '' she said . `` We can not and will not try to make a plan for every corner of our economy . We believe in the free market and wo n't attempt to shield the economy from market forces . `` We have to make strategic decisions about where the Government can and can not best support key sectors of the economy . '' Meanwhile , Mr Drechsler said capitalism had been the driving force in the UK and the world promoting wealth , health and well-being , but that `` until everybody feels the benefits of capitalism in their pockets and in their homes , we will have a problem '' .
Ending the migrant influx will shake Britain out of its laziness , says Ramsay ; Celebrity chef rejects bitter rival Jamie Oliver 's complaints over effect of Brexit on restaurant trade
BREXIT will shake Britain out of laziness and give homegrown talent a chance to shine , Gordon Ramsay has said . The chef said he was looking forward to an end to the `` influx '' of migrants after Britain leaves the European Union and claimed it would have a positive effect on the restaurant industry . His optimism contrasts with his rival Jamie Oliver , who campaigned for Remain and blamed the closure of six of his Italian restaurants on the uncertainty that followed the Brexit vote . A curb on migrant labour would create opportunities , Ramsay told Radio Times . `` That level of influx of multinational workers in this country has sort of confirmed how lazy as a nation we are - when individuals from across the seas are prepared to come and work twice as hard for less money , '' he said . `` If anything , it 's a big kick up the a -- -for the industry , and it 's going to get back to the modern-day apprenticeship . So not only do I welcome that kind of change , but I think it 's going to put a lot more emphasis on homegrown talent . '' There is no love lost between Ramsay and Oliver . `` It 's all very well to spout off now about sugar tax and supermarkets . None of that was spoken about when he was label-slapping with Sainsbury 's for 10 years , '' Ramsay said . He was referring to Oliver 's decade as the face of the supermarket chain , a job reported to have earned him £10million . `` Sadly , the only time he opens his mouth is when he 's got something to promote , '' Ramsay added . In August , asked about Ramsay making regular jibes at him , Oliver said : `` TIMES `` He 's got four kids and I 've got five kids and I do n't want to be slagging off some kids ' dad on telly . It 's not nice . '' It appeared to be an attempt to bury RADIO the hatchet , but Ramsay said the remark was hurtful because his wife , Tana , miscarried their fifth child last year . She was `` mortified '' by Oliver 's remark and Ramsay said he will never talk to Oliver again until he apologises . The Michelin-starred chef gave the interview to promote a new ITV documentary about the cocaine trade . He said teenagers should be taught about cocaine , explaining that he sat his children down and showed them how the drug is often cut with cement powder or battery acid . It `` scared the life out of them '' , he said . He added that children should be given drugs education in the same way that they receive sex education . Ramsay said cocaine is rife in the restaurant industry , recalling an occasion last Christmas when a customer asked for a side plate to be changed because he had used it to snort the class-A drug in the bathroom . A chef at a celebrity book launch pressed a foil wrap of cocaine into his palm during a handshake , Ramsay claimed . On another occasion , while cooking for a dinner party he was asked to dust the soufflés with cocaine mixed into the icing sugar . He declined . 'That level of influx of multinational workers has sort of confirmed how lazy as a nation we are '
Irish premier 's Brexit idea is so good that Ireland should take it up too ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - The suggestion by Leo Varadkar , the Irish Taoiseach , that the United Kingdom should consider becoming a member of the European Free Trade Association or Efta ( report , August 5 ) is www.good.No solution will please everyone and compromises must be made . Membership of Efta would offer many of the advantages we are seeking from Brexit and avoid a `` cliff-edge '' on departure from the EU . It would help to heal the nation 's divisions . Such a sensible , workable plan is laid out in Daniel Hannan 's excellent What Next : How to get the best from Brexit . MPs and peers of all parties who truly have the national interest at heart , as well as those trying to frustrate or overturn Brexit , would benefit by using the summer recess to read and inwardly digest this book . Meanwhile , instead of encouraging the disaffected Nicola Sturgeon and Carwyn Jones in their idea of staying in the single market and customs union , which is tantamount to staying in the EU , which 17.4 million of the British people voted to leave , Mr Varadkar might more usefully spend his time reflecting on the benefit to the Irish Republic of doing the same and joining Efta . After all , the bulk of Ireland 's trade is with the UK , which may well strike a free trade deal with the United States , with which Ireland has far more ties than with continental Europe . Does Ireland really want to be an EU outpost marooned in the middle ? Maureen Waller Little Barningham , Norfolk sir - Members of the Government now seem to be agreed that we need a `` transition period '' after we leave the EU because we can not sort out the details in the time available under Article 50 and we want to avoid a so-called `` cliff edge '' . Their plan now seems to be that no great changes in our relationship will occur until after we have left , and then changes will be made as and when they are required , with no time limit as required by Article 50 . If instead of invoking that Article we had simply revoked the Acts of Parliament that took us in , we would have been in the same position three years earlier . This unnecessary delay will cost us about another £25 billion in contributions and allow an extra unknown number of EU nationals into our crowded island . This was predictable and was indeed predicted . The Government owes us all an explanation for its delay . Brian Meadley Axminster , Devon sir - I wonder if there is any chance of one more EU diktat before we leave . Driving around Europe this summer , I thought a common rule would be useful for allowing another road user into the road . In Britain a quick headlight flash indicates to another driver that they may pull out . In many , but not all , continental EU states it means : `` Do n't even think about pulling out . '' Perhaps one rule could be agreed ? Michael West Bishopstoke , Hampshire
Top bosses to grill Davis over Brexit plan
THE heads of some of the UK 's biggest companies will today seize on the first opportunity since the election to tell the Government what they would like to see from the Brexit process . The guest list at the Chevening summit - being hosted by David Davis , the Brexit Secretary - is understood to include Xavier Rolet , the chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , who is battling to retain the lucrative euro clearing market in the face of calls in Brussels to move it on to the continent after Brexit . Dame Carolyn McCall , the chief executive of EASYJET , will also attend the meeting . The airline is spending tens of millions of pounds on setting up a new European base and restructuring its operations , to allow it to continue flying within the EU . Dave Lewis , the boss of Tesco , which has been hit by the decline of sterling since the Brexit vote , and Gavin Patterson of BT , which faces challenges around data rules , are also expected to attend the talks . Alison Brittain , who runs Costa Coffee and Premier Inn owner Whitbread , is expected to attend too , with migration likely to be high on her agenda . Others on the guest list include Jes Staley , chief executive of Barclays , and Emma Walmsley , the boss of Glaxo-SmithKline . The agenda is understood to be broad , with discussion on any topic relating to Britain 's planned break with the EU . It follows the creation of an EU Exit Business Advisory Group by Mr Davis , the Chancellor and the Business Secretary , which is due to meet once a fortnight . Carolyn Fairbairn , the CBI boss , who last night appeared to be on a collision course with Mr Davis after calling for the UK to stay in the single market and the customs union until a Brexit deal is done , will also attend . Adam Marshall : Page 4
How the Americans began to see Brexit as the model for their own electoral revolution ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Americans are latching on to Brexit to explain Donald Trump 's victory . I suspect few understand what our referendum was about . We were in America on June 24 , the day of the referendum results , and everyone we met thought the EU was simply a free-trade arrangement . They assumed therefore that the Brexit vote must be just a vehicle for protest against the government of the day . When we explained to them the loss of sovereignty , the corruption and the profound lack of democracy of the EU , they were shocked : `` We never hear about those things . '' Quite . Cynthia Harrod-Eagles Northwood , Middlesex SIR - If the next wave of elections follows the same pattern as the most recent ones , the Prime Minister wo n't have to worry about her negotiations for leaving the EU , as there 'll be no EU left to negotiate with . Earl of Ronaldshay Richmond , North Yorkshire SIR - Until recently I had never seen the term `` working class '' used to define a section of society in America , but the description was used increasingly in the presidential campaigns of both Trump and Clinton . How strange it is that a billionaire Republican should have been elected because of support from this new group , the Working Class of the United States . What happened to the land of the free and its classless society ? Mike Taylor Chichester , West Sussex SIR - For the first time in decades the people of Britain have shown they have the power to change the way they are governed . The people of America have now shown they too are fed up with the old order and , like those who voted for Brexit , are ready to face the uncertainly that change brings . Are those protesting against this change , here and in America , saying that they do n't like democracy , or are they blind to how out of touch our governing elites have become - in the case of the EU , out of touch because it does n't like democracy ? David Croxson New Milton , Hampshire SIR - Those , including Mr Trump himself , who see him as a `` Brexit President '' have got it wrong . The Brexit referendum victory was based on the popular vote , and the popular vote in the US election was for Hillary Clinton . Hugh Hetherington Sandwich , Kent SIR - Those protesting against the election of Mr Trump are protesting about the decision of their demos . If they ca n't stand the democratic decisions of the demos that they inhabit , they must leave and find one more to their liking . Or sulk . Christopher Monniot Leeds , West Yorkshire SIR - Why did Gary Gerstle ( Comment , November 19 ) describe Mr Trump 's victory derogatorily as `` populism '' ? It was respectful democracy at work . Dr J Meirion Thomas London SW3 SIR - Populism = widespread opinions I do n't agree with . Popular = widespread opinions I do agree with . Dr John Lockley Ampthill , Bedfordshire SIR - `` As democracy is perfected , the office [ of President ] represents , more and more closely , the inner soul of the people . We move toward a lofty ideal . On some great and glorious day the plain folks of the land will reach their heart 's desire at last , and the White House will be adorned by a downright moron . '' - H L Mencken , 1920 . Peter Smith Ingatestone , Essex SIR - The result of the presidential election shocked me and shook me . I did n't believe that American voters could be so ignorant and intolerant that they would choose to elect Donald Trump . This election was not just a choice between Republican and Democrat . A vote for Trump was a vote for racism , bigotry , misogyny and hatred . Throughout my life America has been hailed as the capital of the free world . It upheld ideals of democracy and freedom of speech , ideas and religion . Yet Trump managed to win a presidency from a platform of hatred . The problem was not Trump but that America heard what he was saying , and liked it . Faith Browning Leicester SIR - Perhaps the American people were following Mae West 's dictum : `` When choosing between two evils , I generally like to pick the one I 've never tried before . '' John Frankel Kingsclere , Berkshire SIR - The arrogant liberal elite and its impressionable groupies only embrace democracy if it produces a result they want . Otherwise , the result is ignored , rejected or violently protested against . David Williams Epperstone , Nottinghamshire SIR - I think I understand the way many people in America are feeling . Recently I 've had a recurring nightmare that Philip Green is prime minister . Jennifer Grover Great Kingshill , Buckinghamshire SIR - While he seems strange to us , Mr Trump will be a president with a record of being able to do business with anybody . Exactly what the world needs in these dangerous times . Sue Doughty Twyford , Berkshire SIR - Nigel Farage has said that he will not be returning to politics after a new leader of Ukip has been appointed . But he appears to know the US presidentelect well , he is experienced in the business world , and by now is a familiar figure in the United States . It would not seem preposterous to suggest that he might be a suitable candidate for appointment as British ambassador to Washington DC . Nigel Milliner Tregony , Cornwall SIR - Allister Heath ( Comment , November 11 ) wonders `` whether Trump intends to repeat that act of vandalism '' , referring to the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 . But in 1930 , the United States had a huge trade surplus with the rest of the world . That is why the Act was `` the single greatest economic blunder of all time '' . Now , the United States has a huge trade deficit with the world ; the circumstances are entirely different . In effect , the United States is borrowing money from its foreign suppliers to enable it to buy imports . The current US trade deficit is the great economic blunder . How can the United States and other Western developed economies get out of this mess ? Tony Hart Topsham , Devon SIR - Will President-elect Trump receive the Nobel Peace Prize immediately he takes office or will he have to wait 11 days , as President Obama did ? Alan Kennington Axminster , Devon SIR - Is anyone else looking forward to Mr Trump 's first meeting as President of the United States with a foreign dignitary when there is a wind blowing . Bad hair day or baseball cap ? Alistair Leitch Morpeth , Northumberland
'Brexit was n't a vote to shut down the economy ' ; Tory conference Philip Hammond warns that immigration controls must not come at expense of growth
PHILIP HAMMOND is keen to point out that his relationship with the Prime Minister is very different to the one George Osborne had with David Cameron . In the three months since Theresa May made him Chancellor , there have been growing reports that their relationship has become strained . Gone are the days when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne governed almost as one . The new Prime Minister prefers to make decisions alone or with only her most trusted advisers , it is said . It has even been reported that Mr Hammond is no longer a guest at the Prime Minister 's daily morning meeting , something that would have been unthinkable when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne occupied Downing Street . However , Mr Hammond suggests that the near-symbiotic relationship maintained by his predecessor and the former prime minister was not necessarily conducive to good government . `` George Osborne had a very close perrsonal and political relationship that goes back a very long way with David Cameron and they worked together in a certain way , '' Mr Hammond says . `` Theresa May and I work together in a different way - [ though ] we 've also known each other a long time . '' He adds : `` The most important thing is that we share clear objectives . That we understand each other 's priorities , we know how each other work and we have a channel of ready communication between us and I 'm quite satisfied with the arrangements that Theresa May and I have got . '' Brexit and the Single Market In recent days there have been reports that Mrs May is seeking a `` hard Brexit '' , which would mean Britain relinquishing its membership of the single market so that it can have full control over its borders . Mr Hammond is dismissive of the attempts to characterise Britain 's exit negotiations as either `` soft '' or `` hard '' . `` We 're the world 's fifth-largest economy and creating a relationship between the European Union and the world 's fifth-largest economy is going to be a complex process for which there is no model , '' he says . `` So it will be a bespoke model . We should be looking for a good Brexit - not a hard Brexit or a soft Brexit . '' There have been reports that Mr Hammond is increasingly concerned that the desire among some in Government to control immigration could lead to economic harm , with the European Union denying access to the single market if Britain does not accept the free movement of migrants . But Mr Hammond is insistent that any migration controls must not come at the expense of economic progress . The Chancellor says : `` We 've got to be clear about one thing - there 's an implicit term of the mandate we received from the British people . It may not have been stated explicitly but it 's implicit . And that is that they do not want to see the economy suffer . `` They do not want to see jobs lost , they do not want to see standards of living decline . So they will expect us to negotiate a solution which delivers the key elements of leaving the European Union - regaining our sovereignty , getting control over our borders - but they will expect us to do all of that in a way that allows the UK economy to go on growing . '' Immigration Mr Hammond has made clear that whatever immigration controls are enforced , `` highly skilled '' workers will never be `` shut out '' of Britain . He has already said that key workers in the financial services industry will be exempt from any controls , but appears to suggest that other sectors will get similar freedoms . `` The message that I want to send to business is that whatever solution we end up with , whatever control powers we have over immigration into the UK , we will use them responsibly , '' he says . `` We will use them in a way that supports the UK economy and we will certainly not use them to shut out highly skilled people - whether they are bankers or software engineers or managers in global companies - from the UK when their presence is supporting inward investment and growth in our economy . '' Responsible capitalism Mrs May has faced criticism from the country 's biggest firms by demanding `` responsible capitalism '' . The Prime Minister wants to put workers on company boards and also rein in excessive pay . He insists that the measures , particularly plans to put workers on boards , is `` something that responsible businesses will recognise can be positive for them '' . He also suggests large companies will not want to risk a backlash from angry customers . Deutsche Bank Amid growing concerns about the German lender Deutsche Bank , Mr Hammond is quick to reassure voters that the British - and global - banking systems are more `` resilient '' than before the 2008 financial crash . He says that if a major bank is in trouble `` the world 's central banks would cooperate together to resolve it in a way that did n't contaminate the wider system '' He adds : `` I have a high degree of confidence that those mechanisms that we now have in place are effective and will work if called upon . '' The tech industry Mr Hammond will use his speech to the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham to announce a huge cashinjection for hi-tech companies . As well as £100 million for life sciences , there will be £120 million to research artificial intelligence and nanotechnology . Mr Hammond says he wants to make Britain a `` global capital '' of `` innovation '' . What 's on when Conference agenda ? Tomorrow Theresa May ; David Davis , Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union ; Liam Fox , International Development Secretary ; Boris Johnson , Foreign Secretary ; Sir Patrick McLoughlin , party chairman ? Monday Philip Hammond , Chancellor ; Greg Clark , Business Secretary ; Sajid Javid , Local Government Secretary ; Chris Grayling , Transport Secretary ? Tuesday Amber Rudd , Home Secretary ; Michael Fallon , Defence Secretary ; Liz Truss , Justice ; Jeremy Hunt , Health ; Justine Greening , Education ; Damian Green , Work and Pensions ? Wednesday Theresa May
We 've signed a blank cheque for nuclear power ; Brexit offered the perfect chance to cancel Hinkley Point , but Britain has given in to France and China
Every cloud has its silver lining , and for Remainers such as me , one potential upside of Brexit was that it might finally bury that Franco-Chinese folie de grandeur-bysea , Hinkley Point C. Britain 's most ambitious nuclear power station to date appeared so bound up in the spirit of European communautaire that it was hard to imagine how the French , statecontrolled , energy giant Électricité de France ( EDF ) , could proceed if Britain voted Leave . For both parties - the UK Government and EDF - Brexit seemed to offer a god-given excuse to pull the plug on an investment which all along has been dogged by controversy and www.setbacks.No such luck . Barring a surprise change of heart , which is not altogether impossible after the latest boardroom bust-up , they are to plough ahead regardless - regardless , that is , of the solvency risk it poses to EDF , already struggling with the finance for nuclear renewal in France , regardless of the latest EDF resignation , regardless of the ever-escalating cost - estimated at £18 billion and rising the last time I looked - regardless of the untested technology being adopted , regardless of the fact that it commits Britain to a Chinese solution to other nuclear reactors elsewhere in Britain , together with the accompanying security risk , and most important of all , regardless of spiralling subsidy costs , including a strike price , inflation-proofed for 35 years , for output which is more than double the current going rate for wholesale electricity . Even Brexit could n't stop it . Indeed , the referendum vote might actually have given it a boost . Keen to demonstrate that Britain is still capable of attracting big league overseas money , and that we are not wholly divorcing ourselves from our Continental neighbours , the new Government is , if anything , even more enthusiastic about Hinkley than the last one , kowtowing to the French and Chinese in equal measure . It is obviously good news that Brexit does n't seem to have deterred EDF , or indeed overseas appetite for UK investment in the round . But then the largesse of the dowry is such that even in the face of a 10-year depression , EDF would have struggled to refuse . The bottom line is that far too big a price is being paid for an untried technology which will very likely be obsolete before the plant is even completed . To get Hinkley built , ministers have had to agree an ever-lengthening and more humiliating list of concessions , including , almost unbelievably , virtually penalty free scope for contract over-runs of up to eight years beyond the planned completion date of 2025 . With Hinkley Point scheduled to provide Britain with 7 per cent of its electricity needs , any such delay would leave consumers disastrously exposed to Britain 's looming energy shortfall , as existing nuclear and coalfired plants come to the end of their natural lives . In any case , a project of questionable value to the UK economy from the start has been left looking like a total white elephant by the collapse in the price of fossil fuels . The National Audit Office recently estimated that over the lifetime of the project , the extra cost to consumers of Hinkley 's output had risen from a punishing £6.1 billion when the strike price was agreed three years ago , to a jaw-dropping £29.7 billion today . Together with other policies designed to deliver a lowcarbon future , Hinkley 's costs will add approximately £230 a year to the average household electricity bill , according to government estimates . Climate change risk may well justify these environmental goals , but whether Hinkley is the right way to deliver them always seemed questionable and today looks positively reckless . To understand how we got ourselves into this mess requires a little history . As with so many other pioneering technologies , Britain practically invented civil nuclear power , but then lost its way in the hopelessly expensive technological cul de sac of bespoke gas-cooled reactors . A further stab at nuclear power was made under the Thatcher government , but was derailed by the `` dash for gas '' and the fallout from Chernobyl . Climate change objectives gave nuclear new legs , but private-sector solutions have proved elusive . It is no accident that Hinkley 's two backers , France 's EDF and China 's General Nuclear Power Corporation , are creatures of the state , for the upfront costs of grand projets like Hinkley are so large and high risk that the private sector struggles to finance them . France and China will be charging us through the nose for the privilege . Frankly , we would have been better off doing it ourselves . There are much better solutions to Britain 's looming energy shortfall - gas as a stop-gap , smaller , more affordable nuclear power stations from Japan , and further out , the development of `` small modular nuclear reactors '' , a promising technology where Britain could again excel . Let 's trade with France , China and the rest of the world by all means . But it is a great mistake to mortgage our future to them in the endeavour . FOLLOW Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ jeremywarneruk ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Britain 's EU exit date might not be March 29 , 2019 , after all
THERESA MAY has conceded that Britain 's exit from the EU could be postponed after she was forced into a climbdown over the date of Brexit . The Prime Minister said Brexit day - March 29 , 2019 - could be pushed back `` in exceptional circumstances '' if negotiations with the EU overran . In accepting an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill giving Parliament the power to postpone Brexit if EU member states decide to extend the Article 50 period , she has avoided a second defeat in the space of a week over an amendment to the Bill . However , Brexiteers fear this could `` indefinitely extend our stay in the EU '' . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , has insisted the transition period should end in December 2020 , earlier than the two years favoured by the Government . Mrs May had said Britain would leave the EU at 11pm on March 29 , 2019 , and repeated this at Prime Minister 's Questions yesterday . But she announced the Government had accepted an amendment by Sir Oliver Letwin , David Cameron 's former policy chief , that allowed the date to be changed by a vote in Parliament . Mrs May had no choice but to accept the amendment after more than 40 Tory MPs , including Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , put their names to it . Mrs May said : `` We would use that power only in extremely exceptional circumstances for the shortest possible time . '' John Baron , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , asked the Prime Minister to pledge that `` it will only be used for a matter of weeks , or a couple of months at most '' . But Mrs May refused to set a time limit . It came as the EU drafted guidelines for transition and for the future relationship with the UK . No10 said the timing of the transition was a matter for negotiation . The guidelines expect the UK to follow EU rules during the transition while having no say over them . Mr Barnier appeared to indicate that Spain would have a veto on any arrangements covering Gibraltar , saying decisions would be `` made for the 27 , unanimously , by consensus '' . Mrs May told the Commons : `` We are not going to exclude Gibraltar from negotiations . '' France must not punish UK : Page 18
Getting on with the job of Brexit ? No sign of it on the British side ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - The Prime Minister has given the nation two mantras about herself . One is that she is `` about getting on with the job '' , and the other that she `` wants to be clear '' about everything . But many perceive a lack of clarity , and wonder why the Government has appeared so tardy about getting on with the job of Brexit . Meanwhile , the EU has `` got on with the job '' and appears `` clearer '' and better prepared in its negotiating position than Britain under the PM and David Davis . The EU has declared ever since the ( very late ) invocation of Article 50 that the four freedoms ( free movement of goods , capital , services and labour ) are indivisible . Yet the Cabinet and the Tory party continue to oscillate back and forth about which slice of the EU cake we can keep as we leave the table , as if any of that is a realistic option . Our civil service has seemed , since the referendum , to be ill-prepared with scenario planning . That impression has continued , despite position papers which have been short on clear negotiating proposals . Of course it 's difficult , but surely by now we could have taken the initiative in negotiating , with our own clear and visionary proposals . We do n't seem to have got on with the job , and certainly not with any clarity worth the claim . Rev Canon Robin Morrison Barry , Glamorgan sir - Hard Brexit ? Bad Brexit ? More like botched Brexit . Nigel Adams Hertford sir - I spent most of my career negotiating commercial deals . Nothing is agreed until everything is agreed and the ink has dried on the paper . If you are not credibly able to walk away at any time up to that point , you will be taken to the cleaners . This is why it is essential that Britain should prepare for a no-deal future , irrespective of the apparent state of negotiations . The European Commission 's strategy in the next 18 months will be to spin these out , making encouraging noises from time to time to lure us into not committing the time and money required . As the clock ticks , we will make desperate concessions until it 's too late . Then the Commission will find some excuse to persuade the 27 other EU countries to pull the rug , blaming HMG for `` lack of sufficient detail '' or competence , to a disloyal chorus of approval from the Opposition , the BBC and much of the UK press . The trap will be sprung . Britain will be given a generous invitation to rejoin - without the rebate and the opt-outs . We need to disabuse ourselves of the notion that the Commission is seeking a fair and amicable outcome , or even one which makes economic sense . From the Commission 's viewpoint , pour décourager les autres , the next best outcome to having Britain return to the EU fold as a supplicant with its tail between its legs would be to have it leave in chaos with an onerous deal . Michael Jones Cowbridge , Glamorgan
Scotland CBI chief calls on SNP to work with Tories on Brexit deal
THE head of one of the UK 's most eminent business groups will tonight demand that SNP ministers work `` more effectively '' with their Tory counterparts during the Brexit talks to get the best possible deal . Carolyn Fairbairn , CBI director-general , will tell the group 's Scottish annual dinner in Glasgow that making a success of Brexit is one of the main reasons overseas firms should continue investing north of the Border . But she will argue that the two governments must work together , following months of acrimony . Her intervention came as Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , admitted in a magazine interview that her greatest fear over Brexit was that `` if there 's a short-term economic hit , we do n't bounce back from it . '' It also coincided with Tory warnings that Ms Sturgeon 's government does not `` understand the economy '' after she used this week 's programme for government to hint at tax increases for the middle classes and the rich . Ms Fairbairn is expected to issue four challenges to the Scottish government over innovation , productivity , business rates and working better with the UK Government over Brexit . Ms Fairbairn will note the UK Government promised to take account of the views of the devolved nations before warning both governments : `` Scottish businesses are looking for evidence of progress - the logjam must be unblocked . `` It is essential that this relationship strengthens and , as EU negotiations continue , helps get the best deal possible for Scottish businesses . ''
Tory MPs warn Davis to make 'clean break ' from EU court
DAVID DAVIS has been warned by Tory MPs that the UK must make a `` clean break '' from the European Court of Justice amid concerns he could allow its continued influence for years to come . The Brexit Secretary will tomorrow publish a paper suggesting that the European Free Trade Association 's court could provide a potential model for the UK after Brexit . The court , which is independent , rules on disputes between Brussels and non-EU members of the single market , such as Norway . Tory Eurosceptics have raised concerns that the body simply `` rubberstamps '' the rulings of the European Court of Justice and would fail to deliver sovereignty after Brexit . However , Brexit officials believe that it could help Theresa May meet her `` red line '' that Britain will leave the European Court of Justice after Brexit . They say that the model will end the court 's `` direct effect '' on British law . John Redwood , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP , said : `` I do n't see the need for it . As far as I 'm concerned , once we leave the European Union we leave the jurisdiction of the court . More than 160 nations have trade deals with the EU without any special arrangements . `` We just want to get on with it , we are having to wait much longer than we wanted to . People are making heavy weather of something that could all be much simpler . We voted to leave , we do n't want the EU bossing us around and telling us what laws we have . '' Jacob Rees-Mogg , another Eurosceptic Tory MP , said : `` One of the rulings of the EFTA Court is it wishes to be as close as possible to the European Court of Justice because it believes that there should be homogeneity . `` It does n't diverge from the European Court of Justice in normal circumstances . If we do that we are only marginally better off than we were before . We need to ensure that the final decision-maker is Parliament , subject to democratic control . '' The paper published by Mr Davis tomorrow will state that Britain will leave the direct influence of the European Court of Justice after Brexit . It will instead highlight a series of precedents , including membership of EFTA and a `` dispute resolution panel '' set up to arbitrate the new EU-Canada trade deal .
MPs must tell us more about a Brexit transition period , warns IOD
THE Government must set out a detailed vision for a Brexit `` transi­ tional '' period or risk losing the confi­ dence of business that it can successfully move towards a new rela­ tionship with the EU , the Institute of Directors ( IoD ) warns today . A report from the bosses ' lobby organisation hints at rising frustration among the business community about the lack of clarity from Downing Street , warning that `` sound-­bites are no sub­ stitute for policy '' on Brexit . In recent weeks , Cabinet ministers have opened the door to a time-­limited transition arrangement for Brexit , but details of what it would entail in prac­ tice remain obscure . Theresa May is billed to make a major speech in early September clarifying Britain 's vision for its future relationship with Europe , including a possible transition , but Whitehall insiders say deep and unre­ solved divisions remain in the Cabinet . Peter Lilley , a leading Eurosceptic , questioned the need for transitional arrangements at all this week in an arti­ cle for The Daily Telegraph , accusing Remainers of relying on them `` like drunks use a lamppost - more for sup­ port than illumination '' . However , the IoD report , entitled Bridging the Gap , argues that because negotiators will only sketch out the post-­Brexit relationship in `` broad '' terms in the EU-­UK withdrawal agree­ ment , a transition period is needed to cover the gap between the two . `` Interim arrangements would there­ fore deal with the bridging period dur­ ing which the UK and EU would negotiate the technical detail of new regulatory co-­operation outlined in the withdrawal agreement 's framework for future relations , '' the IoD said . The Government , which later this month will begin publishing 10 posi­ tion papers covering key areas of Brexit , has resisted providing details for fear of revealing the British negoti­ ating stance and weakening its position in the talks . But the IoD argues that `` engaging in discussion about objectives is not tan­ tamount to revealing our negotiating hand '' , and it has urged the Government to `` signal to industry and enterprise that an orderly exit is not just sound­ bite but an active policy objective '' . The compact 10-­page paper by Allie Renison , the head of EU and trade pol­ icy , lays out the spectrum of options , beginning with the extension of the Article 50 negotiation , which must be done unanimously by the EU , but would be the most comprehensive way to retain the status quo . A second ave­ nue would be for the UK to join the Eu­ ropean Economic Area , which would give it effective single market access , but would require an exemption on bureaucratic `` rules of origin '' checks . However , with both sides indicating that these options are either politically unpalatable or too legally complex , the report explores a list of alternative measures that would effectively mirror existing arrangements and keep trade moving . These include porting over the EU 's Common Customs Code in the forthcoming Customs Bill , agreeing to maintain the Common External Tariff that ensures goods can cross EU bor­ ders freely , and acceding to the Com­ mon Transit Convention to smooth passage for hauliers .
Scotland Cable : main parties too split to deliver Brexit
BREXIT may never happen , Sir Vince Cable has said as he vowed to work with Labour and Tory MPs to block Theresa May 's plans for leaving the European Union . Sir Vince , who is expected to be the next Liberal Democrat leader , said he believes that divisions within the Conservative Party and Labour are `` so enormous '' they could halt Brexit . The former business secretary claimed that the public will swing behind the Lib Dems ' offer to hold a second European Union referendum when they are faced with the economic realities of Brexit . He told The Andrew Marr Show on BBC One : `` I 'm beginning to think that Brexit may never happen . I think the problems are so enormous , the divisions within the two major parties are so enormous . I can see a scenario in which this does n't happen . `` With the situation deteriorating in the economy - as I think it will , none of us are certain but I think it will - people will realise , well , we did n't vote to be poorer . `` And I think the whole question of continued membership [ of the EU ] will once again arrive . '' The Government will this week face a plot by Labour , the Lib Dems and moderate Tory MPs as it publishes the Great Repeal Bill . The Bill will transfer up to 12,000 European laws and regulations into British law on the day that Britain leaves the EU . It is likely to prove one of the biggest tests of Mrs May 's authority after her failure to secure an outright majority in the general election . Opposition MPs are preparing to table a series of amendments in the autumn to ensure the European Court of Justice and other EU institutions retain influence over Britain . They also want to curb the use of secondary legislation - known as Henry VIII clauses - which enable the Government to repeal legislation without further parliamentary scrutiny . The Government insists that the powers are necessary because of the sheer volume of legislation . It also insists that any changes will be technical . Setting out his plans as Lib Dem leader , Sir Vince said that there should be higher taxes and he announced a review of student tuition fees . He also offered the prospect of a new home for disgruntled Labour MPs who face being forced out over their continued opposition to Jeremy Corbyn . He said : `` We have a generous policy on refugees - we will give them food and accommodation . `` Jeremy Corbyn had a good election . But there is an element of a bubble about it . He is very pro-Brexit , a hard Brexit . When that becomes apparent , divisions in the Labour Party will become more clear . '' Owen Paterson , a Tory MP and former Cabinet minister , said : `` I 'm afraid Vince is behind history , we are going to leave , we are on target . ''
European leaders taunt May and put pressure on to negotiate now ; Election 2017
EUROPEAN Union leaders piled pressure on Britain to start Brexit negotiations yesterday , as they sought to take advantage of the UK 's political predicament after Theresa May 's failure to win a majority left her negotiating strategy in disarray . Even as the Prime Minister struggled to form a minority government , Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , openly taunted Mrs May that the EU side was ready to `` open negotiations tomorrow morning at half past nine '' . Having already delayed talks once by calling the surprise election in April , Mrs May 's failure to go on to win the promised mandate was derided as a spectacular `` own goal '' that risked a damaging result for both sides . `` Yet another own goal , '' said Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's leading Brexit co-ordinator , reflecting EU exasperation with Britain over the handling of the negotiation . `` After Cameron now May , [ this result ] will make already complex negotiations even more complicated . '' Before the election , Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , had said that talks should begin on June 19 - a date Mrs May had appeared to endorse on the campaign trail - but which EU sources conceded privately now looks increasingly unrealistic . Mr Barnier said that negotiations `` should start when UK is ready '' , urging both sides to work for a deal but also noting that both the `` timetable and EU positions are clear '' - a reminder that the two-year timeframe set for talks under Article 50 is now rapidly ebbing away . Donald Tusk , the European Council president , was more explicit in his warnings to Mrs May , writing formally to the Prime Minister to congratulate her on her re-appointment while noting that there was `` no time to lose '' over talks . Our shared responsibility and urgent task now is to conduct the negotiations on the UK 's withdrawal from the European Union in the best possible spirit , securing the least disruptive outcome , '' he wrote . Somewhat more menacingly , he added on social media : `` We do n't know when Brexit talks start . We know when they must end . Do your best to avoid a 'no deal ' as result of 'no negotiations ' . '' Officially , the EU said it was simply putting the ball in the UK 's court to begin talks , but the apparent rejection of Mrs May 's vision for a so-called `` hard Brexit '' was also seen in some quarters as a rejection of a hardline position by the British electorate . Regional analysts said the lack of conciliation by EU leaders reflected mounting frustration with Britain in Brussels and the belief that the inconclusive election result hands the EU even more leverage in the coming negotiation . `` This result will play to and reinforce the EU 's negotiating hand , '' said Mujtaba Rahman , head of European analysis at Eurasia Group . `` May 's significantly weakened mandate , and the ticking Article 50 clock , will give the EU more leverage to dictate terms to the UK . '' The warnings also reflected concerns in Brussels and EU capitals that political disarray in London now risks dragging out the talks beyond the March 2019 deadline set for Brexit . One senior EU aide told The Daily Telegraph that it was `` ludicrous '' for Mrs May even to try to form a government , saying that she `` no longer had any credibility '' in Brussels . That view was echoed across Europe where Mrs May suffered a personal mauling in the continental press , with Germany 's Der Spiegel magazine nicknaming her the `` wobbly woman '' while Italy 's Corriere della Sera opined that Mrs May is `` no Margaret Thatcher '' . `` May-Day '' was the headline in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , noting that British voters were `` insecure , angry and upset '' , while Die Welt commented that `` Brexit means Brexit - so much for that '' . `` Theresa May 's authority in her own party is broken , '' added Elmar Brok , the Brexit representative for Angela Merkel 's faction in the European parliament . `` She has become a weak prime minister and negotiator . '' Britain was hoping to complete initial talks by October this year , with a view to completing negotiations over trade and the future EU-UK relationship by October 2018 . Mr Barnier set the October 2018 target in order to leave time for the deal to be ratified by the European Parliament in order to complete an orderly UK exit in March 2019 . The Article 50 process can be extended by unanimous agreement but lawyers are divided over whether Article 50 can actually be withdrawn . The UK Supreme Court has said it is irrevocable , but Mr Tusk has said he believes it is possible to pull out . That was a possibility discounted by both Tories and Labour but still openly mooted in some quarters yesterday . `` Who knows , perhaps British society will decide it 's worth remaining after all in a Europe of nation states , '' said Mateusz Morawiecki , the Polish finance minister . Elsewhere in Europe the sudden upending of the expected talks schedule was seen as a `` bad sign '' for Europe , with Jaroslaw Gowin , a deputy prime minister in Poland 's conservative government , warning it `` deepened the uncertainties '' over the future of the bloc . In Hungary , the news website Index described the result as a `` slap in the face for May '' . US President Donald Trump and French President Emmanuel Macron called British Prime Minister Theresa May on Friday to congratulate her . `` French President Emmanuel Macron ... said he was pleased that she would continue to be a close partner , '' a spokesman for Mrs May 's office said in a statement . `` They agreed that the strong friendship between our two countries was important and would endure . '' The spokesman said May and Trump had also agreed to continue the close cooperation between the two countries . 'Her authority in her own party is broken . She has become a weak prime minister and negotiator '
Scotland EU staff put on guard against Brexit lobbyists BODY : EUROPEAN Union bureaucrats have been given a `` do and do n't '' checklist to protect them from lobbyists looking to influence the upcoming Brexit negotiations . Brussels civil servants are told not to accept hospitality `` without careful consideration '' or share confidential information , and `` where necessary '' to report any gifts . Meetings outside office hours are banned and officials warned that `` lobbying can also take place during casual encounters and in social settings '' . Lobbying is carried out in Brussels by organisations such as consultancies , law firms , NGOs , trade associations and campaigners , the list reads . The document was drawn up by the European Ombudsman , which investigates maladministration in EU institutions , such as the European Commission . The 20-point list is `` relevant to the imminent Brexit negotiations when large numbers of interest representatives will understandably seek to engage with EU officials '' , the watchdog said . Brussels attracts large numbers of lobbyists , who look to influence EU legislation on behalf of their clients and employers through meetings with the officials working on draft laws . Britain and the EU have two years to conclude the Brexit talks . Uncertainty around the impact of Brexit has created much work for lobbyists in sectors as diverse as agriculture , technology and financial services . `` It is not always obvious to public officials as to what constitutes acceptable lobbying , '' said Emily O'Reilly , who leads the watchdog . `` This checklist will help ordinary civil servants to navigate these occasionally tricky waters . ''
Mandelson calls for Lords to frustrate Brexit bill in Blairite plot ; Ex-Labour minister urges peers to 'not throw the towel in ' as debate begins over triggering Article 50
ALLIES of Tony Blair will today attempt to frustrate Brexit in the House of Lords by urging peers to rally against the Government . The former Labour prime minister , last week urged people to `` rise up '' against Brexit and support a new movement to keep Britain in the European Union . Lord Mandelson , one of Mr Blair 's closest allies , yesterday urged peers to defy the Government and not `` throw in the towel early '' . The Labour peer said he believes that the Lords can force ministers into giving Parliament a `` meaningful '' vote and guaranteeing the rights of EU citizens living in the UK . Lord Hain , who served as a cabinet minister under Mr Blair , will push for a vote on keeping Britain in the single market and call for the open border between Northern Ireland and the Republic to stay in place . He claimed that despite being an unelected peer , he has a right to force major changes to the Brexit Bill . He said : `` Critics say 'what right have I , an unelected peer , to oppose this Bill or even seek to radically amend it ? ' But I was appointed by my party . And in the referendum , two thirds of Labour electors voted to remain . `` That 's what I am reflecting , that 's my mandate . '' The House of Lords will this week begin debating the Government 's legislation to trigger Brexit amid reports that six peers are ready to defect from the Labour Party and sit as cross-benchers . Around a dozen Tory peers are expected to form an alliance with Labour and Liberal Democrat members of the Lords in seeking to defy the Government over Brexit . They believe that with the support of cross-bench peers they have the numbers to send the Bill back to the Commons with amendments . PA Lord Mandelson yesterday told BBC One 's Andrew Marr Show he believes peers will be successful in defeating the Government on migrant rights in a parliamentary vote on Brexit . He said yesterday : `` There is a strong body of opinion across the parties and independent peers that both these issues are very serious . If it [ the final Brexit deal ] is not good for Britain , send the Government back to the negotiating table . `` [ We are ] trying to instill a bit of courage in the Tory MPs - most of whom seem to have capitulated to the ideologues - put pressure on Labour , the Lib Dems and the Greens to say you 've got to speak up for us when the time comes . '' He urged people to sign up to Open Britain , a pro-EU organisation , and donate money . His appeal comes after The Sunday Telegraph disclosed how Lord Mandelson , a former European trade commissioner , is estimated to receive an EU pension worth around £35,000 a year . Liz Truss , the Justice Secretary , responded to Lord Mandelson 's comments by describing him as `` yesterday 's man '' and said that the Government expects the Lords to respect the result of the referendum . She said : `` Peter Mandelson and others in the Labour Party are trying to frustrate the will of the British people , trying to re-fight a battle he conclusively lost last year . I just listened to Peter Mandelson , it was like the referendum never happened . He needs to move on and the Labour Party need to move on . He 's a blast from the past . `` I fully expect the House of Lords will recognise the will of the people and the will of the Commons which was overwhelming . '' Lord Mandelson also claimed that immigration will not fall after Britain leaves the European Union . He said : `` We 're going to have less trade , we 're going to be paying through the nose for it and , broadly speaking , we 're going to have the same number of immigrants coming to the country as well . Is that a reasonable deal ? Do n't you think the public will have something to say about that outcome when the negotiation ends ? '' Lord Lawson , the former Tory chancellor , will be one of nearly 200 peers to speak during the debates today and tomorrow . He said : `` The Bill went through the Commons on a huge majority without any amendments . It would be wholly wrong and unconstitutional for the Lords to interfere with that in any way . '' Editorial Comment : Page 15 200 The number of peers expected to speak during two days of debate over the Brexit Bill in the House of Lords
History made as MPs vote to trigger Brexit
BORIS JOHNSON last night said that `` history has been made '' after MPs voted overwhelmingly in favour of triggering Brexit negotiations and beginning the process of leaving the EU . The Foreign Secretary called it a `` momentous '' night as MPs voted four to one in favour of triggering Article 50 . Kenneth Clarke , a former chancellor , was the only Tory MP to oppose it . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , will today publish a White Paper formally setting out the Government 's plans for Brexit in response to the concerns of pro-European Tory MPs . However , there were further signs of division among the Conservatives as George Osborne , the former chancellor , accused Mrs May of putting Brexit ahead of the economy and warned he will join the `` fight '' over Britain 's future outside the EU . Yesterday 's vote means the Government 's Brexit legislation has cleared its first hurdle and Mrs May is on course to trigger the process by her March deadline . There had been 14 and a half hours of debate and bitter clashes in Parliament over two days as nearly 100 MPs expressed their views about Brexit . MPs finally voted in favour of the European Theresa May faces a packed Commons for PMQs before the Brexit debate resumed Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill by 498 votes to 114 , with 47 Labour MPs , 50 SNP MPs and seven Liberal Democrats voting against . It leaves Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , facing his third reshuffle in 18 months after 12 serving frontbenchers voted against it . Four members of his front bench team have already quit . Mr Johnson said : `` I 've just voted three times in the House of Commons for an absolutely momentous thing - to give our Prime Minister the right to trigger Article 50 and Britain to begin the path out of the EU . Do n't forget we may be leaving the EU treaties but we are not leaving Europe . `` We are going to be making an amazingly positive contribution to our continent as we always have done and always will . But we are now able to forge a new identity with new free trade deals as global Britain . '' However , Mr Osborne said that Mrs May has chosen `` not to make the economy the priority in this negotiation '' . He said that there will be `` lively debates '' to come on migration , state aid and agricultural policy . `` I will be in those fights for years to come , '' he said . While he had argued `` passionately '' for Britain to stay in the European Union , Mr Osborne said , he had `` lost the case '' and `` sacrificed '' his position in Government . Ahead of the debate , Mrs May accused those planing to vote against Article 50 of abusing the trust of the people . During the debate Neil Coyle , a Labour MP who wants Britain to stay in the EU , was censured for calling the Government `` b -- -- -- - '' . He also called Mr Corbyn 's decision to impose a threeline whip on the vote a `` disgrace '' . Ed Miliband , the former Labour leader , said he would not oppose Article 50 even though he had not wanted the referendum . `` We do not want to give the sense that people who voted for Brexit because they felt they had been ignored are being ignored once again , '' he said . Tim Farron , the Liberal Democrat leader , faced jeers of `` where were you '' from MPs after failing to turn up to the debate on Tuesday . Alex Salmond , the former SNP leader , said : `` The choice the House will get is a bad deal or no deal . '' The White Paper - conceded by Mrs May last month - will be based on the 12-point plan contained in her Brexit speech at Lancaster House last month . Editorial Comment : Page 17
Carney : Brexit not biggest threat to economy ; Bank of England says credit growth risk should be warning light , with rise in consumer spending
BREXIT no longer poses the biggest risk to domestic financial stability , according to the Governor of the Bank of England , who signalled that the economy 's resilience would prompt the Bank to upgrade its UK growth forecasts within weeks . In a significant about-turn on previous warnings about the impact of Brexit , Mark Carney told MPs on the Treasury Select Committee that the risks associated with June 's vote to leave the European Union had receded , while the market turmoil predicted by some had not materialised . Asked by committee chairman Andrew Tyrie if the vote to leave the EU still posed the biggest domestic threat to the UK , Mr Carney said : `` Strictly speaking , the view of the committee is 'no ' . In the run-up to the referendum , we felt it was the largest risk because there were a series of positions and possibilities in the financial sector - things that could have happened that would have had financial stability consequences . '' Mr Carney said action by the Bank to free up £150bn in lending and slash interest rates had helped to mitigate the impact of the vote . `` Having got through that night [ of the Brexit vote ] and the day after , the scale of the immediate risks around Brexit have gone down for the UK , '' he said . Mr Carney described the strength of the UK economy in the months following the Brexit vote as `` absolutely welcome '' . Bank policymakers almost doubled their economic growth forecast for 2017 last November compared with August , and Mr Carney said recent economic data `` would be consistent with some further upgrade of that forecast '' in February . Policymakers on the Bank 's Financial Policy Committee ( FPC ) also warned that the `` extremely rapid '' growth in UK credit card and loan debts had become `` very difficult to ignore '' . Alex Brazier , the Bank 's executive director for financial stability , said credit growth risks were rising amid a `` loosening of credit conditions '' . He said credit growth had been `` a significant driver of consumer spending '' over the past year , contributing £20bn of the £30bn in extra spending flows . Consumer credit rose 10.8pc in November compared with a year ago , representing the fastest rise since 2005 . Martin Taylor , an external member of the FPC , described the pace of credit growth as a `` flashing light '' on the FPC 's dashboard of risks . The former Barclays chief said growth at this pace risked becoming a `` big concern in the coming quarter '' if real income growth started to slow amid higher inflation . `` The big thing that 's happened in the British economy since Brexit is that people have got on with their lives . Thank goodness . Increasingly they 've got on with their lives thanks to consumer credit , which is another issue , '' Mr Taylor said . Mr Carney also told the Treasury Select Committee that failure to secure a transition deal with Brussels after the UK 's exit terms from the EU are agreed posed a bigger financial stability risk to the 27-member bloc than to the UK . `` I 'm not saying there are not financial stability risks to the UK - and there are economic risks to the UK - but there are greater financial stability risks on the Continent in the short term for the transition than there are for the UK , '' he said . Mr Carney said UK growth remained on course to slow in the coming year .
Scotland SNP urged to stop linking hate crime to Brexit after fall in number of racial offences BODY : A TORY MSP has accused the Scottish Government of having a `` dangerous obsession '' with linking hate crime to Brexit despite a fall in reported race attacks since the EU referendum . Annie Wells also accused Nicola Sturgeon of `` tokenism '' in her work with gay anti-bullying groups and called for more work to be done in tackling the types of hate crime which are `` on the increase and are vastly under-reported '' . She said Police Scotland 's 2015-16 statistics show race hate crime has fallen by 3 per cent since last year , while sexual orientation crime is up 20 per cent and disability hate crime has increased 14 per cent , despite the latter two being under-reported . In a debate at Holyrood , Ms Wells said : `` Firstly I want to ask why it is that the SNP became so obsessed with linking hate crime to Brexit when this summer Police Scotland reported that in Scotland it had seen no increase in the number of hate crime reported . In fact hate crimes actually fell in the aftermath of the EU referendum . `` It is dangerous to continually link the Brexit vote with hate crime . '' She highlighted research by the Campaign for Inclusive Education showing that the scale of homophobic bullying . She added : `` This is why I call on the SNP Government to stop the Brexit bashing , the end goal of which we all know , and address the hate crimes it so conveniently turned a blind eye to . '' Angela Constance , the Scottish equality minister , said the Scottish Government has invested and strengthened the law in a bid to tackle hate crime . She said it will introduce a public education campaign next year , raising awareness of the impact of hate crime and the support available .
Scotland The judges versus the people ; May pledges to uphold Brexit vote as High Court rules Article 50 must pass through Parliament ; Article 50 battle will lead to early election , say MPs
THREE High Court judges were yesterday accused of frustrating the will of more than 17 million British people after they ruled that Brexit can not be triggered without a parliamentary vote . Europhile MPs immediately put into action a plot to use the ruling either to overturn the Brexit vote or force Theresa May to water down dramatically her plans for Britain 's exit from the European Union . The Prime Minister pledged last night to face down any attempt to thwart Brexit , suggesting that she intended to dare Remain-supporting MPs to vote against her in Parliament , in a move which would provoke a constitutional crisis . Senior backbenchers and peers suggested that she could be forced to call an early general election if she wants to proceed with her plans . The country voted Leave in the June referendum with 17.4 million people backing Brexit , the biggest mandate in British political history . However , Parliament has a significant majority of Remain-supporters , with about 480 of 650 MPs believed to have backed the campaign to keep Britain in the EU . The Government immediately said that it would appeal to the Supreme Court after the judges declared that Mrs May does not have the power to bypass MPs by relying on royal prerogative to trigger Article 50 and begin the two-year period of separation negotiations with Brussels . However , a member of Mrs May 's Government said last night that ministers were resigned to losing the case . They are now preparing an Act of Parliament , meaning that both the Commons and the Lords will be able to debate , amend and vote on Article 50 before it is triggered , potentially delaying the process for months . Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , said that the ruling was an example of the `` uncertainty '' that could affect the economy during Brexit . Mrs May will today speak to European leaders including Jean-Claude Juncker and tell them the court ruling has not disrupted her `` resolve '' to take Britain out of the EU or `` altered her timetable '' . Government sources have told this newspaper that the need for an Act of Parliament will delay Brexit by as much as a year , meaning Britain will not now leave the bloc in 2019 . There was growing anger last night over the court 's involvement in the case , with Iain Duncan Smith , a former Cabinet minister , accusing the judges - Lord Thomas , the Lord Chief Justice , Sir Terence Etherton , the Master of the Rolls , and Lord Justice Sales - of risking a `` constitutional crisis '' by `` pitting Parliament against the will of the people '' . Lord Justice Sales is a close friend of Tony Blair , the former prime minister who campaigned for Remain and wants a second vote on Britain 's EU membership , and Lord Thomas cofounded a Europhile legal group . Eurosceptics also pointed out that the leaflet sent to every household before the referendum said that the Government - and not Parliament - would implement the result of the vote and that the decision was `` yours '' . Mr Duncan Smith said : `` You now have the High Court telling Government and Parliament how to go about their business . This is unprecedented . '' Dominic Raab , a former justice minister , said : `` On June 23 the British people gave a clear mandate for the UK Government to leave the EU and take back control of our borders , laws , money and trade . It is disappointing that today the court has chosen to ignore their decision . This case is a plain attempt to block Brexit by people who are out of touch with the country and refuse to accept the result . '' Lord Tebbit , a Cabinet minister in Margaret Thatcher 's government , said : `` Judges are out of their boxes these days and need to be put back in . It was clearly not an advisory referendum - it was Parliament asking people to make a decision . '' Douglas Carswell , Ukip 's only MP , hit out at the `` shocking judicial activism '' , adding : `` These judges are politicians without accountability . '' John Baron , a Tory MP who supported Leave , said the decision `` must not be allowed to frustrate the will of the British people '' and promised to `` man the barricades if the result is not respected '' . Remain-backing MPs including George Osborne , the former Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 Chancellor , and Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , said that the ruling would allow them to force Mrs May to reveal in the Commons detailed plans for Brexit . Mrs May has repeatedly refused to `` show her cards '' before Britain has started formal negotiations with the EU . If Europhile MPs attempt to amend the Act of Parliament on Article 50 to such a degree that it is seen as watering down Brexit , Mrs May may have to trigger an early general election in order to increase her majority in the Commons . One minister said last night that Mrs May and her closest advisers were `` completely against '' calling an early general election . However , backbenchers including Mr Raab and Mr Duncan Smith said she could be forced to call a national vote if MPs are seen to be attempting to block Brexit . Mr Raab said : `` The elephant in the room here is if we get to the stage where [ MPs ] are not willing to allow this negotiation to even begin , I think there must be an increased chance that we will need to go to the country again . '' The case was brought to the High Court by Gina Miller , a wealthy philanthropist . Lord Thomas said triggering Article 50 without a Commons vote would be contrary to `` the fundamental constitutional principles of the sovereignty of Parliament '' . 'It is a bad day for the constitution ... The courts will be perceived to be helping to frustrate Brexit ' Comment : Page 17
Scotland Separation will be worse than Brexit for financial industry ; Financial services 'depend more on the UK than EU '
SCOTTISH independence poses a greater threat than Brexit to the country 's £8 billion-a-year financial services industry because of its reliance on English customers , a report by two of the sector 's most eminent figures warns . Jeremy Peat , the former group chief economist at Royal Bank of Scotland , and Owen Kelly , former head of the industry body Scottish Financial Enterprise , said the uncertainties caused by separation `` look even greater '' than those triggered by the EU vote . Their assessment said `` nearly every provider of financial services in Scotland '' serves the UK rather than the EU market and in particular those providing banking , insurance and pension products . Although it acknowledged that asset and fund managers could lose out if the UK does not retain EU `` passporting '' rights , the report noted that many already have operations on the Continent through which they could continue to access European markets . The Scottish Government yesterday continued to insist that Brexit posed the largest economic threat but its stance was further undermined by another report warning that the threat of a second independence referendum was damaging business demand for office , shop and factory space . The Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 assessment , sent to clients from the consultancy Ryder , said Scotland 's commercial property market was lagging behind the rest of the UK as uncertainty caused by Brexit was being `` compounded '' by Nicola Sturgeon 's threat to stage a rerun of the 2014 vote . Last week a major report by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors found Scotland experienced the largest drop in demand for commercial premises in the UK following the Brexit vote , with surveyors blaming the SNP 's independence threat . However , the warning about the financial services industry 's prospects is potentially more damaging to Ms Sturgeon 's case given its importance to the economy and the focus it is likely to receive during the Brexit negotiations . It contributes about £8 billion a year to the Scottish economy and employs about 90,000 directly and a further 90,000 indirectly - together around a 12th of the country 's total workforce . Murdo Fraser , the Scottish Conservative shadow finance secretary , said : `` More and more we are starting to hear industry experts express concerns about the damage that a second independence referendum would cause . `` The SNP 's obsession with independence is the biggest threat facing our economy , but they are determined to push ahead with it regardless of the harm it would cause . '' The report , published by the University of Strathclyde 's International Public Policy Institute , admitted it was difficult to see new opportunities arising for the financial services sector from Brexit but said the threat posed to it by the EU vote was not `` existential '' . Mr Peat and Mr Kelly , who is now a lecturer at Edinburgh Napier University Business School , backed the First Minister 's lobbying of the Government to retain the UK 's place in the EU single market and protect passporting rights . But they said : `` This line of argument does not take us to a case for Scottish independence in the EU . '' They said there is only `` limited '' activity in Scotland selling insurance to the Continent and `` there is not much of a single EU market in pensions '' . Meanwhile , RBS `` has most of its customers in the UK '' . A Scottish Government spokesman said : `` It is Brexit which is far and away the biggest threat to Scotland 's economy , jobs and long-term prosperity ... That is why we are doing everything we can to protect Scotland 's interests , and that must include the option of independence if it becomes clear it is the best or only way of doing so . ''
The City is going to lose business from Brexit , say fund managers
THE City of London is going to lose business from Brexit , say fund managers . The vast majority of investment industry executives fear Brexit will harm the City of London , and most believe it will damage the rest of the country too - potentially leading to the break-up of the United Kingdom . A total of 82pc of fund managers believe London will be a loser from Brexit , according to a survey by the Chartered Financial Analyst ( CFA ) Institute . By contrast 69pc believe Frankfurt will win more business as a result , and 62pc believe Dublin will also benefit . The study asked more than 2,000 investment workers about their expectations following the referendum on EU membership on June 23 . The study looked at CFA Institute members across the globe , and the gloom about London 's prospects is less pronounced in more far flung countries . While 60pc of EU respondents expect non-UK finance firms to reduce their presence in London , the same is true of only 44pc of non-EU investment professionals who responded to the survey . The survey 's findings `` make challenging reading for the financial services sector in the UK and for the policymakers that will work on the Brexit negotiations , '' said Will Goodhart , chief executive of CFA UK , adding that sentiment among investment workers is `` disturbing '' . `` As we have seen in recent times , things can change rapidly , but as it stands a great deal of work will need to be done to maintain the City 's competitiveness as a global financial centre and to secure the broader economic benefits that flow from that . '' A majority also fears for the future of Britain itself : 59pc see UK fragmentation , such as Scottish independence , as `` more likely than not '' . Just under half believe Britain 's departure from the EU could prompt more countries to follow suit and also break with Brussels . The overall uncertainty following the vote will probably last for less than a year - 33pc of investment professionals believe the uncertainty will die down in under six months , and another 25pc believe it will take between six and 12 months . A substantial minority of 26pc , however , believe it could rumble on for up to two years . `` While changes in the relative attractiveness of one financial centre over another will see some lose ground and others gain , those changes can be disruptive for clients and for investment management businesses , '' said the CFA 's global president and chief executive , Paul Smith .
Former MI5 chief was not worried by Brexit , claims MP
THE former head of MI5 has said that leaving the European Union will make `` no difference '' to Britain 's national security , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP claims . Julian Lewis , head of the Commons defence committee , said Lord Evans had told him privately that a Brexit would not have a significant impact . Mr Lewis said he was `` surprised and rather disappointed '' yesterday after Lord Evans wrote a joint article saying a Brexit would hamper `` our ability to protect ourselves from terrorists '' . He suggested that Downing Street may have `` manipulated '' Lord Evans and Sir John Sawers , the former head of MI6 , into writing the article . In a personal capacity , he said : `` I had a conversation very recently with one of the two and I was quite impressed by the fact that although he told me he was in favour of remaining in the EU , it would make no difference to our security . `` I am surprised and rather disappointed to see this article has appeared . I find it dif-ficult to believe he has changed his mind in such a short period of time . I can only wonder if there 's some manipulation going on here . '' Lord Evans and Sir John denied that their intervention had been coordinated by Downing Street . `` We 're not doing it at anybody 's behest , '' they wrote in The Sunday Times . `` We are completely politically neutral . '' Lord Evans and Sir John said in the article : `` The terms on which we exchange data with other European countries are set by agreement within the EU . As an EU member , we shape the debate , we push for what we think is the right balance between security and privacy and we benefit from the data that flows as a result . '' Mr Cameron said their article held an `` important message '' . Their claims were disputed by Lord Howard , the former Conservative leader , who said they were `` conjecture '' . Lord Howard , who is arguing for Britain to leave the EU , said : `` There is no reason to suppose we wo n't make satisfactory arrangements for data sharing with the EU when we leave because we have more to offer than the rest of the EU . '' Lessons from the Brussels attacks will form part of the first counter-terrorism exercise staged since the atrocity in March . Police in Manchester will swoop on a shopping centre today as part of a three-day mock terrorist attack in the North West .
Scotland Sturgeon puts independence on 2018 agenda ; First Minister to break pledge within months , claim Tories
NICOLA STURGEON was yesterday accused of breaking a promise to put her independence plans `` on pause '' after she warned - only days into 2018 - that Tory Brexit proposals meant breaking up Britain `` must remain an option '' . Attacking what she called the Conservative `` horror show '' on leaving the EU , the First Minister also claimed there was a `` better than evens chance '' that a hard Brexit could be stopped . She predicted a `` new spirit of Scottish assertiveness '' this year , adding : `` We will resist as fiercely as possible the Tory plans for an extreme Brexit , outside the single market and customs union . `` The threat to Scotland 's interests means independence must remain an option . Being torn out of the world 's biggest single market against our democratic will - a market eight times bigger than the UK 's - threatens to do untold damage . '' The Scottish Conservatives said her `` naive and arrogant '' approach to Brexit had already been punished by the electorate and claimed her view that two democratic votes - the 2014 independence referendum and 2016 Brexit vote - could be overturned would `` damage her credibility further '' . Ms Sturgeon was forced to `` reset '' her timetable for a new independence referendum after a disastrous general election last year that saw the SNP lose 21 seats , including that of Alex Salmond , after pushing for a fresh poll . However , Ms Sturgeon refused to take the threat off the table , saying instead that she would `` revisit '' the timing of a new vote this autumn . Writing in the Sunday Mail , she said 2018 could be one of the most significant in Scotland 's recent history and a year in which it emerged as `` an emboldened , more confident and assertive nation '' . She added : `` That is perhaps not the most obvious conclusions to be drawn from the ongoing horror show of the Tories ' inept and chaotic Brexit plans , which threaten to do deep and lasting damage to our economy and society . `` But it is because of that overarching threat that I believe a new spirit of Scottish assertiveness is needed and will come to the fore . '' She was speaking ahead of talks today between the SNP , Lib Dems , Plaid Cymru and the Green Party on a common approach to keeping Britain in the single market . John Lamont , Tory MP for Berwickshire , Roxburgh and Selkirk , said : `` After last year 's general election , Nicola Sturgeon promised to put her plans for independence on pause and focus on her day job . It 's clear from her words that she intends to break that promise within months , and once again put independence top of her agenda . `` As one of her own MPs said last week , most Scots do n't give two hoots about independence . It 's time Nicola Sturgeon listened for once . ''
There are other Tory MPs disappointed not to be called Brexit mutineers ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Your front page article ( `` The Brexit mutineers '' , November 15 ) is misleading . We have accepted the result of the EU referendum and accordingly accept that our country is leaving the European Union . We do not seek to delay or thwart Britain 's exit from the EU , however much we may regret it . Many of us are lawyers ; we are all parliamentarians . We seek to make an important Bill - the EU Withdrawal Bill - considerably better by laying amendments , in accordance with our duties as MPs . The Government laid an amendment late last week that seeks to put the date of Brexit on the face of the Bill . What looks at first blush like an uncontroversial proposal could accidentally harm our country 's interest . Putting a date in law is too rigid . As negotiations reach their close , the Government may need a small amount of additional time to conclude , for example , the best transitional deal . We are pleased Conservative colleagues from across the Brexit divide accept our intentions are genuine and note that some are disappointed you did n't include them in our number . Ken Clarke MP Dominic Grieve MP Nicky Morgan MP Tom Tugendhat MP Dr Sarah Wollaston MP Bob Neill MP Sir Oliver Heald MP Anna Soubry MP Stephen Hammond MP Jonathan Djanogly MP Vicky Ford MP Antoinette Sandbach MP Jeremy Lefroy MP Heidi Allen MP Paul Masterton MP sir - You say ( leading article , November 15 ) that the Prime Minister will not tolerate wreckers on her own side using parliamentary process to reverse our departure from the EU . Brave , fighting talk , but what exactly can she do ? If she withdraws the whip from them , she loses her thin majority . Only their own electorates can remove them , at a time when Brexit might be decided one way or the other . They are in a stronger position than she is , and they know it . Myra Spalton Macclesfield , Cheshire sir - The Prime Minister must hold her nerve . Like the EU , the Brexit mutineers have much to lose . If they force a constitutional crisis , many of them can expect to lose their seats in the ensuing election , when their sophistry will not be forgiven by the voters . Bryan Clark Ludlow , Shropshire sir - If the Tory mutineers neither support their Government nor represent the wishes of the majority of their constituents , what function are they fulfilling as Members of Parliament ? Philippa Hayden Maidstone , Kent
Scotland Do n't let EU dictate Brexit , warns US ; Trump 's trade chief offers UK hope of quick deal if it avoids compromise with Brussels ; US trade deal could follow Brexit 'quickly '
BRITAIN must avoid too much compromise with the EU over the Brexit divorce settlement if it wants a speedy free trade deal with the US , one of President Donald Trump 's most senior advisers has said . Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , said a trade deal with Britain could be signed within months of Brexit , brushing aside claims that it could take 10 years for an agreement to be reached . But Mr Ross said there would be problems if the UK retained the current EU-wide bans on chlorinated chicken and genetically-modified food . Speaking at the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) conference , Mr Ross said his trip allowed him to `` address with the UK some concerns we have that they may be tempted to include [ provisions ] in their agreement with the European Commission that could be problems for a subsequent Free Trade Agreement with the US '' . While he struck a friendly tone , he also issued a veiled warning that talks with Washington could go off the rails if Theresa May , the Prime Minister , aligned too closely with Brussels in designing the post-Brexit settlement . It is a reminder that Britain risks having to pick sides between two trade superpowers with starkly different demands . Mr Ross accused Brussels of imposing higher tariffs than the US across the `` vast majority '' of traded goods - including a 10 per cent charge on cars , compared with America 's 2.5 per cent - and trying to enforce its regulatory codes on third countries rather than allowing an open global system . `` While the EU talks a lot of freetrade rhetoric , it is really quite protectionist , '' he said . He pledged to avoid `` tit-for-tat '' bargaining when it comes to negotiating a trade deal with Britain , but left no doubt that there will be trouble if the UK signs up to core elements of EU ideology deemed most aggravating in Washington , not least the EU curbs on chlorinated chickens and - far more important - genetically modified foods . He said : `` The EU rules are not science-based . This could potentially create problems with us . What happens will be very much conditioned by the terms of the departure agreement between the UK and the EU . '' He told The Daily Telegraph : `` Any trade deal is important but especially one with a country with whom we have such intense relations as we do with the UK , from a geopolitical , military , and a commercial point of view . Our two economies have $ 1.2trillion invested in each other . That is a very big number . '' He said of the timing of a trade deal : `` Assuming that there are no big landmines in the UK 's exit agreement from the EU , it should n't take terribly long . '' Referring to the North American Free Trade Agreement ( Nafta ) , which regulates trade between the US , Canada and Mexico , he added : `` We 're trying to redo Nafta in less than a year Continued on Page 2 Business : Page 5 Continued from Page 1 and that is a much more complicated situation than we would have with the UK . '' Mr Ross 's comments are a boost to Theresa May at a time when Brexit talks remain deadlocked , increasing the possibility of leaving the EU without a trade deal . They come just days before the latest round of negotiations between the UK and the EU , which will take place on Thursday and Friday . A free trade deal with the US will be vital to the UK 's post-Brexit strategy for `` global Britain '' and to convincing Europhile voters that Britain can forge a brighter future outside the EU . The US and the UK can not legally conduct full trade talks until the day after Brexit , but the two sides are already in `` scoping discussions '' to avoid a cliffedge in March 2019 . They are pushing for a smooth switch on `` Open Skies '' for air transport , on transfers of nuclear material , and on a host of technical issues . `` Hopefully it can be done pretty quickly , '' he said . They are also tip-toeing towards a future framework , and flagging in advance where landmines may lie . `` We are addressing to the UK some of the concerns we have on things they may be tempted to include in their deal with the EU , that could complicate a free trade agreement with the US , '' he said . Mr Ross said it was vital that `` passporting '' rights for banks and finance houses operating in Europe are preserved . The system allows any firm registered in the European Economic Area to do business in any other EEA country without needing additional authorisation from individual states . `` It 's been a great convenience for many American companies to base themselves here in London , '' said Mr Ross . `` To the degree that it turns out there is a change and to the degree that it 's a complication , that could become a real barrier in services . ''
Starmer in talks to advise Gina Miller law firm ; MPs warn of conflict of interest for shadow Brexit secretary who sits on the privy council
LABOUR 'S shadow Brexit secretary is in talks to become an adviser for the law firm that brought the successful Article 50 case against Theresa May , it has emerged . But Sir Keir Starmer has been warned not to take the lucrative job with Mishcon de Reya , which launched the case against the Government on behalf of Gina Miller , the Remain campaigner . He worked for the firm before Jeremy Corbyn appointed him shadow Brexit secretary last year , earning £4,500 for just six hours work . Conservative MPs and John Mann , a senior Labour politician , said Sir Keir should turn down the role because as a member of the privy council and a shadow cabinet minister there could be a conflict of interest . In a public letter James Cleverly said Sir Keir 's access to documents and his role drafting and amending legislation would be in direct conflict with the firm 's work and demanded an urgent clarification of his intentions . Sir Keir will be free to view controversial and private documents involved with the Brexit negotiations after the Government admitted him to the privy council this year . He has been offered the chance to work as an adviser in Mischon 's inhouse think tank . There are concerns that his access to such information is inconsistent with working as an adviser for the law firm which has been prominent in taking action against the Government in regards to Brexit . A spokesman for the firm said : `` We are in discussions with Keir Starmer about reappointing him as an adviser to the Mishcon Academy . `` His wide experience and previous association with the firm would enable him to play a key and unique role in shaping the work of the Academy , which leads new thinking and develops the potential of everyone in the firm . '' But Labour MP Mr Mann said : `` One job per MP is enough for anybody . He should n't go for it if he is keeping his current position . I do n't see how he would have the time to do both . `` It could become a conflict of interest . You ca n't be in the shadow cabinet and have a second job - that 's totally untenable for anybody at any time , no matter who they are . '' Mr Corbyn has previously suggested that MPs should not have a second job while serving in the House of Commons . Labour sources said any appointment would be scrutinised closely to ensure it is appropriate . Sir Keir was hired by the firm as a consultant to the Mishcon Academy in June 2016 , but stood down when he was appointed to the shadow cabinet in October the same year . The former Director of Public Prosecutions was paid £18,000 for 24 hours work by the firm for his legal advice last year . He earned £4,500 for working six hours work a month . Mischon de Reya successfully challenged the Prime Minister 's claim that she could trigger Article 50 without a vote from MPs and peers . Supreme Court justices ruled , by a majority of eight to three , that she could not lawfully bypass Parliament by using the royal prerogative to trigger Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty and start the two-year process of negotiating the UK 's divorce from its EU partners . Sir Keir was contacted for comment . Editorial Comment : Page 15
Small businesses fear that May has 'lost sight of their interests ' ; Business tracker
BRITAIN 'S small businesses are increasingly disillusioned with the Government , fearing that Theresa May 's administration has lost sight of their interests . The appearance of incompetence or indifference is feeding into companies ' perception of the Government 's performance elsewhere , too - a growing proportion are worried about Brexit . Firms which were not worried about leaving the EU at the time of the Article 50 announcement are now increasingly concerned . The Daily Telegraph Business Tracker has found that small businesses are voicing their concern increasingly vocally , and sentiment among the firms is deteriorating . The tracker , which is compiled by Impact Social , follows companies and businesspeople online to monitor their social media postings , and shows large volumes of complaints about the economic outlook . When the tracker first launched five months ago , firms had a positive view of the future . In February 42pc of businesses appeared to feel positive while just 7pc were downbeat , leaving a net balance of 35pc . By March - around the time of the bungled Budget with its national insurance U-turn for the self-employed - the overall view was more balanced , with almost equal proportions of businesses posting negative and positive statements online . Since then the picture has deteriorated . Now , 9pc are upbeat while 35pc are negative , with the overall senti-ment indicator at minus 26pc . `` It was n't just Brexit which was driving negativity , '' said Phil Snape at Impact Social . `` It was compounded by a bad Spring budget , the disastrous manifesto and then a strong negative reaction from business to the snap election . The negative sentiment has leaked through into perceptions of the preparations for Brexit negotiations . In February , just 16pc of negative online chatter related to Brexit . Bigger perceived problems included business rates , rising inflation and red tape . Now the proportion fearing the Brexit talks has risen to 64pc with businesses afraid that the Prime Minister has no clear negotiating plans . In contrast to the pre-election period , there is now `` utter confusion over the forms of Brexit being discussed with no alignment from what 's left of the political leadership , '' said Mr Snape , and `` very little trust in May to carry out the negotiations effectively '' . Mr Snape said there are clear questions emerging from the business community which the Government needs to answer if it is to regain the support from companies which Conservatives have traditionally enjoyed . `` The writing has been on the wall for months . For a Tory Government this shows a baffling blind spot , '' he said . `` Is the new 'contrite ' leadership prepared to open its ears to the business community ? '' He added : `` Talk of a consensual Brexit was picked up on with a rallying cry that business must speak truth to power and demand a seat at the table in the negotiations . '' The Daily Telegraph Business Tracker is an analysis compiled by Impact Social . It tracks the Twitter messages of 25,000 British companies and business people , searching their public posts f or indicators of their sentiment towards the state of the economy , their own business performance , and their reaction to government policies . Those aggregated search results are then analysed manually by Impact Social 's researchers to assess whether the messages are positive , negative or neutral . That process also strips out posts that are promotional , leaving only the firms ' opinions on topics in question . Business tracker ( )
Carney : Britain 's leading role after Brexit ; Bank Governor highlights the opportunity for more jobs and higher growth across the world
THE UK is in prime position to lead a new era of globalisation after Brexit , according to Mark Carney , who also warned that cutting off international finance risked inflicting damage on the economy . In his first speech since Article 50 was triggered , the Governor of the Bank of England said the global system was `` at a fork in the road '' as he urged politicians to take the `` high road '' towards prosperity built on `` resilient '' and `` responsible '' rules . Mr Carney said `` all the building blocks '' were in place to create `` a system of enhanced access '' for Britain on a `` wide range of financial services '' after it leaves the EU to ensure minimal disruption as the UK forges a new trading relationship with the bloc . It came as the Bank 's Prudential Regulation Authority published a letter sent to finance bosses across Britain conducting cross-border business in the rest of the EU asking them to hand over their Brexit contingency plans . Sam Woods , chief executive of the PRA , said while most firms ' plans were `` well advanced '' , they remained uneven , particularly related to the possibility of a hard Brexit . Speaking in London , Mr Carney said Brexit negotiations that built `` on the foundations of a new responsible global financial system '' would ensure the UK and rest of the world remained open for business . As long as this was done safely and countries recognised and trusted each others ' rules , he said `` wholesale financial services could be brought more fully into bilateral trade agreements , keeping the global financial system open and resilient , and supporting greater trade , investment and innovation . '' Mr Carney noted that this matched the Government 's aim to create a more global , trading nation . `` This road leads to more jobs , higher sustainable growth and better risk management across the G20 . '' Traditionally , trade deals only cover goods but a deal between the UK and EU could set up a framework for including services too , which would be useful for Britain 's highly services-orientated economy . But that opportunity could be lost if Brexit talks turn hostile , he warned . `` There is another path - the low road - where trust and co-operation diminish , fragmentation hardens , capital flows are disrupted , and trade and innovation are curtailed , '' the Governor said . `` Taking the low road would be a suboptimal for all with fewer jobs , lower growth and higher domestic risks . '' Mr Carney , who is also head of the Financial Stability Board , said the UK was `` ideally positioned '' to take his `` high road '' because it starts with the same financial rules as the EU . He said that it was important that businesses prepared `` for all eventual outcomes '' , even as he stressed that a good deal was in sight . Sunny lull Higher imports push trade deficit to £3.7bn Warm weather hit the energy industry in February and bigger imports of erratic goods such as oil and commodities pushed up the UK 's trade deficit , writes Tim Wallace . Production output fell by 0.7pc compared with January , while the trade deficit rose from £3bn to £3.7bn . Construction also slowed , but economists say manufacturing and trade both have a positive trajectory .
'Hard ' Brexit will be good news for Vauxhall
A `` HARD '' Brexit would be good news for Vauxhall 's supply chain , the carmaker 's new owner has said as he sealed the long awaited £2bn purchase from General Motors . Carlos Tavares , chairman of PSA whose existing brands include Citroen and Peugeot , said that were the UK to leave the European Union without any form of deal , it would lead to opportunities to increase the manufacturer 's supply chain in the UK . `` A hard Brexit from UK plants will be a nice opportunity in terms of business , '' Mr Tavares said . `` This is something that the UK government completely understands . If it is a hard Brexit , then the supplier base needs to be developed . It is important that we source parts from the UK , so that the cost structure will be more in pounds . '' He made the comments as it emerged that the deal to sell Vauxhall and its fellow Opel brand to PSA could cost GM , the American car giant , more than £3.5bn . PSA said it will pay General Motors nearly £2bn for its European business as it issued long-awaited confirmation of a move that will make it the second-largest carmaker in Europe , behind Volkswagen . But GM will pay ( EURO ) 3bn ( £2.6bn ) back to PSA in order to cover a pensions black hole that had threatened to scupper the deal , while it will also retain the bulk of the historic UK and German pensions liabilities , believed to be costing it more than ( EURO ) 3bn . The deal is also likely to see Vauxhall workers ' existing defined-benefit pension schemes replaced by a defined contribution scheme under PSA . Despite the agreement between the two companies raising fears over the future of the 4,500 Vauxhall staff at plants in Ellesmere Port and Luton , Mr Tavares allayed fears over potential job cuts or factory closures . PSA said it plans to return Opel and Vauxhall , which have been loss-making for the last 16 years , to profit by 2026 . Matthew Lynn : Page 2 Analysis : Page 4
Banks retreat on 'hard Brexit ' worries
BANKING stocks were among the hardest hit yesterday after a slew of bearish broker notes and `` hard Brexit '' fears rattled the sector , snapping the FTSE 100 's historic winning streak . Royal Bank of Scotland became the biggest laggard after Goldman Sachs slashed its rating to `` neutral '' . Removing the FTSE 100 stock from its pan-European `` buy '' list , the US investment bank said RBS 's upside potential was `` increasingly reflected '' in its valuation . It also described the outstanding litigation settlement facing the bank as `` the most significant unknown for the group '' . Martin Leitgeb , of Goldman Sachs , said : `` In light of recent US Department of Justice residential mortgage-backed securities settlements with other banks , we see the possibility that RBS will book a significant provision as early as the fourth quarter . '' Elsewhere , Deutsche Bank maintained Lloyds ' `` hold '' rating as it thinks the stock is trading at close to fair value . Separately , the sector was also hurt by fears that Theresa May , the Prime Minister , will signal a `` hard '' Brexit during her speech today . A `` hard '' Brexit scenario would prioritise immigration controls and bilateral trade deals that would see Britain leaving the EU 's single market and customs union . Shares in RBS slumped 6.2p to 214.9p , Lloyds surrendered 1.4p to finish at 64.7p and Barclays fell 4.2p to 231.1p . HSBC bucked the trend , advancing 2.3p to 680.3p , and Standard Chartered rose 5.8p to 724.3p . Meanwhile , after a stellar 14-day run of successive gains , the FTSE 100 closed in the red , down 10.68 points , or 0.15pc , at 7,327.13 , despite a boost to overseas earners from the persistent pound weakness . Broadcaster ITV also lost ground , down 4.4p to 204.2p , despite Citigroup raising its price target from 205p to 235p . Analysts said commentary from ad buyers on the outlook for the TV ad market was now `` more optimistic '' . On the other side , mining stocks rallied as HSBC became more bullish on commodities . The bank upgraded Anglo American to `` buy '' and Antofagasta to `` hold '' . Shares in Anglo American jumped 26p to £13.56 , Rio Tinto climbed 70½p to £34.88 , Glencore advanced 5.2p to 321.9p , BHP Billiton rose 23p to £14.78 and Antofagasta edged up 8½p to 733½p . Safe-haven stocks were also in demand . Randgold Resources made gains of 110p to £68.20 and Fresnillo inched up 23p to £14.36 after gold jumped to a seven-week high on buying fuelled by political uncertainty which dented investor confidence . Elsewhere , gold miner Acacia rallied to the top of the FTSE 250 , 16.8p higher at 435p , after it confirmed it was in talks about a possible merger with Canadian peer Endeavour Mining on Friday . Meanwhile , aerospace and defence company Cobham wobbled 2.2p to 136p on the back of a rating downgrade . Goldman Sachs cut its rating to `` sell '' from `` neutral '' citing a `` challenging '' growth outlook . Analysts also think the company 's initial decision to suspend its 2016 final dividend will be followed by `` a much lower dividend level from 2017 onwards '' . On Aim , shares in WANdisco surged 22.3pc , or 50p , to 274p as the big data company delivered a 72pc rise in total bookings for the year to $ 15.5m ( £12.9m ) thanks to new channel partnerships with Amazon and Oracle . Finally , a robust trading update lifted shares in Instem , a developer and vendor of software used to log clinical trials , 3.4pc to 231p .
Scotland Forecast Brexit fears downplayed BODY : Nicola Sturgeon 's warning that she would not allow Scotland to be driven off a `` hard Brexit cliff edge '' were undermined yesterday after her own civil servants published figures predicting higher economic growth . The projections , published alongside Derek Mackay 's Budget , predicted 1.3 per cent growth in GDP next year , rising to 1.7 per cent in 2019-20 , the year after Brexit is scheduled to take place . Domestic demand and earnings are also forecast to increase , although exports are expected to fall after an initial rise . However , the report acknowledged that the Brexit vote `` greatly increases the level of uncertainty within these forecasts . '' A separate analysis by the independent Scottish Fiscal Commission also predicted that employment and earnings in both the public and private sectors will grow every year until at least 2020-21 .
Scotland Minister leaves SNP 's position over Brexit 'clear as mud '
NICOLA STURGEON was last night urged to clarify her stance on a special Brexit deal for Scotland after a senior SNP minister said her key demand of single market membership is `` only possible if you are a member of the EU '' . The Conservatives said the Scottish Government 's strategy was as `` clear as mud '' following the intervention by Mike Russell , the SNP 's Brexit minister , and appeared to be getting `` more and more confused '' . Ms Sturgeon has repeatedly said that Scotland must retain `` membership '' of the EU single market following Brexit , a much higher benchmark than mere `` access '' . But , challenged by a Commons select committee to explain the difference between the two terms , Mr Russell said that `` in the strictest sense , membership is only possible if you are a member of the EU '' . He then admitted that if Scotland leaves the EU along with the rest of the UK that `` membership is not possible '' . Mr Russell concluded that the Scottish Government 's key test is actually `` involvement in '' the single market `` more than anything else '' . The confusion over the Scottish Government 's stance comes ahead of Ms Sturgeon shortly unveiling her proposals for Scotland to stay in the single market even if the rest of the UK comes out . Her plans have already been dismissed as impossible by academics and politicians , who have warned they would create a hard economic border with England . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , has ruled out any separate Scottish deal and a senior Spanish MEP has said his government would oppose one . John Lamont , the Scottish Tory chief whip , said : `` People in Scotland now deserve to know exactly what her position is , how it will work , and how it ensures Scotland retains access to our most important market , the rest of the United Kingdom . '' Mr Russell was asked by an SNP MP at last week 's Commons Scottish affairs select committee meeting to clarify the difference between the UK Government 's test of `` access '' to the single market and the Scottish Government 's demand of `` membership '' . He replied : `` In the strictest sense , membership is only possible if you are a member of the EU , so on this trajectory of the UK leaving and a differentiated position being found for Scotland but Scotland continuing to leave in that regard , membership is not possible . '' He said there is a `` range of other language '' used because single market membership is restricted to EU members , with the Welsh government referring to `` free and unfettered access '' and the Scottish Government supposedly preferring `` involvement in '' .No respite Economic growth still 'weak ' Economic growth forecasts for Scotland have been increased but remain `` weak '' for the next few years , according to a new report . Researchers at Strathclyde University now forecast growth of 1.1 per cent in 2017 , 1.3 per cent in 2018 and 1.6 per cent in 2019 , a marginal increase on the institute 's July predictions . The revision is credited to `` signs the UK will press for a transition and not a 'cliff-edge ' when leaving the single market '' , the fall in Sterling , Bank of England stimulus and a `` slightly less pessimistic environment for the North Sea '' .
In the age of Trump , we need the buccaneering Hammond of old ; America is about to embark on the greatest supply-side tax cuts since Reagan . Britain ca n't stand still
It will be hard for some to believe but Philip Hammond was once a colourful , buccaneering entrepreneur , the opposite of the grey-suited bean-counter he now purports to be . As a schoolboy in Essex , the man who today serves as our Chancellor of the Exchequer made good money renting out church halls for discos , before graduating to trading cars made at the local Ford factory . He had a knack for spotting a profit opportunity and struck his first real deal aged just 24 , when he bought out his employers ' medical products division for just £1 . Over the years , Hammond had his fair share of failures as well as successes , like all entrepreneurs , but ended up making millions from a range of property and construction , manufacturing and energy businesses . People do n't really change , which is why I 'm hopeful that Hammond may rediscover his risk-taking instincts and ditch the ultra-cautious , lugubrious and bizarrely pessimistic persona he has acquired since entering politics . The world has shifted dramatically in the past five months , and Britain desperately needs a dose of the old , glass half-full Hammond . Governments must deal with reality as it is , not as they hoped it would be , and this applies even more to Trump 's triumph - which Downing Street neither predicted nor wanted - than it does to Brexit . Nobody knows , at this stage , whether Trump 's presidency will implode in an orgy of demagoguery , protectionism and corruption , or whether it will confound its critics by governing in a neo-Reaganite manner . Realpolitik must thus be the order of the day . Given the inflammatory elements of Trump 's campaign , the British Government needs to remain vigilant ; but it should also seek to make the most of the new world order and the imminent pro- Brexit and pro-growth shift in Washington . This is where Hammond comes in . Brexit alone would have required a radical response from the Chancellor ; Brexit , Trump and the growing likelihood that strains in the eurozone will eventually reach breaking point make this an urgent necessity . Hammond 's first Autumn Statement next week is the first real opportunity for the May Government to regain the initiative and to show that it has an exciting , optimistic plan for our post-Brexit prosperity . Hammond can not afford to be hemmed in by the pessimistic consensus - the same duff predictions that claimed the Brexit vote would trigger an immediate collapse in growth and jobs . He needs to break free from the constraints of the Treasury 's models . The Chancellor should start off by pointing out - diplomatically , of course - that the rise in the deficit is largely the doing of his predecessor : the previous predictions never had any hope of coming true , Brexit or no Brexit . He must then retain an iron grip on almost all areas of current spending , while announcing his own deliberate but carefully controlled loosening in fiscal policy . The first big change is that the Chancellor needs to be much more radical on tax , and unveil at least one flagship measure to improve incentives to work and invest . He should commission a major review of the tax system , with the aim of drastically simplifying and flattening it . Trump changes everything here : America is about to embark on the greatest supply-side tax cuts on business and workers since Ronald Reagan . The Republicans want to slash the top rate to 33 per cent , increase the personal allowance and abolish the estate tax , among other things . Capital gains tax rates would be no more than 20 per cent . Corporation tax would be slashed to between 15 per cent ( under Trump 's plan ) and 20 per cent ( the House 's alternative ) . A special 10 per cent tax rate could be introduced for US multinationals repatriating the money they hold overseas , sucking trillions of dollars back into the US economy . Britain can not afford to stand still . Combined with the possibility of a major pro-growth shift in the way Wall Street is regulated , and the big London-based investment banks ' fears that they will be frozen out of European markets after Brexit , now is also the time for Hammond to ditch the banking levy supertax . Second , trade . The UK needs to take every opportunity to defend the World Trade Organisation against the new administration 's troubling protectionist instincts , which are likely to be focused on emerging markets . But in other respects the dreams of many Brexiteers have suddenly come true : there is now a real chance of a bilateral trade deal with the US , as soon as we leave the customs union . Hammond should ignore the clueless naysayers who claim that we should reject or delay this historic opportunity to ensure we do n't alienate the EU ; talks with Washington should begin in parallel with those with Europe . A US-UK free trade deal would transform our negotiating position with the EU and would be game-changing in every possible way . Hammond should at the very least hint that he is excited by this next week . Next , defence . Trump 's lukewarm approach to Nato means that Britain 's strong military will become a major bargaining chip in our Brexit talks , especially when it comes to convincing eastern Europe countries . Defence spending as a share of GDP fell to 1.9 per cent in 2015-16 ; Hammond should pledge to increase it to 2.2 per cent by the end of the decade . The Chancellor must also move fast on energy , infrastructure and housing . He needs to intensify and accelerate the development of shale , and speed up road-building projects . As for housing , apart from releasing more land , tearing down barriers to entry for new housebuilders and applying some of the lessons he learnt in his construction business , Hammond should slash stamp duty across the board . The fiscal impact would be limited - it is one of those tax cuts that could pay for itself , directly as well as indirectly . The number of housing transactions would rocket , more people would be able to upgrade or downsize their homes and lots of other spending and tax revenues would be generated . In his original , swashbuckling incarnation , Hammond loved to roll the dice , to take a calculated risk . Electorates here and in America are certainly in that sort of mood . The Chancellor needs to show them what he is really made of , and deliver an Autumn Statement fit for the times . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
This idea that EU workers may be booted out is bizarre and repugnant ; Theresa May should do a swift U-turn before the Tory party really does become the nasty party
My 75-year-old fatherin-law is used to upping sticks . He was raised in post-war rural Moravia in the kind of ruin and poverty that made austerity Britain seem like a promised land . After Russian tanks crushed the Prague Spring , he fled the Soviets and ended up in a Swedish refugee camp . There he was looked after , taught the language , became a geologist and could , now , retire and live by himself . But I have a better idea : that he moves , yet again , to Twickenham and lives with his three grandchildren , who adore him . We have an attic room , where he has been staying , and we 'd like to make this arrangement permanent . If - and it 's a big `` if `` - he can be persuaded . It was all going to plan until Theresa May entered the Tory leadership contest . Last weekend , she delivered a message that put the skids under all three million EU nationals living in Britain : she regards them as bargaining chips . As prime minister she would offer no guarantees about their staying in Britain ; that would all depend on what other governments say about Brits abroad . Such a deal could , of course , take months - perhaps years - to negotiate . She might be forced to unleash the British bulldog , and chase them out . It 's a disgusting message , and the precise opposite of what the Brexiteers repeatedly offered during the referendum campaign . The Vote Leave platform was explicit : Brexit meant better control over immigration inflows , but that was it . Deportation was never an issue in the debate because Boris Johnson , Michael Gove and even Nigel Farage said that the status of every European already living here would not change . It was an easy promise to make . Only the BNP thought Europeans should have no automatic right to stay : that seemed a fringe , almost a lunatic , position . Now , this is the position of the woman overwhelmingly likely to be the next prime minister . It 's certainly a bold move , but a rather puzzling www.one.No one thinks she personally wants to start deporting Polish receptionists , or that she wants to destabilise anyone . She just was too quick to follow official advice : that she should not concede the residency rights of EU nationals in Britain until receiving assurances about Brits on the continent . Her officials are right : it 's logical . But to play this game , and cast such uncertainty over so many , is deeply inhumane . Even Mrs May 's most senior supporters are worried that this has now become her greatest single liability . It underlines a broader concern about her : that when she falls into a hole , she ca n't dig herself out very quickly . The idea of Britain booting out Polish children from our schools while Spain boots out our retirees is bizarre . And , probably , illegal under the Vienna Convention . But , most of all , the idea is repugnant - and this is what Mrs May seems not to realise . To `` wait for reciprocal assurances '' may make bureaucratic sense in the Foreign Office , but it means uncertainty for millions of children , workers , colleagues and pensioners . People who had , until recently , considered themselves new Brits . Mrs May has grown fond of saying that `` Brexit means Brexit '' , but it 's far from clear that she understands the agenda . The Vote Leave campaign took great care to lay out an inclusive and compassionate manifesto . The enemies of Brexit understandably portrayed it as a deranged manifesto for penury in a Little England . The question now facing the Tory members during the nine weeks of the leadership election is what would happen if Brexit ends up being implemented by someone who never agreed with it . And whether , as a result , the optimistic and open version of Brexit will be torn up , a casualty of Tory wars . The recent debate over Mrs May 's position on European immigrants has seen a bizarre reversal of positions . Her most vocal critic is her rival , Andrea Leadsom , but those defending her hardline position tend to have voted for Remain . Of course European immigrants are insecure now , they say : that 's what the wretched Brexiteers voted for ! So they ought not to complain when Mrs May confronts them with the ugly consequence of their own ideas . But Brexit is only as ugly as the new prime minister chooses to make it . The eyes of the world are on Britain right now , and much depends on what we say . The case for guaranteeing every European 's place in Britain is simple : we need them . They make up one in 10 doctors , about half of construction workers in many areas , and are the backbone of our public services . A unilateral declaration of support for European immigrants would send a crucial message : we want Brexit to be a friendly and amicable settlement , not an acrimonious divorce . And our openness to the world ought not to be in doubt . Mrs May may have disagreed with Brexit , but the job she is now applying for obliges her to make the best of it . She should start talking about its advantages , and say how Brexit will allow her to scrap her awful rule that has non-EU immigrants deported after a while if they 're not earning more than £35,000 a year . As Home Secretary , she should be doing everything she can to reduce uncertainty , not making French businessmen wonder if it 's worth investing in a country that considers turfing them out . Every day that Mrs May keeps open the prospect of deportations is a day that undermines British social cohesion - and a day where the Tories start to look less and less appealing . Ukip has joined the fray , saying it would be `` fundamentally wrong '' to turn someone who is here legally into someone who is illegal . If Nigel Farage can understand this , why ca n't the Home Secretary ? Mrs May has been perhaps the most consequential home secretary of recent times . But to apply to be prime minister she needs to show that she understands Brexit , she understands people - and that she 's capable of calming an unsettled country . Until she drops her indefensible ambivalence towards the status of Europeans , many of those who 'd normally be inclined to support her ( myself included ) will find it impossible to do so . It would be tragic if the woman who invented the phrase `` nasty party '' were to end up hanging it around Conservative necks once more . FOLLOW Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
One in five chairmen of blue-chip companies plan to vote Leave
ONE in five boardroom bosses intend to vote leave next week , a poll of FTSE 100 chairman has found . Business consultants Korn Ferry surveyed 33 companies , which together make up £700bn of the market , and found that six bosses plan to vote for Brexit , 23 to remain , while four were undecided . Only two said they had changed their mind during the lengthy referendum campaign , in which sides have battled over Brexit 's potential impact on the markets , house prices , immigration levels and the cost of a weekly shop . In the anonymous interviews , one chairman said : `` I have barely heard a single economic , political or social argument for leaving that is in any way convincing . '' Around half of the 33 chairman surveyed thought Boris Johnson , a leading Brexit campaigner , had helped the Leave campaign , while 10 of the chairmen believed he had inadvertently bolstered support for Britain 's EU membership . One Remain supporter said the former mayor of London was `` as dangerous as Donald Trump '' after Mr Johnson 's campaign of rallying speeches as well as his controversial claim that the EU prevents bananas from being sold in bunches of more than three . Business leaders have become less certain a Brexit vote will spell disaster as the campaign has worn on . A survey of FTSE 350 board members last month showed 43pc of respondents described Brexit as `` potentially damaging '' , while 70pc held this view last December . Last month 300 business leaders called on British voters to leave the EU in a letter published by The Daily Telegraph . Its signatories included Peter Goldstein , a founder of Superdrug . 6The number of FTSE 100 chairmen who say they plan to vote for Brexit , according to an anonymous survey of 33 companies
Leaving the EU is like Nazi appeasement , says peer ; Tories call for Lord Adonis to be sacked as government adviser after warnings of risks faced over Brexit
CONSERVATIVE MPs have called for Lord Adonis to be sacked as an adviser to the Government after he compared Brexit to the appeasement of Adolf Hitler . The chairman of the Government 's national infrastructure commission said Britain was in `` serious danger '' of getting it wrong as it leaves the European Union . He warned Brexit could lead to `` a serious relative decline in our living standards compared with France and Germany '' . In an interview with House magazine on Thursday , the peer said : `` My language is usually pretty subdued in politics but anyone with a historical sense - and I 'm a historian - recognises that leaving the economic institutions of the European Union , which have guided our destiny as a trading nation for half a century , is a very big step and the importance ca n't be over-emphasised . `` To my mind , it 's as big a step that we 're taking as a country as decolonisation in the 1950s and 1960s and appeasement in the 1930s . We got it right on decolonisation ; we got it wrong on appeasement and I think we 're in serious danger of getting it wrong in the way that we leave the EU . '' His comments prompted a furious response from Brexit-backing MPs and calls for him to lose his £85,200 a year Government role . But Theresa May rejected calls to fire the former Labour Cabinet member and peer yesterday , despite the controversy caused by his remarks . Iain Duncan Smith , a former Tory Cabinet Minister , told The Daily Telegraph : `` This was a democratic vote and a democratic debate . For him to turn round and compare leaving the EU to Nazi Germany is insulting to the British people and it 's cheap . It is an outrage and what he said was simply appalling . `` If he was a decent person he would simply apologise and accept he made a major mistake . '' Andrew Bridgen , the Tory MP for North West Leicestershire , added : `` Of course he should be removed from any advisory role to government . He does n't really believe in democracy - just like Hitler . '' Lord Adonis maintained his position yesterday morning during an interview on Today on BBC Radio 4 . Asked if he stood by his remarks , he said : `` Leaving the European Union is clearly going to have very , very serious economic consequences . `` The point I 'm making is that it 's the worst economic mistake we will have made in this generation if we do leave and do a hard Brexit . `` My view is that the Labour Party should stand behind staying in the single market and the customs union - I 've argued that in the House of Lords , I could n't have been clearer . '' A spokesman for Mrs May said the Prime Minister `` completely '' disagreed with his comments , but would not be removing him from his post . The spokesman added : `` He is not a member of the Government . He is not a Conservative peer . `` His job is to provide independent advice to Government on infrastructure . That does n't have anything to do with the views he expressed on Brexit . `` She completely disagrees with those views . His views on Brexit have no bearing on the position that he holds . It is down to him to explain his views . '' The peer was appointed to his advisory role by George Osborne , then the chancellor , in 2015 . Charles Moore : Page 18
Brexit getaways under cloud ; As Britain decides its EU future , Tim Pitt assesses the likely impact on motorists of voting to leave BODY : Easyjet is cheaper and Eurostar is quicker , yet there remains something alluring about a European driving holiday . Every summer , millions of motorists head east on to French autoroutes and beyond , ignoring refrains of `` Are we there yet ? '' and cursing having a car without air-con . If Britain leaves the EU , could this venerable tradition be under threat ? Driving epitomises personal freedom , yet also hits us hard in the pocket , so it touches upon many key areas of the In/Out EU Referendum . Here are the main points that could affect motorists after June 23 . Ports Brexit would mean the imposition of additional customs controls at ports . This could lead to delays both sides of the Channel , particularly for vans and lorries . Once inside the passport-free Schengen area - which covers 26 states , from Norway to Malta - drivers are unlikely to notice much difference . They will be able to move freely , although stays may be limited , possibly to 90 days without a visa . A post-Brexit Britain would almost certainly join Iceland , Norway , Switzerland and Liechtenstein in the European Economic Area . In the event of accident or illness , drivers ' healthcare costs would therefore be covered , at least in part , by the existing European Health Insurance Card . Fuel Filling your tank , especially with diesel , has traditionally been cheaper in Europe . A litre of petrol or diesel currently costs around £1.09 in the UK , compared with £1.06 for petrol and 92p for diesel in France . This price gap is likely to increase if Britain leaves the EU , at least in the short term . The AA has predicted a `` worstcase '' of petrol prices soaring 18.7p per litre , leaving a two-car family that refuels twice a month £494 worse off each year . That claim is based on calculations made by Goldman Sachs and HSBC that Sterling 's value could fall by 20 per cent after Brexit . However , RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams disputed this , saying : `` The impact on fuel prices of Britain exiting is not likely to be as dramatic . `` While the strength of the pound is a significant factor ... oil price is currently a greater influence . '' Whichever way the vote goes , Jason Lloyd of www.PetrolPrices.com says uncertainty is already taking effect : `` I think Sterling will continue to be volatile all the way to June 23 and we will see petrol prices nudge upwards as a result '' . Insurance Aside from rules on the curvature of bananas , one of the EU 's more controversial policies was a ruling from the European Court of Justice that insurance companies could not take the gender of drivers into account . As male drivers are considered higher-risk , this led to increased prices for women drivers , with lower premiums for men . The policy could be abandoned post- Brexit but nothing is guaranteed . Likewise , last year 's hike in insurance premium tax from 6 per cent to 9.5 per cent , justified by the Chancellor as bringing Britain into line with other EU states , could be reversed . Neither the AA or RAC expects their ability to rescue stranded drivers to be affected . Changes in the exchange rate could push up the cost of policies , however . Car prices A recent survey by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders found 77 per cent of motor industry businesses are opposed to Brexit . BMW even warned its UK staff that jobs may be at risk . For motorists , a devaluation of the pound and UK/EU trade tariffs could increase the cost of new cars imported from Europe . Could Brexit see a return to unofficial `` grey import '' cars ? Popular in the Nineties , these lead to a `` Great British Car Rip-Off `` campaign from Which ? . In 1999 , the consumer group said Britons paid £4,000 more for some cars than buyers in the EU . BREXIT BAD NEWS FOR THE BOOZE CRUISE ? Britons regularly cross the Channel to plunder French hypermarkets , taking advantage of lower alcohol taxes ( 23p per 750ml of wine in France , versus £2.08 in the UK ) that effectively halve the cost of a bottle of cheap plonk . The rules state you can bring back 800 cigarettes , 110 litres of beer and 90 litres of wine without raising the eyebrows of UK Customs . However , exit from the EU is likely to see this allowance drastically reduced . Those arriving from outside Europe are restricted to 200 cigarettes , 16 litres of beer and four litres of wine . If such limits are imposed on EU passengers , it could be the end for the British booze cruise . Yet there is a light at the end of the ( Euro ) tunnel : the possible return of dutyfree shopping . Eurotunnel chief executive Jacques Gounon is upbeat on Brexit . `` Dutyfree would be an incredible boost for our business , '' he told the Financial Times . BAD RECEPTION MOBILE COSTS COULD INCREASE WITH BREXIT A mobile phone is an essential part of the modern travel toolkit . Yet a report from the Association of British Travel Agents ( ABTA ) and Deloitte says using your phone abroad could become more expensive if Britain quits the European Union . Roaming charges within the EU are currently capped at 4p per minute for calls , 2p for text messages and 4p per MB of data . And fees will be cut to zero from June 2017 . But leaving the EU would exempt the UK from these regulations , meaning costs may increase . The uncertainty is a particular worry for those who use their mobile phones as satnavs . Data-heavy navigation apps such as Google Maps could land drivers with a big bill upon their return from holiday . 'Oil price is the biggest influence on pump prices '
Disheartening cacophony in the Cabinet does not bode well for Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Boris Johnson 's description of the Cabinet as a `` nest of singing birds '' ( report , September 20 ) is remarkably - perhaps unintentionally - apt . The cacophony of nestlings is far more reminiscent of juvenile squabbling than a chorus in harmony . Anne Cranfield Heathfield , East Sussex sir - Following the disastrous general election last June , Theresa May said that she had learnt her lesson on the danger of relying on a small clique of advisers at the expense of involving the whole Cabinet in decision-making . However , it seems that she has already forgotten that lesson , having seemingly replaced her advisers , Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill , with the First Secretary of State , Damian Green , and the Home Secretary , Amber Rudd , while keeping the same isolationist method of control . This has been demonstrated in the drafting of her forthcoming speech in Florence this Friday , in which she will set out the Government 's vision for future trade and relationships with Europe and the rest of the world following Brexit . You have to question why , in the drafting of a speech about foreign affairs , trade and Brexit , the views of the Home Secretary should take precedence over those of the Foreign Secretary , the International Trade Secretary and the Brexit Secretary . Paul Lewis Edinburgh sir - For 45 years the British establishment has capitulated to the EU . Voters recognise this , and it is one reason why the Leave vote prevailed in June 's referendum last year . Your report ( September 20 ) that Theresa May is `` preparing to offer the EU £20 billion in budget contributions until at least 2020 '' shows that the Government still has n't grasped the lesson . Brexit negotiated by Remainers is , unsurprisingly , turning into a disaster . Nick Martinek Huddersfield , West Yorkshire sir - My political outlook is global , socially liberal and fiscally conservative . I recoil in horror at the present state of the Tories , particularly Boris Johnson and his fellow Brexit knuckleheads . For whom do I vote now ? Nick Judd Kersey , Suffolk sir - Boris Johnson seems to polarise voters , both Tory and non-Tory . May I just say that he was an exceptionally popular and `` hands-on '' MP in his Henley-on-Thames constituency , where I lived for 20 years . He is bright and measured , he listens and he believes in a freemarket economy with limited state intervention . He is the last true Conservative speaking up for everyone , regardless of background . He also is exceptionally kind and capable of acts of generosity which do not reach the public domain . Dr Alistair A Donald Watlington , Oxfordshire
Scotland Scotland 'risks legal cliff edge ' if Sturgeon opposes Repeal Bill ; Tories warn Nationalists over 'legal gaps ' after Brexit
NICOLA STURGEON 'S government risks pushing Scotland to a legal `` cliff edge '' if it opposes the EU Repeal Bill as the gaps left by thousands of redundant European laws may not be seamlessly plugged , Theresa May 's deputy warned yesterday . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , said the Bill was trying to avoid the `` hugely undesirable '' situation where Brexit leads to huge holes in Scotland 's statute book covering areas such as food safety . He refused to confirm that the UK Government would step in to plug the legal gaps if Ms Sturgeon makes good her threat to withhold consent for the Bill , saying it was `` new territory '' . But he expressed confidence that the SNP government would end up reaching a deal , arguing it would result in a swathe of new powers repatriated from Brussels for the Scottish Parliament , some of which he said would be delivered on day one of Brexit . Mr Green also rejected a call by Ruth Davidson in The Daily Telegraph for the Tories to review their target of cutting immigration to `` tens of thousands '' , saying that one of the `` forces '' behind the Brexit vote was the feeling it was too high and `` we should respect that '' . He made the intervention the day after holding talks with Mike Russell , the SNP Brexit minister , and John Swinney , the Deputy First Minister , to try and break the impasse . However , Mr Russell emerged from the meeting to warn that Holyrood would vote against the repeal Bill without `` serious and significant changes '' , arguing it was a `` blatant power grab '' by Westminster . Although Mrs May could press ahead without the Scottish Parliament 's consent , this risks a constitutional crisis as the Bill impinges on dozens of devolved responsibilities . The SNP is demanding that all EU powers linked to devolved areas , such as replacing the Common Fisheries Policy ( CFP ) and Common Agricultural Policy ( CAP ) , be automatically passed to Scotland . But the Government is concerned this would fragment the UK 's internal market by creating different systems north and south of the Border . As well as creating UK frameworks to ensure this does not happen , the Bill will replicate thousands of EU regulations that will cease to apply the day after Brexit covering areas such as health and safety and food standards . At a press briefing in Edinburgh , Mr Green said the current devolution settlement was predicated on EU membership and `` what we 're trying to do is find a practical way through '' . He said : `` One of the reasons for having this Bill absolutely is that we want to avoid anywhere in the UK a cliffContinued on Page 8 Continued from Page 1 edge on Brexit day where there are gaps in the statute book . The last thing anyone wants is to suddenly discover we have n't got regulations covering food safety , to take an example . Obviously that 's what we 're trying to avoid with this Bill . '' Asked whether the gaps would be plugged by Westminster if the Scottish Parliament withheld consent for the Bill , he said : `` We 're in new territory so it 's clear that it would be hugely undesirable for Scotland to have any gaps in Scots law . That 's one of the reasons it 's so important that we do bring these discussions to a successful conclusion before we get to April 2019 . '' He insisted that the `` difficulties that appear now '' between the UK and Scottish governments would `` disappear '' as the talks progress , arguing `` it 's hugely in the interest of Scotland '' to reach an agreement . But Mr Russell said : `` We have made our position crystal clear to UK ministers , who should be in no doubt whatsoever that we will not recommend that the Scottish Parliament gives consent to the Bill as it stands . `` As drafted , the proposals undermine the founding principles of devolution and amount to a power grab - we will not accept that and it is inconceivable we would recommend acceptance of such a Bill . '' The SNP also seized on Mr Green 's dismissal of Ms Davidson 's call for the UK Government to look again at its immigration target , which he described as `` sustainable '' . Joan McAlpine , an SNP MSP , said : `` This just shows how little authority Ruth Davidson has - she can make a lot of noise but nobody 's listening . ''
Firms to defy Brexit fears with science spending boom ; CBI says most want to invest in research , as Prime Minister unveils £2bn boost for innovation
BRITISH businesses are pressing ahead with plans to spend hundreds of millions of pounds on research and development ( R & D ) , in a vote of confidence in the UK economy following the Brexit vote . The Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) said 70pc of companies intended to maintain or increase spending in new technology to grow their business , despite the EU referendum result . It described corporate access to research and R & D tax credits as `` world- class '' . In a survey of more than 800 businesses , just 7pc planned to reduce their investment in innovation , while larger companies were more likely to increase spending than those with fewer than 50 employees . The Government will welcome the results , but the CBI also described the UK as `` a follower rather than a leader '' in terms of government support for innovation , including grants . Theresa May will set out plans today to transform Britain into the `` global goto place for scientists , innovators and tech investors '' . Speaking at the CBI 's annual conference , the Prime Minister will pledge to boost government investment in R & D by £2bn by the end of this Parliament to `` help put post-Brexit Britain at the cutting edge of science and tech '' . The CBI said a three-pronged plan was needed in Wednesday 's Autumn Statement to transform the UK into an `` innovation powerhouse '' , with higher growth and improved living standards . Britain 's biggest business group called for a `` funding road map '' for ar-eas currently financed by Brussels , and urged policymakers to follow through on a pledge to create a `` modern industrial strategy '' . Mrs May will address the CBI 's call today as she announces fresh support for start-ups and innovation in fields such as robotics and artificial intelligence to `` break down the obstacles to getting long-term investment into innovative firms '' . Carolyn Fairbairn , director-general of the CBI , described the findings as encouraging . She said companies were `` rolling up their sleeves and looking to make the best of Brexit '' . However , Ms Fairbairn urged the Government to help businesses make the most of post-Brexit opportunities . `` The UK will need to work hard to become the front runner in global innovation , creating a pioneering economic role for itself that drives prosperity in every corner of the UK , '' she said . Last week , official data showed private sector R & D spending rose 5pc in 2015 to £20.9bn . While this represents an increase in cash terms , private-sector R & D as a share of national income has remained broadly flat this decade . The International Monetary Fund has highlighted that UK R & D spending is below many of its G7 peers . The CBI urged the Government to raise public and private spend on R & D to 3pc of GDP by 2025 , from its current 1.7pc . It also called on the Government to double the £500m-a-year budget of Innovate UK , the taxpayer-backed research agency . Downing Street cited research that showed every £1 spent on R & D tax credits stimulated between £1.53 and £2.35 of investment in the UK . Philip Hammond yesterday rejected calls from Labour to indulge in a borrowing binge and raise business taxes , suggesting this would make UK `` an unattractive place to invest '' .
Brexit is nothing like the rise of Trump - whatever he might think ; The Leave vote was outward-facing and optimistic ; the Republican candidate is anything but ALLISTER HEATH
All over the Western world , electorates are angry at their self-satisfied , arrogant political classes ; they want their views reflected , including , of course , on immigration , and feel that they have been ignored for too long . Manual workers and the lower middle classes are especially fed up , and feel under pressure financially as a result of the legacy of the Great Recession , automation and globalisation . First the Leave campaign in Britain and now Donald Trump in America have sought to harness these populist rebellions . But I have news for Mr Trump : he may become the next US president but he never will be Mr Brexit . It 's not even close . In all of the ways that really matter , the Brexiteer agenda is dramatically at odds with what passes for Trump 's world-view . The Donald wants to walk away from America 's free trade deals ; Brexiteers are desperate to sign as many as possible as quickly as possible . Leavers here would love to join Nafta ; Trump wants to quit it . Almost all Brexiteers want to use Nato to help protect the West and project UK and US power ; Trump sees it as a drain on resources . The utter incompatibility of visions ought to be obvious . Brexit is the politics of hope , of positive change , of radical reform ; Trump is the politics of despair , of powerlessness , of retreat . Brexit was primarily about regaining Britain 's selfgovernment ; it is a bold , powerful statement that liberal , independent , free-trading democracies are the best way for countries and their people to prosper in a modern , complex world . It is a denunciation of post-war technocracies , a rejection of top-down rule , and a commitment to a massive increase in democratic control . In complete contrast , America selfevidently never relinquished its independence : this is just another election , albeit between two hopeless candidates . Brexit 's massive repatriation of power to our own institutions will strengthen and rejuvenate the UK 's ailing democracy , which had become atrophied and pathetic ; the election of either Trump or Clinton , by contrast , could make America almost ungovernable . It is clear why Trump wants to bask in the Brexiteers ' reflected glory : they triumphed spectacularly on an antiestablishment , David-versus-Goliath message , and in the face of the received wisdom . To get out his vote , Trump needs to convince his supporters he has a real chance - and pointing to the referendum triumph and the explosive shock it caused to the elites they so despise is a great way of achieving this . It is in the interest , too , of the liberal-Left intelligentsia in Britain to conflate Brexit - a pro-free trade , prodemocracy , pro-internationalist movement - with Trumpism - an antitrade , almost autarchic agenda . If nothing else , they hope that the market chaos a Trump victory would cause might derail or delay Brexit indefinitely , or make it much harder for Theresa May to sign global trade deals . Such folk are also keen to focus on the demographic similarities between the two groups of voters : those with more advanced academic qualifications are more likely to back Hillary Clinton or to vote Remain . The intent here is obvious : to portray Brexit as a plot by dumb , uneducated suburban voters who were led astray by a group of charismatic demagogues ( such as Michael Gove or Boris Johnson ) , thus discrediting the movement to leave the EU . It is undeniably true that many Northern and coastal communities decided to vote Leave partly as a protest against social change , and that many Midwestern states will do the same with Trump . But while his base is overwhelmingly white and male , and his campaign has further fanned the flames of America 's horrendous racial divisions , the Leave vote was dramatically more diverse . A majority of women ( and men ) voted to Leave : in fact , according to Lord Ashcroft 's on-the-day poll , there was complete gender equality at 52 per cent for Brexit . Trump has few votes in America 's great cities . The Leave side 's record here too was far better . Even in London , Leave grabbed 40 per cent of the vote , hugely more than Trump will get in New York or Los Angeles . As to minority votes , take London 's Newham , where under 17 per cent of the population are white British and 32 per cent are Muslim . Leave still grabbed 47.2 per cent of the vote . Harrow , a very different London borough with a white British share of 31 per cent and the UK 's largest concentration of Hindus and Jains , voted 45 per cent for Leave , also well above the London average . Plenty of Leave campaigners hailed from ethnic minorities , not least the excellent Priti Patel ; and the majority of the Tories ' 17 ethnic minority MPs backed Leave . A majority of ethnic minority voters still backed Remain . But the proportions are incomparable to the racially-divided US election , where an astonishing 91 per cent of the African-American vote is likely to go to Clinton , who also has a massive 50-point lead among Hispanics . There was , tragically , a despicable spike in instances of abuse and even attacks on migrants in the immediate aftermath of the vote , apparently directed primarily at Eastern European workers . This was a disgusting development and the Government should have condemned it even more forcefully than it did , but it was a very different phenomenon to the extreme racial divisions that we are currently seeing in the US . Most importantly of all , modern British Euroscepticism is a wellestablished doctrine . It dates back to Margaret Thatcher 's Bruges speech of 1988 . Dozens of books have been written on the subject since then ; it is a proper movement with its own historians , philosophers and economists , its activists and its supporters . By contrast there is no real Trump ideology , no coherent thinking , no meaningful movement . He is a poujadiste , an operator in the mould of Ross Perot , the independent anti-free trade candidate who grabbed 18.9 per cent of the vote in 1992 . Trump is a pure opportunist who will say anything to get elected , and then do whatever he is able to get away with . So Mr Trump . Come up with better answers to the challenges facing America - and stop appropriating our victory . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Acting BCC boss confirmed in top job six months after predecessor quit over Brexit
THE British Chambers of Commerce has picked an insider to replace its director-general John Longworth , who quit in March in a row about his support for Brexit . The BCC said Adam Marshall , an American who has worked as a policy expert at the chambers since 2009 , will take charge with immediate effect `` following a robust recruitment process '' . Dr Marshall has been acting director general since Mr Longworth 's resignation earlier this year . The BCC consulted with its 52 regional chambers before assessing a list of internal candidates for the job . `` Adam has a detailed knowledge of the Chamber Network and a strong understanding of the opportunities and challenges facing Chamber members across the country , '' said president Francis Marshall . `` At a time of great political and economic uncertainty , I am confident that Adam has the ability and passion to enable the BCC to thrive under his leadership . '' The BCC decided to remain neutral on the outcome of the EU referendum and Mr Longworth quit after declaring his support for Brexit at the business group 's annual conference , accepting that his views were `` likely to cause confusion '' about the BCC 's stance . He chaired the business council for the Vote Leave campaign . Trade bodies have been grappling with how best to represent their members in the wake of the Brexit vote . The manufacturing firm JCB announced this week that it was quitting the CBI over its pessimism about leaving the EU . `` At this time of national transition and change , BCC will ensure that the diverse voices of business are heard - regardless of size , sector , region or nation . We will act to ensure that British businesses get every opportunity to grow and thrive , both here at home and across the world , '' said Dr Marshall . Before joining the BCC , he helped set up the Centre for Cities , a thinktank focused on the economies of UK cities , and carried out a PhD in international studies at Cambridge .
Chancellor should wait for the dust to settle ; Brexit The economy
SO , George Osborne says the Government wo n't be running a surplus by the end of this Parliament any more , because of the Brexit vote . Given that his achieving a surplus required a large amount of fiscal tightening ( more than £30 billion in extra taxes and lower spending ) in the final year before the 2020 General Election , many of us had been pretty sceptical that he would do it anyway . Some folk are saying this means the end of our post-2010 `` Age of Austerity '' or Osborne abandoning his `` surplus rule '' ( requiring that the Government runs a surplus every year in normal economic conditions ) . Not so fast ! The surplus rule never applied until the Government had first run a surplus anyway , and it allowed for there being a deficit if the economy suffered a slowdown . Furthermore , if the past six years of enormous deficits ( falling from 11 per cent of GDP in 2009-10 to 3 per cent this year ) have counted as an Age of Austerity , there 's no reason we ca n't have more `` austerity '' at the same time as running large deficits in the future , either . Abandoning a political target does not take away the financial and economic need to get the budget back to balance . There is a lot of jumping the gun going on in interpreting the economic impact of Brexit . The main pro-Leave economists ( such as myself and Gerard Lyons ) always said there 'd be some depreciation in sterling and some short-term economic slowdown if we voted to Leave , with recovery later . Gerard calls this the `` Nike tick '' . Nothing so far has been a surprise . Sterling has dropped about 10 per cent in recent months , which should add around 0.3-0.6 pc to GDP next year , but that will probably be offset by lower investment in the short term , and there may even be slightly slower growth in 2016 and 2017 . The main lost GDP growth , however , will occur in 2019-2021 , when we actually leave the EU - albeit ( in my view ) recovered during the 2020s . Mark Carney , the governor of the Bank of England , has said monetary policy will loosen this summer . If it does , that will not be on the basis of any evidence of a Brexit www.slowdown.No post-referendum economic data will even be available by then . The economy probably will slow , and that will probably mean some extra borrowing later this parliament and early next . But that is no surprise and does not mean government spending cuts should not continue . They should and will do so . Where Mr Osborne ( or whoever becomes chancellor under the next prime minister ) might reasonably change policy a bit in response to Brexit could be on infrastructure . The Government has talked a good infrastructure game , but done relatively little . We need to ease planning rules and give the go-ahead to more infrastructure projects . If the Government really believes Britain can make a go of Brexit , that would be a better way to prove it than by any premature changes in fiscal or monetary policy . Those can wait until the Brexit dust settles . Andrew Lilico is executive director and principal of Europe Economics 'The main pro-Brexit economists always said there 'd be some short-term economic slowdown '
Brexit is a non-starter , leading City investor insists
ONE of the City 's best known investors has brushed off the idea that the UK will separate itself from the European Union , saying there is `` no way '' that British voters would accept the risks that come with Brexit . `` There 's just absolutely no way that the UK is leaving Europe . It 's that simple , '' said Richard Buxton , the chief executive and head of equities at Old Mutual Global Investors . `` As in the Scottish referendum , the markets are much smarter than the pollsters . Watch the bookies , not the pollsters . '' The most recent odds from Ladbrokes suggest that continued EU membership is more likely than Brexit , with odds of 8/15 offered on a vote to remain , and 6/4 on a vote to leave . Mr Buxton 's comments on the EU were echoed by Mark Wood , the former boss of Prudential , who suggested that the depth of the UK 's links to the Continent made the idea of complete withdrawal almost meaningless . `` If we were to come out of the EU it would be a decade 's work , '' he said at a financial services panel debate organised by the accountancy firm EY . Meanwhile , the boss of the investment house Schroders has taken a more sanguine view of Brexit , although he also sees only a remote chance of a vote to leave . `` As far as Brexit is concerned , I wait to see what is on the table when the referendum comes around . `` Both polarised Eurosceptics and Europhiles use emotional language about a decision which should be made on facts and good information , '' he said in an interview with the writer Alain Elkann . `` I think it unlikely we will vote to leave . If we do , we will reach an accommodation with the EU after a couple of years , one that works for both sides . `` Talk of economic suicide or catastrophe is very wide of the mark . '' But the Central Bank of Ireland has flagged up the potential damage to the UK 's neighbour if it decides to separate from the rest of Europe , in its first analysis of what a vote to leave would mean . `` Analysis undertaken in the Central Bank suggests that Brexit would have a negative impact on exports , GDP and labour market developments in Ireland under a number of different scenarios considered , '' said the bank in its bi-annual financial review . The institution said Ireland 's five retail banks have about 21pc of their total assets , or ( EURO ) 64bn , tied up in the UK economy , primarily in property . The insurance sector is also heavily reliant on ties to Britain , leaving it vulnerable to an economic slowdown or major legal changes in the wake of a break from the EU . The central bank concedes that there could be a silver lining for Dublin 's fi-nancial centre if large companies decide to relocate from a post-Brexit UK . The Government has pledged to hold a referendum on whether to remain part of the EU before the end of 2017 . David Cameron continues to lobby European institutions in his attempt to secure a package of reforms ahead of the vote , although hopes are fading for concrete progress on the renegotiations this year . Polls both of politicians and the public suggest that opinions are split . A recent study by Open Europe found that the majority of Tory MPs are still undecided about whether the benefits outweigh the costs of EU membership . Meanwhile , a poll of party members by Conservative Home last month produced a 71pc vote to leave .
A long transition will only prolong uncertainty ; Corporate titans are sitting on their hands over Brexit , but Jeremy Corbyn is still the one they fear
For a parable that perfectly sums up the hopes of `` Exit from Brexit '' die-hard Remainers , it is hard to beat this little piece of homespun wisdom from the 13th-century Persian philosopher , Mulla Nasreddin . Sentenced to death by the Sultan , Nasreddin begs forgiveness and promises , ridiculously , that given a year 's stay of execution , he could teach the king 's horse to sing . An amused Sultan agrees . Nasreddin 's cellmate tells him he is a fool , as a horse can never be taught to sing . To which Nasreddin replies : `` A lot of things can happen in a year . The king might die . The horse might die . I might die . And , who knows ? Maybe the horse will sing . '' While Remainers play for time , the economy must nonetheless keep chugging along ; continued uncertainty over Britain 's future relationship with its nearest neighbours means it is doing so with ever-less enthusiasm . Any article that addresses the economic uncertainties of Brexit must begin by acknowledging that , so far , things have held up remarkably well . Neither consumer spending nor business investment have been notably damaged by the outcome of the referendum , and employment has continued to grow . But all good things come to an end ; Brexit euphoria is wearing off , to be replaced by sharpedged realities . What gross domestic product growth there has been in recent quarters is largely the result of enhanced consumer spending . This in turn has been driven by increased employment , a rundown in household savings and an unrestrained consumer credit boom - influences that may now largely have run their course . Jobs growth is slowing , real wages are being hit by elevated inflation , and the Bank of England has cracked down on unsecured , household credit growth . These negatives are being partially offset by an export-led revival in manufacturing , supported by the very same devalued pound that is eating into take-home pay . The trouble is that manufacturing is a relatively small part of the UK economy these days . Its present success , moreover , is substantially down to a cyclical recovery from near depression-like conditions in its major export market - Europe . Worryingly , there is still very little sign of the sustained upturn in business investment to match . Surveys repeatedly show that Brexit uncertainty has damaged investment intentions - not for everyone , but for a significant minority . The great paradox here is that although business and the City have broadly welcomed the idea of a two-year transition after Brexit - in which nothing much will change in the UK 's trading relationship with the rest of the EU - the effect is simply to prolong this state of uncertainty ; the immediate cliff edge is removed , but only to be shunted further out into the future . Do n't get me wrong . I 'm not seriously advocating that we forgo the transition and opt instead for an immediate hard Brexit on WTO terms . This could prove too much of a shock for the economy , and the Government , to bear . But there is , nonetheless , something to be said for ripping the sticking plaster off in one go , and thereby getting the process over and done with . The immediate consequences would no doubt be painful but , in time , the economy would adjust and move on . Slow death by a thousand cuts , which may well be the alternative , is scarcely a more appetising prospect . One of the great worries was that Brexit 's all-consuming nature would sap the nation of energy for almost anything else . So far , that 's exactly how it has turned out . In a fastchanging world , the current state of political infighting and introspection is close to economically lethal . Brexit is front and back of virtually every conversation with any topdrawer chief executive these days , as if all other potentially gainful activity has ground to a halt . Many companies are just sitting on their hands waiting to see how things pan out . While Britain attempts to negotiate its future trading relationship with Europe , all other potential free-trade agreements ( FTAs ) have to be put on hold . Nobody is going to agree an FTA with the UK until they know just how constraining Britain 's FTA with the EU is likely to be . The one determines the other . In a recent speech to the CBI , Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , warned that the closer Britain ended up to Europe , the more problematic its future trading relationship with the US was likely to be . This sense that Britain must choose between Europe and the US further adds to the pall of uncertainty . Over it all hangs what international capital regards as an even greater threat : an unashamedly hard Left Government in Downing Street , led by someone who says that City bankers are right to fear him because he 's out to get them . Do I really need to be invested in such a country , many overseas investors are asking ? Whatever form of Brexit Mrs May eventually negotiates , it may be at the expense of her own Government . A further four to five years of economic uncertainty and stagnation is not going to play well at the polls . FOLLOW Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ jeremywarneruk ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Davis ridicules Barnier 's 'silly ' Brexit claims ; Tory anger at negotiator 's comment that the British need 'educating ' on what leaving EU really means
DAVID DAVIS has accused Michel Barnier of making the European Union look `` silly '' after he said Britain needed to be `` educated '' about the perils of leaving the bloc . The EU 's chief negotiator reportedly told a conference in Italy that he viewed the Brexit process as an opportunity to `` teach the British people and others what leaving the EU means '' . He also warned of the `` extremely serious consequences '' of leaving the single market . But Mr Davis yesterday issued a stern rebuke to his counterpart while Tory MPs greeted Mr Barnier 's latest comments with fury . The Brexit Secretary ridiculed the tough tone adopted by his counterpart at the close of negotiations last week when a frustrated Mr Barnier claimed no significant progress had been made on key issues . Mr Davis told The Andrew Marr Show on BBC One : `` He can take whatever line he likes on the way we conduct the negotiations - that is up to us , not up to him . '' He added : `` Bluntly , I think it looked a bit silly because there plainly were things that we have achieved . '' David Jones , a former Brexit minister , said Mr Barnier 's view of the negotiations was evidence that the UK had made the correct decision when it voted to leave the EU . He said : `` Michel Barnier 's patronising remarks exemplify the Quai d'Orsay arrogance that most Britons find repellent . His job is n't to 'educate ' anybody ; it 's to work towards an outcome of the current negotiations that will be to the mutual benefit of the UK and the EU . As it is , he is merely providing confirmation that we did the right thing when we voted to leave . '' The escalating war of words point to ever increasing tension between the EU and the UK as Brexit talks risk sliding further into acrimony after Liam Fox , the Trade Secretary , suggested Brussels was trying to `` blackmail '' Britain . Negotiations are deadlocked over the UK 's so-called Brexit bill with a number of newspapers claiming yesterday that Mrs May is ready to sign off on a settlement worth up to £50billion but Mr Davis dismissed the claim and said : `` It 's nonsense . The story is completely wrong . '' Meanwhile , Mr Davis offered Tory rebels an olive branch in a bid to avoid a defeat over the use of `` Henry VIII '' powers . He said the powers , outlined in the European Union ( Withdrawal ) Bill which MPs will debate this week , will not be used on anything `` significant '' . Critics fear the measures could be abused by ministers to push through law changes without full parliamentary scrutiny . A few Tory MPs are believed to be considering joining forces with opposition parties to block the Bill over the issue . But Mr Davis moved to assuage concerns on the Government benches by insisting the powers will not be used inappropriately . He said : `` Everything that is significant in terms of changes - not technical changes but significant changes - will be done in separate primary legislation . Immigrations bills , customs bills , you name it . '' Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , said yesterday that Labour will seek to scupper the passage of the Bill unless the Government listens to the party 's concerns . Anton Muscatelli : Page 14 Brexit timetable The next two months Tuesday Sept 5 David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , is expected to deliver a statement in the House of Commons detailing progress made in the latest round of talks . He is likely to face a grilling over the Government 's handling of the talks with progress appearing to have stalled . Wednesday Sept 6 The Government is expected to publish its latest Brexit position paper . It will set out the UK 's stance on future scientific cooperation . Thursday Sept 7 The first of two days of debate will start in the Commons on the Government 's European Union ( Withdrawal ) Bill which will transfer more than 19,000 EU laws and regulations into British law . The Bill includes plans to hand ministers so-called `` Henry VIII '' powers which opposition MPs and some Tories fear will be used to push through changes to legislation without full parliamentary scrutiny . Monday Sept 11 The second day of debate on the second reading of the Withdrawal Bill . Opposition MPs are expected to try and block the Bill 's passage . MPs will also vote on how much time should be given for future debate of the Bill , with a fierce battle expected . Time could be set aside for MPs to debate the Bill 's contents - and try to amend it - every week in the run up to Christmas . Monday Sept 18 The UK 's negotiating team will return to Brussels for the fourth round of talks . Monday Oct 9 The fifth round of talks and the point at which it was initially hoped a breakthrough could be secured on the terms of divorce . This seems unlikely given the current impasse . Thursday Oct 19 European leaders will meet for a summit in Brussels and will decide whether sufficient progress has been made on the key issues of the Brexit Bill , the Irish border and citizens ' rights for talks to move onto future trading arrangements .
Sideline banking and Brexit will fail
Whether you are a Leaver or a Remainer , one thing that almost everyone can agree on is that the Brexit process needs to be handled very carefully . The UK 's departure from the European Union may hurt the economy in the short-term or it may not ; if there 's to be pain , it could be mild or severe . We can sit around arguing about such forecasts until we 're all blue in the face . But one thing is certain : if the process is bungled , it will be catastrophic . That being the case you would have thought that the Government would have a laser-guided focus on what Brexit means for the economy 's most important sector . They should be swaddling it in cotton wool , tissue paper and bubble wrap and then placing it on fluffy cushions during the Article 50 process . Unfortunately , the opposite appears to be the case . In fact , the economy 's most important sector has been stuffed in the back of the wardrobe and forgotten about . The reason , of course , is that the sector in question is financial services . And bankers are politically toxic . Since Brexit was , at least in part , a reaction to the pressures placed on society by the austerity resulting from the financial crisis , how can the Government be seen to be prioritising the industry that caused the crash in the first place ? The answer , of course , is that it is also the industry that has helped power the recovery and which funds our vital public sources . Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , spelt out the reality in stark terms at last month 's Mansion House speech : the taxes paid by the financial services industry cover two-thirds of the annual running costs of the NHS . We neglect this golden goose at our peril . It is bad enough if such heedlessness is the result of political expediency , it is something quite different if it is the result of naivety . Senior City figures who have ( on too few occasions ) met with ministers are at their wits ' end . Initially , politicians understood the importance of the City to the economy but refused to believe that bankers would up sticks and move to Frankfurt . ( I mean , have you ever been to Frankfurt ? ) More recently ministers , especially those in the Treasury , have begun to realise that it is a tiny bit more nuanced than that . Many of those who work in the City were born abroad and have been made to feel unwelcome by Theresa May 's attack on `` citizens of nowhere '' . Highly paid bankers also tend to go where the high pay is . And it 's not so much the people that will be moving from the UK to the EU as the jobs . Just when City lobbyists felt they were getting somewhere , May called a snap election . This pressed the pause button on discussions and then threw all the pieces of government up in the air . Four out of five ministers in the Treasury either lost their seats or were moved out of the department ; all of the ministers in the Brexit department , barring David Davis himself , have moved on for one reason or another . The City has to start all over again explaining why , if it ends up being a `` hard '' Brexit , then there will be a whole load of stuff that used to be done out of London that will legally have to be done somewhere else . It 's a thankless enough task banging your head against a brick wall without being presented , some 22 months before the Article 50 deadline , with fresh brickwork . There is potential cause for optimism in the EU 's recent moves on euro-clearing . These stopped short of the `` land grab '' that many in the City had feared and could set up a workable model for future cooperation on financial services . But it is telling that the first move came from the other side of the channel . British politicians need to get their heads around what Brexit means for the City and soon . Otherwise the HMS Brexit will be holed below the waterline before it has even left port . ben.wright @ telegraph.co.uk 'Politicians need to get their heads around what Brexit means for the City '
Scotland Dover queues if there is no Brexit deal , warns EU chief ; Brexit
THE European Union and the UK will face `` severe consequences '' if Britain leaves without a deal , Europe 's chief Brexit negotiator has admitted . These could include `` severe disruption to air transport and long queues at the Channel Port of Dover , '' said Michel Barnier . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has said repeatedly that `` no deal '' is better than a `` bad deal '' and said that the UK is prepared to walk away if necessary . Tomorrow she will trigger Article 50 and begin the formal process of leaving the European Union . Mr Barnier , writing in the Financial Times , said he wants an `` orderly withdrawal '' and hopes for an `` ambitious free trade agreement '' after Brexit . He said : `` It goes without saying that a nodeal scenario , while a distinct possibility , would have severe consequences for our people and our economies . It would undoubtedly leave the UK worse off . '' He added : `` We believe it is in the best interests of both sides to reach a deal . '' He also said that while there is `` no price to pay '' for leaving the EU , `` we must settle our accounts '' , a suggestion that he wants to present the UK with a Brexit divorce bill .
May attacks Deloitte and BBC over leaked memo ; Deloitte memo had no place on BBC news bulletin , says No 10
THERESA MAY yesterday launched direct attacks on one of the world 's biggest consultancy firms and the BBC after a leaked memo claimed the Government could not cope with Brexit . The memo from Deloitte said that an extra 30,000 civil servants may be needed to cope with the additional workload , adding that Whitehall is working on 500 Brexit-related projects . The report in The Times newspaper , which claimed that the memo had been `` prepared for the Cabinet Office '' , was at the top of the news bulletins on BBC Radio 4 's Today programme yesterday morning . However , the Prime Minister 's official spokesman said the memo was `` unsolicited '' and that the consultant who wrote it had not been working for the Government . She accused Deloitte of `` touting for business '' and criticised both The Times and the BBC for the way in which they reported the story . Iain Duncan Smith , a former work and pensions secretary , said that Deloitte should be stripped of Government contracts . Senior Eurosceptic Conservative MPs said the story was `` patent nonsense '' and suggested the release of the document was part of a plot by Remain campaigners to frustrate Brexit . After a day of criticism Deloitte released a statement admitting that the memo was `` not commissioned by the Cabinet Office '' and was `` conducted without access to No 10 or input from other government departments '' . It said that the memo , which was written on Nov 7 by Keith Leslie , apartner at Deloitte , had been intended for an `` internal audience '' . Mr Duncan Smith said : `` It 's the same people trying every device they can to tell the world it 's all miserable and too difficult . `` This non-commissioned report is utterly bogus , gleaned from newspaper cuttings . The Government does n't need any more civil servants . I do n't think this was an accident . They were determined to do as much damage as possible . Is n't it time for those people , the institutions that were very pro-Remain , to take a step back ? '' Eurosceptic Conservative MPs highlighted a survey carried out by Deloitte during the European Union referendum which claimed that Brexit represented the biggest risk that their companies faced . David Sproul , the chief executive of Deloitte UK , was a prominent Remain campaigner and signed a letter calling for the UK to remain of what the impact of Brexit could be - and its plan to cope with the 'worst case'.Although necessary , this falls considerably short of having a 'Government plan for Brexit ' because it has no prioritisation and no link to the overall negotiation strategy . '' Mrs May 's spokesman , however , insisted Mr Leslie had not spoken to anyone in No 10 since the Prime Minister entered office . She said he conducted some work for David Cameron 's government in the immediate aftermath of the referendum . In an unusually frank response , the Downing Street spokesman said : `` I struggle to understand why such an unsolicited memo that has no credence can make front page news or indeed the broadcast bulletins in the morning . '' A BBC spokesman said : `` The early morning bulletins included that the memo reported in The Times was prepared by a consultant . As the story developed , our coverage has reflected Downing Street 's position . '' Amid the row , a think tank also made claims that Brexit represented an `` existential threat '' to the operations of some government departments , according to key figures inside and outside Whitehall . The Institute for Government said Brexit preparations would be `` unsustainable '' unless Philip Hammond uses the Autumn Statement to commit more resources .
Hard Brexit is a threat to Ulster peace process , Irish warn
A HARD Brexit would endanger the Northern Ireland peace process and be unworkable for the Irish Republic , the country 's foreign minister warned last night , urging Theresa May to `` engage sensitively '' with other European states to avoid a destructive Brexit . `` The concept of a 'hard ' Brexit , with a return to 'hard ' borders is not something that is either desirable or workable from our perspective , '' Charlie Flanagan told The Daily Telegraph . He added that the return of a hard border with Northern Ireland threatened to undermine 20 years of normalisation since the end of the Troubles that sees 30,000 border crossings per day . `` The peace dividend of the 'invisible border ' can not be underestimated , '' he said . Speaking ahead of an all-Ireland Brexit conference in Dublin today , Mr Flanagan cautioned Britain against taking a confrontational approach . `` A willingness to engage sensitively with partners , and trying to understand their perspective is always helpful in finding a manageable solution , '' he said . His remarks will be taken as a thinly veiled criticism of Mrs May 's speech to the Tory Party conference last month , which riled leaders across Europe . However , Mr Flanagan , who also holds the trade portfolio , indicated that Ireland was not taking the speech at face value , advising that no one `` should read too much '' into the speech , which delighted Brexiteers by promising an end to free movement . Whilst declining to comment on possible UK demands until the Prime Minister had formally set out her stall in her Article 50 letter next year , Mr Flanagan said that any British move that created tariffs or `` any other trade restrictions '' would be `` unwelcome '' to Dublin . Some £1.2 billion worth of trade passes between the UK and Ireland each week and officials fear that a hard Brexit would lead to job losses and falling tax receipts . The 18 per cent fall in the pound has already caused business closures among UK-dependent Irish agricultural exporters . Among the biggest fears is that UK demands to control immigration from continental Europe will lead to the end of the Common Travel Area that has allowed British and Irish citizens to move freely between the two countries since 1923 .
Scotland Davidson : Brexit may take decades just like devolution ; Independence 'bandwagon ' has gone backwards
RUTH DAVIDSON yesterday warned that Britain 's exit from the European Union could take decades to resolve as another opinion poll showed no surge in support for Scottish independence . The Scottish Conservative leader compared the Brexit negotiations to the devolution process , which she said started with a referendum in 1997 and is still continuing this year with the transfer to Holyrood of new tax and welfare powers . In a speech at the European Council on Foreign Relations in London , she argued this lengthy process was a `` good parallel '' for Brexit and said the deal struck with the EU could still be changed after the two-year Article 50 process to leave is complete . Ms Davidson also announced a new expert panel to advise her on Brexit and argued that what appeared to be an independence `` bandwagon '' in the wake of June 's EU referendum has since gone backwards . Her analysis was borne out by another opinion poll today , showing Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 47 per cent of Scots are opposed to independence and 41 per cent support it , with 12 per cent unsure . Kantar TNS , which conducted the survey between Aug 10 and Sept 4 , said the findings showed `` little evidence '' of any growth of support for separation . When the `` do n't knows '' were removed , support for independence was at 47 per cent and opposition 53 per cent . Although this is marginally higher than the 45 per cent the nationalists received in the 2014 referendum , the pollster said this was not statistically significant . Referring to the Scottish Parliament , Ms Davidson said : `` When it was first set up in 1999 , it became a cliché to declare that this was a 'process not an event ' . The point was , while power was being transferred from London to Edinburgh in the form of a Bill , devolution would take time and would evolve . `` And indeed it has : later this year , we will adopt tax and welfare powers than were never even conceived when devolution was first proposed . The legal framework is one thing . The change in political culture is another . I believe the same thing will be true of Brexit . '' The Tory leader also defended the UK Government against `` unfair '' criticism that it had failed to clarify what Brexit means , arguing it was right that Theresa May did not want to `` limit her options '' ahead of talks with Brussels . Ms Davidson said politicians who backed the Remain campaign had a duty to seek out opportunities for Scotland in areas such as fishing or farming . `` We should take our time in order to negotiate a bundle of bespoke agreements which are tailored to our national interest '' she said . Ms Davidson said Nicola Sturgeon had `` got it wrong '' in the aftermath of the referendum by declaring independence was `` highly likely '' and her hopes of a snap rerun of the 2014 vote had been `` parked in a lay-by '' in the face of referendum fatigue . The Scottish Tory leader 's new advisory panel includes Gavin Hewitt , the former chief executive of the Scotch Whisky Association , as well as Sir Iain McMillan , the former director of CBI Scotland . Mike Russell , the SNP 's Brexit negotiations minister , accused Ms Davidson of a `` sell-out of enormous proportions '' after she warned of the dangers of leaving the EU during the referendum campaign . He said : `` Scotland 's Tories are acting as a smoke screen for a UK Tory government that can not answer a single question about what Brexit means and who are putting jobs , investment and Scotland 's economy at risk . ''
Dishonesty on both sides of the debate is harming Brexit 's chances ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - I was disappointed to read that the Brexit share of the poll is falling ( report , May 24 ) . The Leave campaign is not getting its message across . Many people , particularly the younger generation , who have never known Britain outside the EU , believe that Brexit would leave us virtually cut off from Europe , and that even visiting would be difficult . In reality we would not notice much difference - we already need passports and different currency . Studying in Europe was perfectly possible before we joined the EU . Unfortunately , the Leave campaign is exaggerating the money that would be saved by leaving . We would not save £350 million a week , as some of that money comes back to us . However , we would be free to spend the money as we wished . A promise to continue providing support to those who currently rely on EU funding ( such as farmers and scientific researchers ) would be helpful . Richard Unwin Amport , Hampshire SIR - It is not surprising that the polls suggest a fall in support for Brexit among the older generation . The British are cautious by nature and many will succumb to the fear tactics of the Remain campaign . Only voters with determination , vision and courage - and who believe in our country - will do the right thing . Gerry Walsh South Rauceby , Lincolnshire SIR - A memorable soundbite for the Leave campaign ( Letters , May 19 ) might be `` SOS - save our sovereignty '' . A Z Miller Edgware , Middlesex SIR - I think the Leave campaign might regain some lost ground if it were to replace the word Brexit with Brescape . Glenn Mitchell London SW16 . SIR - I have helped to run several street stalls for the Leave campaign in our area , and the results of our straw poll show a consistent support for Brexit of over 70 per cent . The most passionate and committed supporters are of the older generation . Colin Bullen Tonbridge , Kent SIR - I have asked relatives , friends and acquaintances , but nobody knows anyone who has ever been polled , at any time , about anything . Our age range is 18 to 80. Who is being polled ? Dr Ian Perry Shaftesbury , Dorset SIR - David Cameron 's latest scare tactic is to predict that holidays will cost hundreds of pounds more if Britain votes to leave the EU . This wo n't be true if people choose to take their holiday in Britain . Mr Cameron goes to Cornwall , where the sun shines , the beaches are clean , accommodation is reasonably priced and everyone speaks English . What could be better than Brexit and a Cornish holiday ? Mick Ferrie Mawnan Smith , Cornwall
We must seize the opportunities of Brexit , not kow-tow to a Davos elite
As the weeks roll by , the evidence is piling up that the UK economy is doing really rather well . Last week 's published economic statistics included a rise of 102,000 in employment in three months , record VAT receipts and growth of GDP in Q4 of 0.5pc , slightly faster than in the previous quarter and above expectations . Last week Lord O'Neill , a former Treasury minister and prominent Remainer , admitted that the economy has done a lot better than expected . Nevertheless , he suggested that it had been bolstered by the dynamic performance of the North West , doubtless helped by the `` Northern Powerhouse '' project , driven by George Osborne , the former chancellor , aided and abetted by none other than one Lord O'Neill - and , perhaps more importantly , by the strength of the world economy . The UK would be doing even better than it is , he said , if we had not voted to leave the EU . This has become the Remainers ' lament . Unsurprisingly so , because it has the merit of being unfalsifiable . We do not know what would have happened without the Brexit vote . The idea has some superficial support from the fact that the UK has slipped down the international growth league . Whereas we used to be at the top of the G7 , recently we have surpassed only Italy and Japan . Some people have suggested that this change in ranking gives at least a crude measure of the size of the Brexit effect . But the key word here is `` crude '' . The UK 's relative position before the vote was unsustainable , since it relied upon rapid growth of domestic demand , led by consumer spending , in advance of what was occurring in our major markets overseas . Hence the large and growing current account deficit . Moreover , when you look at the components of GDP , it is difficult to find convincing evidence of a pure Brexit effect . Investment spending was supposedly going to collapse . It did n't . Indeed , in 2017 the growth of investment was faster than it had been in 2016 . True , the growth of consumers ' expenditure fell back from 3pc in 2016 to 1.5pc last year . But there is no mystery about why this happened . Real incomes were squeezed by the rise of inflation which derived from the fall of the pound . Admittedly , Brexit is widely credited as the trigger for this , but the pound had been overvalued for years , as manifested in a yawning current account deficit . We desperately needed a weaker pound in order to rebalance the UK economy . And the rebalancing has begun , with net exports now boosting GDP . As this effect builds up and the squeeze on consumers abates , while the cyclical burst currently enjoyed in the eurozone subsides , there is every chance that the UK will rise in the league tables again - and this time on a more sustainable basis . Nevertheless , official forecasters are still enveloped by gloom . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , is evidently angling for a minimal Brexit , doubtless supported by the experts in the Treasury who fear some sort of catastrophe from a full Brexit . But should we take any notice of what they are saying ? It is worth recalling that in 2016 the Treasury said : `` The analysis in this document comes to a clear central conclusion : a vote to leave would represent an immediate and profound shock to our economy . That shock would push our economy into a recession and lead to an increase in unemployment of around 500,000 , GDP would be 3.6pc smaller ... compared with a vote to remain . '' To be fair , it did forecast a major fall in the pound but it appeared to view this as a bad thing . To recognise the range of possible outcomes , the Treasury also presented an alternative prospect , as follows : `` In this severe scenario , GDP would be 6pc smaller , there would be a deeper recession , and the number of people made unemployed would rise by around 800,000 compared with a vote to remain . '' Curiously , there was n't an upside scenario . Funny that . Oh well , better luck next time ! This ingrained pessimism apparently extends to big business . Jeremy Warner , my colleague , has reported that at Davos last week many corporate leaders were nonplussed at the idea that Brexit Britain could believe that it was embracing free trade while walking away from the largest free trade area in the world . Let me clarify this issue for them . The EU is not a free trade area ; it is a customs union . This means that although it brings free trade between its members , it inhibits trade between members and countries outside the union through the imposition of tariffs and other restrictions , except where there is a free-trade agreement ( FTA ) . And , lest they have somehow missed this point , let me emphasise that the EU does not have many significant FTAs . The reasons why it is so bad at trade policy are the same as the reasons why it is bad at just about everything else : managing its own budget , agricultural policy , fisheries policy , immigration policy and the common currency . It is a profoundly dysfunctional entity . Accordingly , when we leave the EU we can move towards free trade by either entering FTAs with other countries , including with the EU , or by unilaterally dropping our tariffs and other trade restrictions . For the Government to kow-tow to the leaders of big business and their lobby groups in myopic pursuit of their perceived self-interest would be a total dereliction of duty . The Government must raise its sights . It keeps banging on about the need to increase productivity . The best way to achieve this would be to unleash greater competition , a refashioned regulatory regime and freer trade as a result of Brexit . This can not be achieved by seeking regulatory alignment with the EU and foregoing the right to forge our own trade policy . The Government also keeps banging on about the need to boost investment in the UK . It should heed its own advice by investing in a full Brexit . Roger Bootle is chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com 'The EU is not a free trade area ; it inhibits trade between members and countries outside the union through the imposition of tariffs '
Schoolboy excuses are not enough , Mr Davis ; Sketch
David Davis and the mystery of the missing homework : the story so far . Dec 14 , 2016 : Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , tells MPs he 's `` in the midst of carrying out about 57 sets of analysis '' on the impact of Brexit on different sectors of the economy . June 25 , 2017 : Mr Davis tells the BBC : `` We 've got 50 , nearly 60 sectoral analyses already done . '' Oct 26 , 2017 : Mr Davis tells MPs that these analyses offer `` excruciating detail '' . Nov 1 , 2017 : MPs vote for Mr Davis to hand over the analyses , so they can be examined by the Brexit select committee . In response , Mr Davis says that , `` as we have made clear '' , it is `` not the case '' that these analyses `` exist '' . He does , he says , have `` a range of documents '' , but MPs will need to give him `` time '' to `` bring together this information in a way that is accessible '' . So , to recap : Mr Davis both has and has n't produced almost 60 reports , and each one is simultaneously detailed , sketchy , and non-existent . Welcome to Schrödinger 's Government . On Monday , a tranche of documents was finally delivered to the Brexit select committee . They were , however , heavily redacted . Yesterday , Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , demanded that Mr Davis come to the Commons to explain himself . Yet , to outcry from Labour ( `` WHERE IS HE ? `` ) , he did n't appear . Instead Robin Walker , an anxiouslooking young squirrel of a junior minister , was sent to speak on his boss 's behalf . `` We were clear from the start that the documents did not exist in the form requested , '' piped Mr Walker , gamely . `` Indeed , there has been some misunderstanding about what the sectoral analysis actually is ... '' If any schoolboys were watching , they 'll have picked up some useful tips . `` Jenkins ! Where is your book report ? It was due in last Friday . You have read the book , have n't you ? '' `` As I have made clear from the start , Sir , my report does not exist in the form requested . I have conducted a wide range of analysis of the blurb on the back of the book , and the author 's Wikipedia page , but it will take time to collate and bring together this information in a way that is accessible . '' The Commons was beginning to boil . The Government , snapped Sir Keir , lacked `` transparency and accountability '' . But it was n't only Remainers who complained . Jacob Rees-Mogg ( Con , N Somerset ) and Philip Hollobone ( Con , Kettering ) - both Brexiteers - said that if the Government had n't wanted to hand over the information in full , it should have amended the motion requiring this . It had n't . A succession of MPs asked John Bercow , the Speaker , whether Mr Davis was guilty of contempt of Parliament . Mr Bercow turned to Mr Walker , and told him to clear Mr Davis 's diary : he would be questioned by the select committee `` very soon indeed '' . It sounds as though Mr Davis will need to do some serious prep . I hope the dog does n't eat it .
EU threat to City risks new crisis ; Stock market says the global economy will suffer if London is stripped of financial roles The path to Brexit Firms need clarity or they will leave , says City grandee
FRANCE and Germany risk starting a new financial crisis if they try to use Brexit to dismantle the London-based heart of the global economy `` just to make a political point '' , one of the City 's most senior figures warns today . Xavier Rolet , the chief executive of the London Stock Exchange Group , says European leaders who demanded tighter global regulation after the 2008 financial crisis are now threatening to `` fragment '' those same standards to punish Britain for Brexit . Writing in The Daily Telegraph , Mr Rolet calls on the Bank of England and regulatory bodies in Europe to speed up talks to ensure the carefully constructed system of global regulation developed to stop unexpected risks emerging does not collapse . He calls for an `` update '' on the progress of these talks to reassure international financial firms . The head of the stock market uses today 's article to welcome Theresa May 's call for a transition period to give business certainty but said that the details must be agreed before the end of the year . British jobs will begin relocating abroad next year if the uncertainty continues , he warns . Mr Rolet intervened as it emerged last night that Germany is secretly working on proposals for a `` comprehensive free trade accord '' with Britain . There is also evidence that Brussels is prepared to begin talks within the European Union over what trade discussions may look like , but it will not agree to formal negotiations beginning . Mrs May will travel to Brussels tomorrow for a crucial meeting with EU leaders who are under intense pressure to begin trade talks amid fears over the impact on the global economy caused by the diplomatic stand-off . With Brexit talks deadlocked , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , accused Brussels yesterday of using time pressure to see if `` they can get more money out of us '' . His counterpart , Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , hit back by blaming Britain for the delay , saying Mrs May 's decision to call the snap election had cost time . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , also appeared to hand European leaders a boost by saying that a `` no deal '' Brexit was `` unthinkable '' - despite Mrs May 's claims to the contrary . Mr Rolet will today address a crossparty group of MPs and business leaders when he gives a speech on Brexit in the Palace of Westminster . He will make a direct appeal to European leaders not to make `` protectionist '' moves to strip London of its status as a clearing house for trades carried out in euros - a move first mooted by France 's then-president François Hollande within days of the EU referendum . London has been the global centre for clearing - in which financial trades are carried out through a third party - since the G20 demanded better financial regulation in 2009 . Leaders including Angela Merkel were among the architects of the system that put London at the heart of the clearing system , which makes it far easier for regulators to monitor millions of daily trades through a centralised system . It also saves companies billions of pounds by pooling risk . Mrs Merkel said at the time that `` we have to make sure we learn the lessons of the crisis and make sure it is not repeated '' . Mr Rolet says taking back euro trading into the eurozone would `` increase systemic financial risk '' because `` the global monitoring of risk would be impaired and that risk more heavily concentrated '' . He adds : `` To those who want to dismantle rather than build on a system of global regulatory standards that protects taxpayers and reduces the cost of capital we say : do not willingly diminish systemically important global financial market infrastructure just to make a political point . '' Mr Rolet says it is `` imperative '' firms are given certainty on the Brexit implementation phase so they can plan ahead . Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank of England , told MPs yesterday that Europe 's financial stability would take a bigger hit than Britain 's in the event of a `` no deal '' Brexit .
Scotland Madness to cut EU trade , says Hammond
PHILIP HAMMOND has said it would be `` madness '' not to seek `` the closest possible arrangement '' with the EU in comments that appear to widen the gulf between the Chancellor and Theresa May over Brexit . Mr Hammond , who flew to Hamburg with the Prime Minister for the G20 summit , suggested that leaving the EU was a `` political argument '' and stressed that the EU `` will remain our largest trading partner '' . His comments jarred with Downing Street 's outward-looking trade agenda and come as Mrs May uses the G20 to talk trade with leaders of the world 's three biggest economies : President Trump , President Xi Jinping of China and President Shinzo Abe of Japan . Today she will hold a one-to-one meeting with Mr Trump . Mr Hammond , a former Remain campaigner who favours a softer Brexit than Mrs May , appeared to prioritise the importance of keeping strong trading links with the EU yesterday without mentioning other major nations . He said those who voted , like him , to remain in the EU `` want to see a Brexit that looks sensible to them '' . He added that they want `` a Brexit that is focused on protecting jobs , business , prosperity , trade , a Brexit that recovers sovereignty for the UK but also recognises the reality that ... the EU will remain our largest trading partner and Continued on Page 4
No Brexit deal 'chaos for aerospace industry '
GROWTH in Britain 's aerospace indus­ try , the world 's second largest , will be hurt by failure to secure a good Brexit deal , sector chiefs have warned . The prospect of Britain crashing out of the European Union in 2019 having not negotiated an exit deal was de­ scribed as `` chaos '' and `` the worst pos­ sible outcome '' by trade body ADS . Launching its annual assessment of the industry , ADS said UK aerospace companies ' combined turnover rose by 8pc last year to £31.8bn , placing Britain behind only the US . Almost 90pc of demand is from overseas , making the sector one of the UK 's biggest goods exporters . The ind­ ustry employs 120,000 people directly , mostly in highly skilled and well­paid jobs , with a further 118,000 positions supported by aerospace companies . Paul Everitt , chief executive of ADS , said the election presented an opportu­ nity for politicians to rethink their approach to Brexit negotiations . `` Last week the country signalled it wanted a more collaborative approach , '' he said . `` No deal is the worst possible outcome for the UK and Europe . In no way shape or form is it acceptable . Finding the best agreement will require compro­mise and pragmatic decisions by the UK and its European partners . '' ADS wants Britain to remain within the single market , maintain free move­ ment of goods and staff , and to a retain a voice in regulation of the sector . Aerospace is uniquely exposed to Brexit . International agreements mean it is largely exempt from trade tariffs likely to be imposed on other sectors if Britain leaves the EU without a deal . Although no entire aircraft are built in the UK , British companies are ex­ perts in certain areas and components . For example Rolls­Royce 's jet engines and the wings for Airbus 's airliners are designed and built at bases in Bristol and Broughton , North Wales . Should a hard Brexit mean customs borders are imposed , it will most likely result in an increase in costs from extra red tape , as companies will have to track components and their origin at a level of detail not previously seen . Controls on immigration could also hamper the industry because of a skills shortage for the specialised work , Mr Everitt said . The industry is likely to feel the pain of a hard Brexit on a long­ term basis as companies decide against basing new projects in the UK . `` We are an industry that works on a fairly long­ term cycle , '' Mr Everitt said . `` It is likely to be an incremental effect felt in 10 to 15 years . '' Last week Fabrice Brégier , chief operating officer of Airbus , which employs about 10,000 staff in the UK , said if there was an unfavourable Brexit deal , the plane maker would find it `` very easy to have a new plant some­ where in the world for new projects '' . £31.8bn Last year 's combined turnover of UK aerospace companies , a rise of 8pc , according to ADS
City leaders add commitment to stay in London
BUSINESS and banking leaders have offered further commitments to the UK post- Brexit , as managers reported growth in British businesses has fallen to a four-year low . Google executive Matt Brittin and Barclays chairman John McFarlane praised the UK 's expertise in technology and financial services respectively , saying this gave businesses a reason to stay here . It comes as just 39pc of UK firms surveyed by the Chartered Management Institute said they experienced growth following June 's referendum , the lowest figure since 2012 . Of the 1,118 managers surveyed , 65pc were pessimistic about the economy over the next 12-18 months while 49pc expect Brexit will weigh on growth over the next three to five years . Some 35pc also said they lack confidence in `` UK leadership and management 's ability to capitalise on post-Brexit opportunities '' . But only 25pc were pessimistic about prospects for their own businesses over the next year , in line with levels recorded over the past year . Barclays ' chairman Mr McFarlane meanwhile told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that it made sense for both Britain and the EU that certain services stayed in the City of London after Brexit . Fund manager Helena Morrissey added : `` The City was successful long before the EU was created , and it has all the potential to be successful for decades if not centuries to come . We have had people before flexing their muscles and saying they 're out of here and then realising , actually , London is the place to be . ''
Brexit is an opportunity to set migration levels that work for everyone ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Warnings from business about the damaging effects of limiting immigration are www.alarmist.No one has made the presumption that Brexit will lead to a complete end to immigration . What Brexit should do is ensure that those people from other countries who wish to work here do so after proper entry controls are applied . That is a very positive step to take for businesses , and one which should benefit the country immensely . Mick Ferrie Mawnan Smith , Cornwall SIR - Angela Merkel says that if an exception is made for Britain over freedom of movement it would put that fundamental EU principle in danger - because everyone would want the same exception ( report , November 16 ) . But if everyone would want the same exception , what support can there be in the EU for the principle in the first place ? And if the principle has so little support , why not abandon it ? If the principle were abandoned , the reason why many voted for Brexit would disappear , and there would be a majority for staying in the EU.Mike Lightfoot Northallerton , North Yorkshire SIR - It seems that many would like Theresa May - unilaterally and well in advance of formal negotiations - to assure Europeans living and working in Britain that they will be able to carry on doing so after Brexit . I disagree . Acting without a similar assurance from the EU places British expats living in EU countries in a more precarious position - and removes a lever by which we can secure rights for them . To secure these rights later may involve a price we would much prefer not to have to pay.Ralph Griffiths New Malden , Surrey SIR - Justice Hale , a Supreme Court judge , is correct that referendums are not legally binding ( report , November 16 ) but she forgets that they are electorally binding . She is also wrong about rights being automatically lost . It is a peculiarity of English law that , once a right is given , it can only be removed by legislation , not the repeal of legislation . A right is a matter of common law , even when granted by legislation , and common law can only be amended by legislation.Bozidar Zabavnik London W12 SIR - Reis Mitchell ( Letters , November 15 ) suggests that it would be a sad reflection on our democracy if a number of MPs voted to invoke Article 50 purely in order to save their jobs . Surely it would be a fine example of democracy if , by voting for Brexit , they put their views aside in order to follow the wishes of their constituents . Alistair Mackay Dunoon , Argyllshire SIR - The Brexit formula is simple : stop paying and stop obeying.Sandy Pratt Dormansland , Surrey
Scotland Cabinet at loggerheads over life after the EU ; Ministers express their frustration as Prime Minister disallows talks over Britain 's 'end state '
CABINET tensions over Brexit emerged last night after Philip Hammond disclosed that Theresa May had not allowed her ministers to discuss the `` end state '' of life beyond the EU . Sources have expressed `` frustration '' over Brexit negotiations , with trade talks with the EU possibly just days away . The Chancellor said that senior ministers had only held `` general discussions '' about Britain 's post-Brexit relationship with the EU but insisted it would be `` premature '' to hammer out the Government 's desired destination before the second phase of negotiations . He also clashed with Downing Street over the so-called Brexit divorce bill , telling MPs that Britain would pay regardless of the outcome of the negotiations - a position that has not been supported by Downing Street . Mr Hammond 's admission that the Brexit `` end state '' had not been discussed came during an appearance before the Treasury Select Committee . He told MPs : `` That is something that will be done first in the sub-committee that has been constituted to deal with this issue and of course logically that will happen once we have confirmation that we have reached sufficient progress and that we are going to begin the phase two negotiations with the EU 27 . `` We are not yet at that stage and it would have been premature to have that discussion . '' Downing Street said Cabinet will discuss the Brexit `` end state '' before the end of the year . But another Cabinet source said : `` There are voices from both the Leave and Remain supporters in the Cabinet that would welcome the chance to discuss the end state before we move onto the next phase . There is frustration that that still has n't taken place . '' Mr Hammond was also asked by the committee whether settling the divorce bill depended on the UK and Brussels striking a trade agreement . He replied : `` Nothing is agreed until everything is agreed ... but I find it inconceivable that we as a nation would be walking away from an obligation that we recognised as an obligation . `` That is just not a credible scenario . That 's not the kind of country we are and frankly it would not make us a credible partner for future international agreements . '' The Prime Minister 's spokesman said that negotiations had been taking place `` in the context of building a future relationship '' with Brussels but did not go as far as Mr Hammond , adding that `` nothing is agreed until everything is agreed and that applies to any financial settlement '' . Mr Hammond 's comments appeared to contradict Liz Truss , the Chief Secretary to the Treasury , who told MPs on Nov 29 that `` any settlement that we make is contingent on us securing a suitable outcome '' . A draft copy of the withdrawal agreement states that Britain would pay no upfront Brexit bill but would have to pay for `` ongoing liabilities '' over the decades as they arose , according to the Politico website .
Labour MPs jeer Field for claiming their constituents want to leave EU ; Brexit debate ; Veteran heckled by own party as first of eight Brexit sessions lays bare divisions in both main parties
LABOUR MPs turned on their veteran colleague Frank Field in the House of Commons yesterday for daring to suggest that voters in the party 's electoral heartlands supported Brexit . Mr Field was heckled by Labour MPs as he told them they `` needed educating '' to accept that the majority of their constituents voted to leave the European Union . Divisions in both the Labour and Conservative parties were laid bare as MPs began the first of eight sessions in the Commons about the European Union ( Withdrawal ) Bill which formally writes into British law thousands of Brussels regulations after the UK has left the EU . Mr Field , the Labour MP for Birkenhead , said that as a Brexiteer - while he was backed by most members of the public - he was not supported by most Labour MPs . To jeering and catcalls from fellow Labour MPs , he said : `` I am supported by people largely whose constituents agree with me and not their views . And how they deal with that is not my problem . I agree it is a difficult problem . `` Generally speaking , the larger the Labour majority in a general election - and the one before that and the one before that - the more likely they were to vote leaving . Labour voters - the larger the majorities generally speaking - the more clearly they spoke about Brexit . '' As Labour MPs reacted with fury , and tried to interrupt , Mr Field , a former minister in Tony Blair 's government , said it was the `` Labour side that needs educating as to where Labour voters are '' . During the debate Sir Bill Cash , the veteran Tory chairman of the EU scrutiny committee , said millions of people had died for the freedoms offered by Brexit . He said : `` We have just had Remembrance Day . I just want people to reflect on the fact that those millions of people who died in those two world wars died for a reason - it was to do with sustaining the freedom of democracy in this House . `` My own father was killed in Normandy fighting for this country ... People understand the real reasons why self-government is so important . The European Communities Act was the greatest power grab since Oliver Cromwell . '' Kenneth Clarke , the pro-EU former Tory chancellor , won cheers from Labour and SNP MPs when he declared he was now the `` rebel '' in the Tory party . He said : `` He [ Bill Cash ] now represents orthodoxy , party loyalty . I 'm the rebel . I espouse the policies that the Conservative Party has followed for the 50 years of my membership of it until we had a referendum 18 months ago . '' Mr Clarke said that amending Brexit legislation to include Britain 's exit date from the European Union could be `` positively harmful to the national interest '' and was `` ridiculous and unnecessary '' . Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general who is leading a group of Tory MPs who want to amend the Bill , said Brexit was a `` great and historic error '' and a `` process of national self-mutilation '' . And he attacked the decision by Theresa May , the Prime Minister , last week to back a `` mad amendment '' to the Bill to set a time and date when the UK leaves the EU . Mr Grieve , who himself has tabled 19 changes to the Bill , said the amendment had not been discussed with other Cabinet ministers saying it was tabled `` without any collective decision-making in government at all '' . It had also been `` accompanied with blood-curdling threats that anybody who might stand in its way was in some way betraying the country 's destiny and mission . I am afraid I am just not prepared to go along with that . '' Anna Soubry , another pro-EU MP , reiterated her determination to rebel : `` The date going into the Bill has really upset a lot of really top-quality backbench Conservative MPs . `` There were some people there who have never rebelled and they are now talking , for the first time ever , of rebelling . '' Ms Soubry also called Bernard Jenkin , a senior Tory MP who backed Brexit , a `` disgrace '' when he said MPs who voted to trigger Article 50 but did not back a leaving date and time `` are open to the charge that they do not want us to leave '' the EU . Speaking for the Government , Steve Baker , a Brexit department minister , said it was `` an essential Bill in the national interest which will ensure that whatever the outcome of the negotiations the statute book can continue function . `` The amendments would have the consequence of destroying this Bill 's capacity to function in the event a withdrawal agreement was not concluded , ' he said . `` And let me be clear , as a consequence of these amendments the Bill 's crucial provisions could not come into effect until a second Act was passed . `` The consequence would be legal chaos in the event that the second Act was not passed before March 29 2019 . '' Rebel MPs Did they follow their constituents ' wishes ? ? Heidi Allen , 2015 intake Voted : Remain How South Cambridgeshire voted : Remain with 70,694 votes ( 61.6 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Anna Soubry , former minister Voted : Remain How Broxtowe voted : Leave with 51,049 votes ( 52.4 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Nicky Morgan , former education secretary Voted : Remain How Loughborough voted : Leave with 53,050 votes , ( 50.3 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Dominic Grieve , former attorney general Voted : Remain How Beaconsfield voted : Remain with 51,733 votes ( 50.7 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Kenneth Clarke , ex-chancellor Voted : Remain How Rushcliffe voted : Remain with 57,176 votes ( 58.7 % ) Voted against Article 50 Bill ? Stephen Hammond Voted : Remain How Wimbledon voted : Remain with 71,112 votes ( 73 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Bob Neill , former justice minister Voted : Remain How Bromley voted : Remain with 47,028 votes ( 50.2 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Jeremy Lefroy Voted : Remain How Stafford voted : Leave with 55,096 votes ( 57.2 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Oliver Heald , former solicitor general Voted : Remain How North East Hertfordshire voted : Leave with 50,709 votes ( 51.4 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Vicky Ford , 2017 intake Voted : Remain How Chelmsford voted : Leave with 54,866 votes ( 50.5 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Tom Tugendhat , chairman of the foreign affairs select committee Voted : Remain How Tonbridge and Malling voted : Leave with 54,351 ( 52.6 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Jonathan Djanogly , former junior minister Voted : Remain How Huntingdon voted : Leave by 62,690 votes ( 55.3 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Sarah Wollaston , chair of liaison committee Voted : Remain How Totnes voted : Leave with 45,650 votes ( 54.1 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Paul Masterton , 2017 intake Voted : Remain How East Renfrewshire voted : Remain with 66,759 votes ( 74.3 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill ? Antoinette Sandbach , 2015 intake Voted : Remain How Eddisbury voted : Leave with 45,528 votes ( 52.2 % ) Voted for Article 50 Bill 'I am supported by people largely whose constituents agree with me and not their views . And how they deal with that is not my problem '
Let me be clear : Brexit is happening on Friday , March 29 2019 , at 11pm ; Comment
The Government has this week published a cross-party-backed amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill which puts on the face of the Bill the date of our departure from the European Union . Let no one doubt our determination or question our resolve , Brexit is happening . It will be there in black and white on the front page of this historic piece of legislation : the United Kingdom will be leaving the EU on March 29 2019 at 11pm GMT . The EU Withdrawal Bill is the single most significant piece of legislation in this Parliament because it is fundamental to delivering a smooth and orderly Brexit . First , the Bill will repeal the European Communities Act from our statute book . In our future relationship - the deep and special partnership I want to see - our laws will once again be made in Westminster , not in Brussels ; and the judges interpreting those laws will sit in courts in our country , not in Luxembourg . Second , this Bill will convert the body of existing EU law into British law . This provides the greatest possible clarity and certainty for all businesses and families across the country from the very moment we leave the EU . It says that from the outset , the same rules and laws that apply to them before Brexit will apply to them after Brexit - and that any changes we want to make in the law will be subject first to due scrutiny and proper parliamentary debate in Westminster . So as this Bill heads into committee stage next week , I have a very clear view about the approach this government will take . Whether people voted Remain or Leave , I believe that what most people want now is for us to come together and negotiate the best possible Brexit deal for our country 's future . So it is right that as we seek to bring our country together , Members on all sides should come together in scrutinising this Bill . That parliamentary process is important and I am clear that where Members of Parliament think they can improve the Bill , this government will listen to them . Indeed , this amendment to put the date of our departure on the face of the Bill is itself a great example of that - coming as it did with cross-party backing . But I am just as clear of this : we will not tolerate attempts from any quarter to use the process of amendments to this Bill as a mechanism to try to block the democratic wishes of the British people by attempting to slow down or stop our departure from the European Union . The British people have been clear . Parliament itself voted for Article 50 - and for this Bill at its Second Reading . We are leaving the European Union on March 29 2019 . It will be vital for the prosperity and security of our nation to secure the best possible Brexit for our country 's future . As Prime Minister , that is precisely what I am determined to do .
Working with the opposition ? What an extraordinary notion ... ; Brussels leak ; Sketch
The House of Commons was just settling down to another day 's fruitless bickering about Brexit , when someone ventured an unexpected suggestion : what if , instead of sniping at each other , everyone tried working ... together ? `` Damage will be caused if we do n't make progress soon , '' explained Kenneth Clarke , the veteran Tory MP for Rushcliffe . `` So has [ the Prime Minister ] considered asking some trusted minister to make approaches to leading members of the opposition parties , so that in the national interest we can have a consensus in Parliament on the outline of a transition deal ? '' The Commons scratched its collective head . Approaching political opponents ? Consensus ? National interest ? What an extraordinary notion . Politely , Theresa May declined . Her recent speech in Florence , she assured Mr Clarke , had given EU leaders all the `` clarity '' they needed . Mr Clarke looked unconvinced . For all his good intentions , though , an MP of his experience must appreciate that talks between the Tories and Labour would n't necessarily achieve the consensus he dreams of - especially when it comes to Brexit . I think we can imagine roughly how they would go . TORIES : `` Hello , Labour . First of all , just so we 're clear , because we 've been wondering for a while now : what exactly do you want from Brexit ? '' LABOUR : `` Well , we certainly do n't want what you want ! '' TORIES : `` Very possibly . But what do you want ? '' LABOUR : `` Well ... not what you want , that 's for sure ! '' TORIES : `` No doubt . But could you possibly be a bit more specific ? '' Pause . LABOUR : `` We want a good Brexit . Unlike you , who want a bad Brexit ! '' TORIES : `` Very well . How much money would you offer the EU ? '' LABOUR : `` Simple . We would offer the right amount . '' TORIES : `` Of course . And how much is the right amount , precisely ? '' LABOUR : `` Not too much . '' TORIES : `` No . '' LABOUR : `` But also , not too little . '' TORIES : `` Quite . So , just out of interest , what would it be , this amount that is not too much but simultaneously not too little ? '' LABOUR : `` As we have already made perfectly clear : we would offer the right amount . The right amount exactly - and not a penny more . Unlike you Tories - who keep getting the amount completely wrong ! '' TORIES : `` Thank you . Would it be grossly unfair to suggest that , for all your criticism of the Government 's negotiating strategy , you actually have n't a clue how you would do any better in our position , and are privately thanking the Lord that you did n't win the election , otherwise Brexit would be destroying your party in much the same way that it 's destroying ours ? '' LABOUR : `` Typical Tories . We came here for constructive cross-party discussions , and you immediately resort to childish personal abuse . We 're leaving ! ''
Scotland Give me a deal to defend , May implores EU
THERESA MAY has appealed to EU leaders to give her a deal that she can `` defend '' to the British people as she rejected their demands to accept a huge Brexit divorce bill . The Prime Minister said at a dinner in Brussels last night that there was a `` clear and urgent imperative '' for the EU to break the Brexit deadlock and move on to trade talks . A succession of EU leaders told Mrs May that she must make a clear commitment to paying a Brexit divorce bill if she wants talks to progress . Mrs May rejected demands by leading figures in the Leave campaign to declare formally that she is prepared to walk away from the EU if talks do not progress . She instead called for `` joint effort and endeavour '' and for negotiations to be conducted in a new spirit so that Britain and the EU can `` move forward together '' . A senior government official acknowledged , however , that she was `` working against a difficult political backdrop '' amid growing calls for her to walk away without a deal . Mrs May said : `` Both sides have agreed subsequent rounds will be conducted in a new spirit . There is increasingly a sense that we must work together to an outcome we can stand behind and defend to our people . '' Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany said earlier that there were `` encouraging '' signs of progress in Brexit negotiations and suggested there could be a breakthrough in December . However , Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister and one of Britain 's strongest allies in Europe , revealed that he had personally appealed to Mrs May for more clarity on the Brexit divorce bill . `` As long as that is not happening I do n't see how we can move forward , '' he said . Michael Fuchs , the vice-chairman of Angela Merkel 's CDU party , said yesterday that he believed the figure should be between ( EURO ) 60billion and ( EURO ) 100billion ( £54billion and £90billion ) . He said the ( EURO ) 20billion ( £18billion ) the UK has offered `` is definitely not enough '' . The Daily Telegraph understands there are still fundamental differences over whether the European Court of Justice should be able to guarantee the rights of EU citizens living in the UK . The Prime Minister told EU leaders that she `` took stock '' in the summer after she `` recognised the difficulty the negotiating process was in '' . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , said yesterday that there was no prospect of Britain walking away from Brexit negotiations in `` coming weeks '' . The Government yesterday confirmed that it had delayed its flagship Brexit Bill amid concerns it would be defeated after Labour and Tory rebels tabled 300 amendments . There are mounting fears that it will not be enacted until after Christmas . Reports : Page 6 Liam Halligan : Page 16 'There is increasingly a sense we must work together to an outcome we can stand behind '
Labour 's Brexit stance does n't go far enough BODY : To describe Labour 's position on Brexit as inconsistent would be to assign it a coherence that it does not merit . At various times in the past year , the party leadership has given the impression that it both supported leaving the single market and the customs union and staying in them . Whenever one senior figure has emphasised the former , another has popped up to say the opposite . Now the shadow cabinet has reportedly agreed a settled position that Remainers have hailed as a `` game changer '' , but which in essence is very similar to the policy being pursued by the Government . Labour wants to retain the current trading relationship with the EU for a transitional period , while also curbing immigration . This would involve staying in a customs union and observing the rules of the single market for a period of three or four years . The Government seeks something similar , but on a bespoke basis . What is still not clear is whether this is a position that Labour proposes should continue after the transition period that Sir Keir Starmer , the party 's shadow Brexit secretary , said should be `` as short as possible but as long as necessary '' . What does that mean ? Moreover , the party 's vision for the future of the country post-Brexit is no more evident today than it has been for the past 12 months . What would Labour suggest should happen , for instance , if the deal on offer is considered unacceptable to the UK ? Is it Labour 's position now that we stay in the single market come what may ? Labour MPs overwhelmingly voted for triggering Article 50 , and did so on the basis that the UK would leave both the single market and the customs union . Both parties now agree that there should be a transition period before that happens , though there are differences - including in the Cabinet - over how long that would last . But what we are not hearing from Labour is what happens next . Talks are due to get under way again this week , with Britain anxious to get on to the next stages . As Peter Foster , our Europe Editor , reports today , there is pressure on the Commission negotiators to move the process on to trade by October , rather than wait for a final deal on the amount to be paid by the UK as a price for leaving . If Labour has the interests of the country at heart , it should throw its support behind the Government 's efforts to begin serious talks about the UK 's post- Brexit future , rather than cause fresh confusion over Britain 's intentions .
Brexit is for all ages ; established 1855 BODY : Sir Vince Cable thinks that , when it comes to Brexit , `` the old have comprehensively shafted the young '' . Given that only last month Sir Vince , 74 , was named leader of the Liberal Democrats ahead of candidates including Jo Swinson , 37 , he certainly knows a little about the subject . But when it comes to Brexit he is sadly misguided . Certainly a greater proportion of older people than young voted Leave . But would Sir Vince deny them a say ? To do so would be neither liberal , nor democratic . Instead he might ask himself why more older people voted for Brexit . And the obvious answer is that these are the voters who can themselves remember what life was like before Britain handed increasing chunks of its sovereignty away to Brussels by joining the EU . These are the people who are most looking forward to a restoration of such sovereignty , because they have experience of how much it matters , and how profound has been its loss . But that does not mean that they alone will appreciate Britain 's resurgent independence when it comes . As Rishi Sunak and his quartet of fellow , young , Tory MPs , point out on the page opposite , re-establishing British sovereignty and embracing the opportunities for national renewal that come with it , is a concept that appeals to all ages , so the sooner it happens the better .
Blair 's Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : Sir - You report ( March 20 ) that `` Tony Blair admits he did not realise how many migrants would come to the UK after the EU expanded '' . The Blair administration 's decision to allow immediate free entry to citizens of the 10 new EU states in 2004 was greeted with astonishment in central and eastern Europe . In Germany , Austria , France and Italy , months of public discussion led to seven-year transitional controls - the maximum possible - largely because of pressure from the trade unions and Left-wing parties . By avoiding prior debate , Blair made his policy widely unpopular - and the groundwork for Brexit was laid . Dr John Doherty Vienna , Austria Sir - I would not call it lying ; but there seems to be a false memory syndrome going on with Mr Blair 's protestations . I recall that a former adviser of his , Andrew Neather , confessed later that Mr Blair cynically let in thousands `` to rub the Tories ' nose in diversity '' - the expectation being that the migrants would become Labour voters . David Prole London W1 Sir - Why do the broadcast media assume a moral equivalence between Brexit , Donald Trump and the far-Right European political parties ? The latter two , and elements of those who voted for Brexit , may stand for insularity , protectionism and bigotry , but the concept of Brexit , in my view , means the exact opposite . To conflate the three elements is to betray lazy and biased groupthink . Christine Ward Stone , Staffordshire
Blair 's Brexit revolt insults voters , says Boris ; Former PM calls for broad movement to take place of Corbyn 's weak Labour and make the case for Europe
BORIS JOHNSON yesterday accused Tony Blair of `` insulting the intelligence '' of the British public after the former prime minister urged people to `` rise up '' against Brexit . Mr Blair yesterday attacked both the Government and Jeremy Corbyn 's Labour Party as he warned that the UK is heading for `` Brexit at any cost '' . Speaking in the same London location where David Cameron announced his plan to hold an EU referendum , Mr Blair said voters had the `` right to change their minds '' . He pledged to form a cross-party movement to fight Brexit , although he insisted he was not trying to build a new political party . Mr Blair reserved his strongest criticism for Mr Corbyn , saying the `` debilitation of the Labour Party '' that he once led was now a `` facilitator '' for Brexit . He admitted that he was likely to face a `` volley of abuse '' for his comments but said Britain was a `` free country '' and he has a right to his opinions . He spoke as an ICM poll found that 68 per cent of all voters , and a majority of Remain voters , now want the Government to get on with implementing the EU referendum result . Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said : `` We heard all these arguments last year . Not a thing has changed . I think it is insulting the intelligence of the British people to say they got it wrong . `` Be in no doubt that the people of this country were told all sorts of claptrap about the economic consequences of leaving the EU . The very opposite has happened . `` As for Tony Blair , whatever his merits as a former prime minister , this is the guy who would have taken our country into the euro with what would have been catastrophic consequences ; this is the guy who dragooned the UK into the Iraq war on a completely false prospectus ... `` I urge the British people to rise up and turn off the TV next time Tony Blair comes on with his condescending campaign . '' Speaking earlier at Bloomberg , Mr Blair said : `` Yes , the British people voted to leave Europe , and I agree the will of the people should prevail . I accept right now there is no widespread appetite to rethink . `` But the people voted without knowledge of the true terms of Brexit . As these terms become clear , it is their right to change their mind . '' He had criticism for Theresa May as he continued : `` Nine months ago she and the Chancellor [ Philip Hammond ] were telling us that leaving would be bad for the country , its economy , its security and its place in the world . Today , it is apparently a 'once in a generation opportunity ' for greatness . '' And Labour was not spared . Mr Blair said he was setting up his movement in the `` absence of an Opposition which looks capable on the polls of beating the Government '' . He added : `` The debilitation of the Labour Party is the facilitator of Brexit . I hate to say that , but it is true . What this means is that we have to build a movement which stretches across party lines ; and devise new ways of communication . '' It came after Baroness Chakrabarti , the shadow attorney general , told the BBC 's Question Time programme on Thursday night that she expected peers of all parties to water down the Brexit Bill in the House of Lords .
Riddler May leaves us all puzzling again over her policy on Brexit ; Sketch
After a speech , Theresa May takes as few questions as possible from journalists . You 'd think we 'd be grateful . After all , we know that no matter what we ask - particularly if it 's about Brexit - she 's only going to give us the same old semi-answers , so really she 's just saving our time . But no , still we grumble that more of us do n't get called . We 're like the women in that Woody Allen joke from Annie Hall . `` Two elderly women are at a Catskill restaurant . One of them says , 'Boy , the food at this place is just terrible . ' The other one says , 'Yeah , I know . And such small portions . ' `` Yesterday , after a speech in London , the PM took questions from just two journalists . They asked three each , for all the good it did . The day before , she 'd again hinted heavily that Britain must leave the single market . This time she denied that a `` hard Brexit '' - the term Remainers use for withdrawal from the single market - was `` absolutely inevitable '' , and `` those who print things saying I 'm talking about a hard Brexit '' are `` getting it wrong '' . In a way , I do n't mind her talking in riddles . I just wish she could make them more interesting . `` Prime Minister , can you confirm that you intend to withdraw Britain from the single market ? '' `` Well , Tom , let me put it like this . My first is in 'horror ' , but never in 'awe ' . My second 's in 'escape ' , but never in 'door ' . My third is in 'scream ' , but never in 'clap ' . My fourth is the letter on a child 's pointy cap . What kind of Brexit am I ? '' `` Thank you , Prime Minister . Sir Ivan Rogers , who resigned as British ambassador to the EU , said your thinking on Brexit was 'muddled ' . What do you say to voters concerned about your lack of clarity ? '' `` Riddle-me ! Riddle-me ! Riddle-meree ! Perhaps you can tell what this riddle may be ! I 'm what the poor have , and what the rich need . And if I 'm what you eat , you 'll be hungry indeed ! '' `` Thank you , Prime Minister . One final question , if I may . How concerned are you by the latest drop in the value of the pound ? '' `` Ape holds gull ( anag ) . '' Her speech itself was largely devoted to her mission to build `` something that I call 'the shared society ' `` . This would prize `` fairness and solidarity '' , reject `` the cult of individualism '' , allow government to `` repair '' free markets `` when they are n't working as they should '' , and `` take action '' against corporations that `` tear away at the social contract between business and society '' . It sounded strikingly like the sort of thing Ed Miliband used to say . But , while she expressed sympathy for people who feel they 're `` getting by , but not getting on '' , Mrs May did not reveal exactly how she plans to make wages rise . Another riddle to ponder .
Smaller firms look for Brexit boost
ALMOST two thirds of British businesses are `` optimistic '' about their future in the wake of the Brexit vote , a major survey discloses today . A poll of 34,000 companies by the Institute of Directors found that 60 per cent of businesses are `` optimistic '' or `` very optimistic '' about the year ahead . The businesses , mainly small or medium sized , concede there is `` uncertainty '' around the vote to leave the European Union . However , their positivity is in marked contrast to comments by the bosses of Britain 's biggest companies , some of whom have criticised Brexit and even threatened to relocate out of the UK . The findings came as the latest edition of the World Economic League Table said that Britain will overtake France 's economy in the years after Brexit despite the fall in the value of the pound . The table puts Britain in sixth position , after being overtaken by France following the Brexit vote because of currency fluctuations . The forecast , by the Centre for Economics and Business Research , predicts the UK will overtake France by 2026 . According to the IoD survey , the `` net optimism '' figure for British businesses is the highest since the June referendum . About 60 per cent of companies expect to increase revenues in 2017 compared with 15 per cent expecting a fall . However , many of the respondents said they had concerns about the economy `` that could see their expectations prove over-optimistic '' , the IoD said . Half of the companies surveyed said that UK economic conditions are affecting their growth , and 45 per cent felt the uncertain trading status with the EU is holding them back . Four in 10 complained of a skills shortage , demonstrating the need for an immigration system that gives businesses access to people they need . If barriers to growth prove significant and revenues are squeezed , more than a third of companies suggested that they would consider reducing staff ( 38 per cent ) or postponing planned investment ( 40 per cent ) . Many UK businesses want the Government to ensure Britain has access to the single market after Brexit . However , Brussels leaders insist that continued access to the single market would mean Britain being forced to accept freedom of movement . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has made clear that freedom of movement is a `` red line '' and she wants Britain to be able to control EU immigration . Simon Walker , Director General of the IoD , said : `` Businesses are becoming used to uncertainty , and while some speculate on what our relationship with Europe might look like , employers are getting on with the job of growing their businesses and delivering jobs for the UK . `` Business will now look to Government to lay the groundwork for growth , and considering the skills shortage revealed in this survey , it should start by guaranteeing the status of EU citizens working for British businesses . '' The World Economic League Table predicts the United States will remain the world 's leading economy until 2029 , when it is overtaken by China . Business : Page 31
Scotland Four judges to rule on Brexit have previous ties to Europe ; Brexit turmoil ; Supreme Court under scrutiny before appeal on whether Theresa May needs parliamentary vote
FOUR of the Supreme Court judges who will decide whether Theresa May can trigger Brexit have previous links to Europe , it has emerged . One of the judges - who will have the final say over whether a parliamentary vote is needed before Brexit can begin - is a co-founder of an EU legal group , while another helped to choose judges for the European Court of Justice and two more have served in the European Court of Human Rights . The independence of the judiciary will come under intense scrutiny next month when the Supreme Court 's full panel of 11 judges sits . They will be asked to overturn the High Court decision that prevents the Prime Minister from using the royal prerogative to begin Britain 's withdrawal from the EU . The three High Court judges who made that decision on Thursday have been described as an `` elite band '' who `` declared war on democracy '' . Leave campaigners are now pinning their hopes on the Supreme Court to restore the status quo and avoid any delay in invoking Article 50 . They will hear the Government 's appeal from Dec 5 to Dec 8 , but are not expected to give their judgment until the new year , which could delay Brexit even if they find in Mrs May 's favour . The judges include Lord Carnwath of Notting Hill , 71 , an Old Etonian who was the Prince of Wales 's principal legal adviser in the late 1980s and early 1990s , was one of four co-founders of the EU Forum of Judges for the Environment and served as the forum 's secretary general from 2004-05 . The body exists to `` promote the enforcement of national , European and international environmental law '' . Its president from 2006-08 was Lord Reed , 60 , another of the Supreme Court judges who will hear the Brexit appeal . Lord Reed served as a judge in the European Court of Human Rights , where he was on a panel that decided that Robert Thompson and Jon Venables , the child killers of toddler James Bulger , had not received a fair trial . He also acted as an expert adviser to the European Union Initiative with Turkey on Democratisation and Human Rights between 2002 and 2004 , and then became chairman of the Franco-British Judicial Co-operation Committee . Lord Kerr of Tonaghmore , 68 , also sat as a judge in the European Court of Human Rights , ruling on a case in 2001 involving aircraft noise from Heathrow . The former Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland previously worked as senior counsel to the Attorney General . Lord Mance , 73 , began his career working for a law firm in Hamburg , before qualifying as a barrister in 1965 . His time in Germany gave him a taste for international legal affairs and he has represented the UK on the Consultative Council of European Judges , which was set up in 2000 to advise the Council of Europe on the `` independence , impartiality and competence '' of judges . He has also served as a member of a seven-person EU panel that helps select judges and advocates-general of the European Court of Justice and General Court . Also on the panel will be Lord Sumption , once described as the `` cleverest man in Britain '' , who advised the then home secretary Jack Straw over the extradition of the former Chilean dictator General Augusto Pinochet . Pinochet was eventually allowed to leave the country freely in 2000 . Lord Sumption also represented the Government during the 2003 Hutton Inquiry into the death of Dr David Kelly , the UN weapons inspector . The president of the Supreme Court is Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury , whose deputy is Baroness Hale of Richmond , the most senior woman judge in British history . The remaining
Duncan Smith tells Tories to get on with Brexit
TORY tensions over the EU re-emerged yesterday as one of the party 's senior Eurosceptics called on Theresa May to speed up Brexit and issued a series of demands about the shape of a deal . In a sign of rising annoyance over the handling of negotiations , Iain Duncan Smith demanded that the UK leaves the single market and Brexit talks start no later than early 2017 . Divisions are emerging over fears that Mrs May wants a more limited departure from the EU than many Tory backbenchers , given that she campaigned against Brexit . Despite early goodwill for her premiership , Mrs May continues to have a working majority of just 17 - fewer than the number of ministers she sacked after taking office . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , yesterday became the most senior party figure to float the idea of an early election as she cited concerns about rebellious backbenchers . She said the `` usual suspects '' on the backbenches could `` cause problems '' for Mrs May and added that there was a clear `` temptation '' to call an election sooner than 2020 . When Parliament returns from recess in a fortnight , the details of what Britain wants out of the negotiations to leave the EU is expected to be at the top of the political agenda . Mr Duncan Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , attacked `` arrogant '' Europhiles who want to delay triggering Article 50 , in an article in The Sun on Sunday . `` We need to get on with triggering Article 50 , as the Government has said , in early 2017 , '' he insisted , adding that waiting until the German and French elections next year are over would risk turning the referendum result into a `` never-endum '' . Mr Duncan Smith also said Britain should leave the single market , adopt a working permits system on immigration and ensure the UK is not `` under control of European law '' . Concerns about backbench rebellions have led to calls for Mrs May to hold an early election , with polls putting the Tories more than 10 points ahead of Labour and some experts saying she could win a 100-seat majority . `` I can see the temptation , '' Ms Davidson said , during an interview with The Observer . `` She [ Mrs May ] knows if people want to cause problems , they can do that quite quickly . I would like to think that the usual suspects might behave [ now ] in a different manner , but we shall see ... '' Fox 's Boris takeover boast Liam Fox boasted of taking over a `` wing '' of Boris Johnson 's Foreign Office , during an overseas trip . Dr Fox , the International Trade Secretary , told a US radio show last month his department would be near Downing Street to show how importantly the brief was taken . Dr Fox had been accused of a `` land grab '' as he demanded control over key parts of foreign policy .
The Reformation offers a good lesson for Brexit ; Our history tells us that adopting a looser link with Europe can produce fresh ways of thinking
One month on from the Brexit vote , and we 're doing fine . The fundamentals are unchanged : a strong economy , a cohesive society and , lest we forget , we have n't actually left the EU yet . Despite this , some people still talk as though Britain detached itself from the Continent and sank into the ocean . They need to relax - open a beer and enjoy the sunshine . History suggests that ruptures in geopolitics can be the start of something beautiful . Take the 16th-century Reformation . As a Catholic , I am duty-bound to say that Henry VIII 's divorce and the subsequent establishment of the Anglican Church was a disaster . The enormity of its changes - the abolition of the monasteries , sectarian conflict - dwarfs Brexit , implying that leaving the EU just is n't the big deal that Remainers insist . But the Reformation does have two characteristics that hold out hope for a brighter future in 2016 : continuity and the unleashing of the English imagination . England did n't cease to be European after the Reformation , much as it wo n't cease to be European after Brexit . Following our break with Rome , we sought allegiances with Protestant powers and played host to Protestant refugees , such as the Huguenots - among them , a distant relative of Nigel Farage . Catholicism did not evaporate . Elements of Catholic theology remained embedded in the Anglican tradition , while popery crept back into the Royal family . Just as the Protestants struggled to rid England of Catholic influence , so the Catholic recusants accepted aspects of the Reformation as vital . Even when Mary I , the most vicious persecutor of Protestants , launched her counterreformation , she found the only politically feasible way to do it was through Parliament . England immediately following the Reformation was thus still deeply Catholic , but a new political idea was taking hold - that England should be sovereign in all affairs . Certain Reformation-era myths about Englishness remain powerful today . One is geographic . The physical separation from Europe defines our identity , concluded many Protestants , while the proximity of Scotland , Wales and Ireland translates into some English right to dominate them - our equivalent of the Americas ' Manifest Destiny . Another fantasy is that the persecution under Mary and the supposed tolerance of Elizabeth 's Anglican settlement confirms that England tilts towards liberty , while Catholic Europe prefers violent tyranny - a view later confirmed in some minds by Napoleon and Hitler . Perhaps most importantly , the Reformation caused us to investigate ourselves . The emergence of English as an evangelical language spawned the most wonderful literature : The Book of Common Prayer , Paradise Lost , The Pilgrim 's Progress and the visionary poetry of William Blake . This is not to say that Brexit is going to spark an English renaissance : the hymns of Charles Wesley can hardly be compared to Mike Read 's Ukip Calypso . But ruptures prompt nations to rethink who they are and how they govern themselves . And there 's no doubt that the Reformation empowered Parliament . At the height of the British Empire , the Victorians concluded rather arrogantly that they had a duty to spread the march towards democracy and capitalism around the globe . As regards Europe , they wanted to live peacefully with their neighbours but , ultimately , in `` splendid isolation '' . The break from Rome was woven into a narrative of Great Britain as a naval power , sailing westwards from the Continent into the sunset . Brexit contains the seeds of a similar revolution in the English imagination . The Leftist Euroscepticism of Tony Benn sees Brexit as a chance to build a socialist commonwealth . The Rightist tradition of Enoch Powell dreams of a Britain that is smaller and freer - although no one now sees Powell 's grim monoculturalism as a necessary part of that package . Both of these are rooted in Reformation utopianism ; both overlook the practical upsides to Brexit . One is that Parliament will once again be sovereign , but the people increasingly want democracy to be more local . To save the Union , we may have to devolve it completely . Federalism is on its way . But the most obvious benefit to Brexit is that it compels us to look beyond Europe for our markets . I do n't like using history to make predictions , but decoupling from economic alliances has often proved beneficial . When we abandoned the Gold Standard in 1931 , everyone predicted disaster - but it actually helped us get out of the Great Depression . When we slipped out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992 , it felt like the sky had fallen in , but 15 years of astonishing growth followed . Crucially , the future is only as bleak as we allow it to become . Brexit was a vote to reaffirm British self-governance . We may choose to shrink the state and become a bigger , richer Hong Kong . We may choose to nationalise and build the socialist Jerusalem . What we must not choose is what so many Remainers seem to be willing on : we must not choose to fail . FOLLOW Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Inflation : how high will it go after Brexit ? ; What will happen to inflation after Brexit ? Richard Evans canvasses expert opinion in the City
Amid all the predictions about the effects of Brexit , one area of consensus exits : inflation will rise because the falling pound makes imports more expensive . But how high could it be driven ? We look at what City economists expect . Bank of America Merrill Lynch : RPI to reach 3.8pc The bank pointed out that effects of Brexit could push inflation in opposite ways : while the fall in sterling would cause prices to rise , a recession caused by the vote to leave would push them down , as businesses compete amid consumers ' shrinking desire to spend . `` With the course now set for the UK to leave the EU , inflation faces conflicting pressures : the disinflationary influence of the recession we now expect versus the inflationary impact of sterling 's fall . We expect the latter to prevail , in the same way it did in the previous crisis , '' said Mark Capleton and Sebastien Cross of the bank 's global research team . This will lead to a rise in inflation to 3pc before the end of this year , then almost 4pc by the end of 2017 on the retail prices index ( RPI ) measure . JP Morgan Asset Management : CPI to hit 3pc or 4pc `` We think that [ CPI ] inflation could jump to 3pc or 4pc by the second half of 2017 , '' the firm said , although it did n't expect high rates to last long . `` This would be a temporary reaction to a fall in sterling , '' said David Stubbs of JP Morgan . `` Inflation should come back to the Bank of England 's 2pc target quickly . '' He said inflation was already trending upwards as the effect of falls in the oil price dropped out of annual comparisons . Pantheon Macroeconomics : CPI to reach 3pc The consultancy said the outlook for inflation had been `` transformed by sterling 's collapse '' , and that the `` tradeweighted '' sterling index - an average of exchange rates that gives greater weight to those of our largest trading partners - had fallen by 10pc in a week and by 15pc compared with a year ago . Samuel Tombs , Pantheon 's chief UK economist , said the Bank of England had already forecasted that inflation would overshoot its 2pc target slightly in two years ' time and by a bigger margin in three years ' time . `` But those forecasts assumed that sterling would follow a path that is 11pc above its current level , '' he said , implying that inflation would now rise even more . The Bank of England estimates that a 10pc fall in sterling lifts CPI inflation by 0.75 of a percentage point after two to three years , Mr Tombs said . `` So the pound 's 15pc fall is set to boost inflation by just over 1 percentage point . We think CPI inflation will overshoot the [ Bank 's ] 2pc target substantially , hitting 3pc in the second half of 2017 . '' He added : `` The depreciation of the pound will boost petrol prices immediately . Sterling 's fall will also boost food prices - about 40pc of the UK 's food is imported - albeit after a lag of about six months . '' Pantheon said the Bank would probably `` look through '' the rise in inflation , rather than raising interest rates . If it instead reduced Bank Rate from its current level of 0.5pc , as the Bank 's Governor , Mark Carney , has hinted at , sterling would fall even further , adding to inflation . However , it said it expected the UK to stay in the single market , letting the economy recover . A rise in Bank Rate would keep inflation down towards the end of 2017 . Capital Economics : CPI to hit 3pc The consultancy made a similar prediction , although it said the pound could fall further . `` Sterling 's 10pc or so slide could boost the consumer price level by about 3 percentage points , '' said Ruth Miller , a UK economist at the firm . `` And continued economic and political uncertainty , combined with additional monetary easing by the [ Bank of England ] , could push the pound even lower , perhaps to $ 1.20 . '' The pound currently trades at $ 1.35 .
Scotland No tax rises for rest of the decade , pledges May ; Front-runner ; Home Secretary opens her leadership campaign by ditching Osborne 's targets and ruling out second poll
THERESA MAY will rule out new tax rises for the rest of this decade by dropping government plans towards achieving a budget surplus by the end of this parliament if she becomes prime minister . The Home Secretary , who was a `` reluctant Remainer '' during the European Union referendum campaign , said that `` Brexit means Brexit '' and ruled out any prospect of a second referendum or an election before 2020 . Mrs May set out her stall to around 50 Tory MPs in the campaign to succeed David Cameron , presenting herself as an experienced and hard-headed politician who is `` ready and able to do the job from day one '' . Mrs May , who is the odds-on favourite after Boris Johnson 's decision not to run for the leadership , made it clear she will not attempt to back away from last week 's vote to leave the EU , saying `` Brexit means Brexit '' . She said she would not kick off the two-year process of negotiating withdrawal until the UK government 's strategy is agreed - probably not before the end of this year . She said she would create a new Government department , headed by a Cabinet-level minister who had campaigned for Leave , to oversee the country 's departure from the EU . Mrs May told her audience that she would not order an emergency budget in response to the Brexit vote and she also said that , if it was necessary , she was ready to ditch Chancellor George Osborne 's target of achieving budget surplus by 2020 to avoid tax rises . She said : `` While it is absolutely vital that the Government continues with its intention to reduce public spending and cut the budget deficit , we should no longer seek to reach a budget surplus by the end of the Parliament . `` If before 2020 there is a choice between further spending cuts , more borrowing and tax rises , the priority must be to avoid tax increases since they would disrupt consumption , employment and investment . '' Asked if there might be a situation when people from the EU will not be welcome to live and work in the UK , she said `` it will be part of the negotiation '' between the UK and EU . In a surprise move , Mrs May said she would ditch her proposal to pull the UK out of the European Convention on Human Rights . But she stood by the goal of reducing net migration , despite her failure as Home Secretary to help Mr Cameron reach his target of cutting it below 100,000 . Mrs May said that any attempt to `` wriggle out '' of Leave campaign promises to control immigration would be `` unacceptable '' to voters . Mrs May also took several swipes at the man who , when she spoke , was her rival for the Conservative leadership , Mr Johnson - as well as Michael Gove . While some politicians were driven by `` ideological fervour '' or `` ambition and glory '' , she was the unshowy daughter of a vicar who had public service at the heart of her beliefs . In a jibe clearly directed at the former mayor of London , Mrs May said politics was not a `` game '' . She said : `` If you are from an ordinary working-class family , life is just much harder than many people in politics realise . `` Frankly , not everybody in Westminster understands what it 's like to live like this and some need to be told that it is n't a game . `` It 's a serious business that has real consequences for people 's lives . '' Mrs May tried to make a virtue of not being a `` showy '' politician , who toured the television studios , in implicit contrast to the former mayor . `` If ever there was a time for a prime minister who is ready and able to do the job from day one , this is it , '' she said . Mocking Mr Johnson 's purchase of riot control equipment without securing her permission - eventually withheld - to use it , Mrs May joked : `` Boris negotiated in Europe . I seem to remember last time he did a deal with the Germans , he came back with three nearlynew water cannon . '' She concluded : `` My pitch is very simple . I 'm Theresa May and I think I 'm the best person to be prime minister of this country . '' 'If you are from an ordinary working-class family , life is much harder than many people in politics realise '
Rees-Mogg to lead Eurosceptic MPs group ; 'True believer ' in Brexit vows to challenge the Government as head of European Research Group
JACOB REES-MOGG has been elected as leader of an influential Eurosceptic group of Tory MPs and promised to hold the Government to account over Brexit . Eurosceptics said that Mr Rees-Mogg , who stood unopposed to head the European Research Group ( ERG ) , is the ideal candidate for the role because he is a `` true believer '' in Brexit and the benefits it can bring for Britain . It comes amid concerns that the group of more than 60 Eurosceptic Tory MPs has recently been too weak and failed to do enough to challenge the Government . He committed to supporting the `` principles '' of the Prime Minister 's Lancaster House speech last year , in which she set out plans to control immigration and build new trade agreements.Mr Rees-Mogg said : `` I am delighted to have been elected in succession to Suella Fernandes and Steve Baker who were both superb chairmen . In this role I am keen to help the Government implement the principles laid down by the Prime Minister , Mrs Theresa May , in her Lancaster House speech . `` It is especially important to achieve control of our laws , control immigration and achieve new trade agreements with other countries . The ERG speaks individually , not with the collective view , but has considerable support across the parliamentary party . As chairman I intend to be helpful , vigorous and supportive towards government policy of making a success of Brexit . '' His appointment comes at a critical time in negotiations , as Mrs May seeks to reach an agreement with her divided Cabinet over Britain 's future relationship with the European Union . He told The Daily Telegraph : `` The ERG has an important role to play in representing back-bench Eurosceptic views both to the Government and the wider public . There is a strong desire to ensure that the positive emphasis of Brexit is maintained and we focus on the ambition of Brexit to create a more prosperous Britain rather than being bogged down in the minutiae of negotiations . '' The ERG played a key role in the EU referendum as it mobilised Eurosceptic Tory MPs against David Cameron and his pro-Remain Cabinet ministers , including George Osborne , the chancellor at the time . However , senior Eurosceptics said that the group has been far less effective under the leadership of Ms Fernandes , who chaired it while also serving as an aide to Philip Hammond , the Chancellor . One senior Eurosceptic and supporter of Mr Rees-Mogg told The Telegraph : `` We are going to look at Cabinet members and make them stand up for Britain . There are a lot of things that need to be argued for as we enter the next phase of negotiations . We must be at the forefront of the debate . '' The appointment is a significant move for Mr Rees-Mogg , who has been hailed as a potential future leader of the Conservative Party .
Thanks for the war heroics , says Juncker , but now pay up
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER yesterday thanked Britain for liberating Europe during the Second World War before warning the UK would have to pay up for Brexit if it wants to begin talks with the EU over trade and a transition deal . The European Commission president 's demand that Britain meets budget liabilities estimated at £47billion to seal a Brexit deal with Brussels came the day after it emerged that EU leaders were considering taking the first steps towards trade and transition negotiations with Britain . `` I am not hating the British . The Europeans have to be grateful for so many things Britain has brought to Europe , during war , before war , after war , everywhere and every time , but now they have to pay , '' Mr Juncker said to laughter from his audience at a university in his native Luxembourg . `` If you are sitting at a bar and ordering 28 beers and then suddenly some of your colleagues are leaving , it 's OK but they have to pay , they have to pay , '' said Mr Juncker , who has denied having an alcohol problem . He insisted he was not in a `` revenge mood '' , but added : `` I am the first to be impressed by the numerous disadvantages the Brexit , and Brexit means Brexit , is entailing for the British . '' The fifth round of negotiations ended in deadlock on Thursday with huge divisions remaining between the two camps , particularly over the financial settlement the EU believes could be as high as ( EURO ) 100billion ( £89billion ) . In her Florence speech , Theresa May promised ( EURO ) 20billion to ensure no EU member state would pay more or receive less in the current budget cycle , which ends in 2020 . While that brought renewed momentum to negotiations , EU leaders , who meet next week in Brussels , are refusing to start fully fledged talks over transition or trade until the EU judges that `` sufficient progress '' has been made in the three issues of the cocalled Brexit bill , Ireland and citizens ' rights . According to draft conclusions for the summit , they will call on the European Commission to begin internal preparations for future talks but stop short of allowing fully-fledged negotiations on trade and transition to begin .
Scotland Stop bias against Brexit or face fine , BBC warned
THE BBC will face sanctions and fines from its new regulator unless it ends its Brexit bias , a former culture secretary and creator of its impartial Royal Charter warns . John Whittingdale said he is concerned that the corporation is `` constantly looking for negatives and highlighting the challenges '' of Brexit . He warned that , if its negative coverage persisted , MPs could `` escalate '' their complaints to Ofcom , which takes over regulation of the BBC in a fortnight . The regulator has the power to impose sanctions including broadcasting corrections , banning repeats of coverage and imposing a £250,000 fine . More than 70 MPs wrote to the BBC warning its `` perverse and skewed '' coverage risked undermining Brexit . Lord Hall , the BBC 's director-general , said : `` We go to great lengths to ensure that we balance our coverage . ''
Scotland May plans to trigger Brexit in two weeks ; Defeat in Lords over rights of EU citizens fails to disrupt PM 's Article 50 timetable Article 50 rebellion Lords accused of posturing on Brexit Some peers indulged in chest-beating , says IDS , but Corbyn insists that amendment is 'good news '
A DEFIANT Theresa May is determined to push ahead and trigger Article 50 within two weeks as planned despite the House of Lords last night inflicting her first Parliamentary defeat over Brexit . Peers voted to amend the Bill to force the Government to guarantee the rights of EU citizens living in the UK . Seven Tory peers - including Baroness Altmann , the former pensions minister - backed the amendment . However , the Prime Minister is confident it will be rejected by the Commons later this month and Downing Street insisted the timetable for opening negotiations to leave the European Union remains unchanged . Lords who voted to alter the Bill were accused by critics of `` playing with fire '' , pointless `` posturing '' and `` a disservice to the national interest '' . The scale of the Government 's defeat in the Lords , where the proposal to amend the Bill was passed by 358 votes to 256 , prompted speculation Mrs May could face a fresh Tory rebellion when the Bill returns to the Commons . Conservative whips are confident , however , that no more than a handful of Tory MPs will support the amendment . The Prime Minister has already told MPs that she wants to protect the rights of the three million EU citizens living in the UK , but will only issue that guarantee once the EU has granted reciprocal rights to the 900,000 Britons living in member states . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader who voted to leave the EU , said of last night 's vote : `` It is a bit of posturing by some people in the Lords who are beating their chests and puffing out their own sense of self-importance . My answer to that is 'jolly good , nice to hear from you , but it has no bearing on Theresa May 's Article 50 negotiations ' . `` It speaks volumes about who some of these people in the Lords think they are and absolutely nothing about Brexit . '' Labour 's amendment to the EU ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill , tabled with Liberal Democrat and crossbench support , calls for ministers to bring forward proposals ensuring the rights of EU citizens living here will continue post- Brexit , within three months of triggering Article 50 . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , who ordered his MPs to support the Bill unamended when it went through the Commons , described last night 's vote as `` great news '' , raising the possibility that he might tell his MPs to back the amendment in the Commons . `` The Government must now do the decent thing and guarantee the rights of EU citizens living in the UK , '' he said . The Lords will vote next week on a further amendment which would give MPs a `` meaningful vote '' on the outcome of Mrs May 's negotiations with the EU - a vote which could also go against the Government . The Prime Minister could then come under pressure from her own MPs to agree to that amendment passing into law . The amended Bill will return to the Commons on March 13 and March 14 when MPs will debate whether to keep the changes . Mrs May intends to notify the EU of Britain 's intention to leave on March 15 , triggering two years of negotiations that would end with Brexit in 2019 . Last night Downing Street said that the timetable for Brexit would not be changed by the Lords vote . John Penrose , the former Conservative constitution minister , said : `` The Commons voted decisively that the rights of Brits abroad are just as important as the rights of EU nationals living here . People will find it hard to understand why the unelected House of Lords thinks that is wrong . '' Baroness Smith of Basildon , the Labour Leader of the Lords , has already made it clear peers are unlikely to fight further if MPs vote down their amendment . This should allow Mrs May to declare on March 15 that negotiations about Brexit can begin . Lord Lamont of Lerwick , the former Tory chancellor , said of the Lords vote : `` I think they are doing a disservice to the national interest . You should n't be imposing conditions [ on the Government ] . The negotiations need flexibility . `` I hope that it will be rejected by the Commons and sent back here . If that is not the end of the matter I think the Lords will be playing with fire . '' Sir Bill Cash , the chairman of the European Union scrutiny committee , said he was confident that MPs would overturn the amendment . `` It is outrageous that these unelected people should undermine the vote in the House of Commons and the rights of British voters who live abroad , '' he said . Tory peers including Viscount Hailsham and Lord Bowness spoke in favour of the amendment under the glare of Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , who wrote to all peers on Tuesday urging them not to stand in the way of the Brexit Bill . She watched from the steps in front of the Queen 's throne in the Lords . During the debate , Lord Tebbit , the former Cabinet minister , accused fellow peers of putting `` the rights of foreigners '' above those of British people as he implored them not to back the amendment . He asked : `` Why is everybody here today so excited about an amendment that looks after the foreigners and not the British ? '' He was jeered by some peers as he referred to EU citizens in the UK as `` foreigners '' , while some on the Tory benches shouted , `` quite right '' . He said the proposed amendment to guarantee the rights of EU migrants living in the UK would weaken Mrs May 's power to negotiate for the rights of British citizens living in the EU once Article 50 is triggered . Lord Tebbit , who has a Danish sonin-law living in the UK and a son who has lived and worked in Germany , said : `` If we are to be concerned about anybody 's rights after Brexit , to live anywhere on this continent of Europe , it should be our concern for the rights of British people to live freely and peacefully in those other parts . '' Lord Lawson of Blaby , the former Tory chancellor , who lives in France , said it was `` quite clear '' there was `` no danger whatever to EU citizens in the UK '' and said it was `` wholly deplorable '' that the amendment had been tabled . Voting for it would only `` stir up fear and concern among the EU residents in this country that they may not be able to stay , when there is no question they will be '' , he said . Lord Bragg , the Labour peer and broadcaster , said Brexit would be a `` disaster '' and suggested EU citizens living in the UK had been `` reduced to pawns in a Government tragedy '' . Despite the presence of Ms Rudd , Viscount Hailsham , the Conservative peer and former agriculture minister , defied his party by speaking in favour of the amendment . He said it `` offends natural justice '' to deny the rights to EU citizens and called on the Government to `` take the moral high ground '' . Lord Bowness , a fellow Tory , said : `` We are not dealing with enemy aliens in times of war . Let us give the assurance and show that we are indeed the generous outward-looking country we are heading for in these Brexit negotiations . '' A spokesman for the Department for Exiting the European Union said : `` We are disappointed the Lords have chosen to amend a Bill that the Commons passed without amendment . The Bill has a straightforward purpose - to enact the referendum result and allow the Government to get on with the negotiations . Our position on EU nationals has repeatedly been made clear . We want to guarantee the rights of EU citizens who are already living in Britain , and the rights of British nationals living in other member states , as early as we can . '' 'Jolly good , nice to hear from you , but it has no bearing on Theresa May 's Article 50 negotiations '
The Lords must learn the lessons of history or face a new revolution ; Obstructing Brexit would risk another political upheaval that could sweep the upper house away
The House of Lords is debating the legislation that triggers Brexit . It should return it to the Commons untouched and wrapped up in a ribbon . As Theresa May reminded them by attending the deliberations on the steps of the royal throne , a fight against this Bill is a fight against democracy . A few Europhiles imagine that they can stuff the legislation with compromises and roadblocks and pray for future reversal . This would be stupid . The Brexit revolution is growing and gathering momentum . Any institution that stands in its way risks being flattened . This is the way of revolutions . They start out as a debate about one thing and wind up in a war about everything . Consider the French Revolution . In 1789 , the issue was whether or not Louis XVI could govern without consulting all classes of society . Compromise was possible ; a constitutional monarchy was on the table . Yet by the mid-1790s , the revolutionaries had cut off Louis ' head , abolished nobility and were busy replacing God with a Supreme www.Being.No one predicted this ; it was n't planned . Accidents happen . One of those accidents was Louis - and while it sounds like victim-blaming to say he brought this on his own head , he really did . Louis could have made a constitutional monarchy work , but he did n't want one . On June 21 1791 , he and his family attempted to flee Paris in order to join rebel forces and , it was alleged , return as a despot . Like Charles I or Tsar Nicholas , Louis ' stubbornness condemned him . The narrative of every revolution is thus determined as much by its opposition as by its supporters . Fast-forward to June 23 2016 . The issue on the ballot was membership of the European Union . Most of us who voted Leave saw it as a simple , unemotional proposition : we judged that we 'd be wealthier and freer outside the EU . Of course there were radicals and extremists on the Eurosceptic side - I shall come to them in a minute - but for most of us this was a rational choice . Indeed , much of the heat in this debate since the vote has come not from a Leave campaign that never even expected to win but from the Remain campaign , who were shocked and appalled by defeat . They are the ones who have tried to redefine what Brexit is all about . It 's about racism , they say . English nationalism . Retreat from the world . A conspiracy by the Right-wing media . A plot to defund the NHS . Even , and this is the best one , a coup d'état by the Russians . Did you not realise that your Ukip-voting grandma in Cheriton Fitzpaine was a mole for the KGB ? Well , now you know . Now you know that Brexit was a vote on everything but the EU - it was a contemptible spasm of xenophobia and ignorance . If you believe that , as the liberal establishment does , then it makes sense to try to reverse the vote . Several peers have detailed the plan openly . First , identify as many constitutional mechanisms as possible to drag out debate and limit the Government 's negotiating position . Secondly , use the next two years to run a PR campaign to influence the electorate . Thirdly , establish the logic for a second referendum in which Britons will choose to stay in the EU after all . The strategy is technically possible and superficially clever . But Remainers are committing a terrible mistake - the same mistake made by Louis XVI . They are confirming the accusations of their most extreme critics . They are radicalising the situation . It was Nigel Farage who declared that Brexit would not end with Brexit - that it was just `` the first brick knocked out of the Establishment wall . '' Why ? Because the sheer scale of opposition to Brexit had exposed the existence of what he calls a `` political class '' - not dissimilar to the aristocrats of old France . And every institution that houses these counter-revolutionaries now finds itself under scrutiny . The Lords has stepped into the spotlight , and the radical Eurosceptics have questions . Can we truly call peers such as Peter Mandelson or Neil Kinnock fair-minded when they received such generous pensions from the EU ? How can it be right that Ukip got 13 per cent of the vote in the 2015 general election and yet has only three peers to speak for it - while the Europhile Lib Dems , who have just nine MPs , enjoy more than 100 members of the House of Lords ? The irony is that the Eurosceptics asking such questions are overwhelmingly constitutional conservatives : they voted Leave out of love for Parliament and British tradition . To restore the greatness of the institutions , they are now prepared to overthrow the institutions themselves - and it is exactly that kind of iconoclasm that marks a revolutionary situation . The Eurosceptics are not the silly little fringe that Tony Blair and the Establishment still see them as being . They have the will of the people as expressed in a referendum behind them . And while the Lords does exist to question the actions of the Commons , it does not exist to contradict the verdict of the people . If the Lords is seen to be doing that , then there will be calls for stuffing them with Tories , making them elected , even abolishing them altogether . The people will wave their little finger and they 'll be gone . I do n't want this . As I said , for most of us Brexit begins and ends with Brexit , and was never supposed to be about anything else . But emotionally charged opposition is forcing voters to re-evaluate several aspects of our constitutional settlement . The Right is asking why they finance a BBC that , they allege , does n't give them a fair say . One half of the UK is asking why the other half should be allowed to block the Brexit that they voted for . And the Labour Party , which is struggling to maintain a consensus that will get it through two perilous by-elections , is split . Blair and his militant Remainers are helping to kill it . One of the few institutions that has emerged from Brexit with some strength is the Conservative Party , even though it 's probably the most divided party of all . Theresa May did the right thing . She heard the people sing and decided to make the song her own . For the sake of its own survival , I beg the Lords to join the sublime chorus of history . FOLLOW Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland PM : Isil would be glad if we left the EU ; Cameron under fire as defence minister warns Europe undermines UK security
DAVID CAMERON provoked a furious response from leading Eurosceptics yesterday after saying that the head of Isil would be `` happy '' if Britain left the European Union . The Prime Minister said that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , as well as Vladimir Putin , the Russian president , would favour Brexit as he sought to `` demolish '' nine economic `` myths '' from the Brexit campaign . Boris Johnson , the former mayor of London and a leading Brexit campaigner , suggested he `` no longer recognises '' the Prime Minister and Remain campaign 's `` negative '' vision of Britain . He added that it was `` a bit much '' to say that Brexit campaigners were `` allies '' with Mr Putin and Isil , and accused the Prime Minister of `` colluding '' with Britain 's businesses to win their support during the referendum . It came as Penny Mordaunt , a Eurosceptic defence minister , said that it was `` almost impossible '' for the security service to keep jihadis out of Britain while it is a member of the EU . She said : `` It is really undermining our security and again this , as in so many areas , we have the EU with the authority but none of the responsibility at all . '' Last week Mr Cameron suggested that the EU could descend into war if Britain voted to leave it . He yesterday said in a speech at Mansion House in central London : `` I never said if we leave on Thursday , World War Three breaks out on Friday . It is worth asking the question who would be happy if we left . Putin might be happy , I suspect al-Baghdadi might be happy . This is the time for strength in numbers - this is the time to stick with our friends and neighbours and our allies rather than breaking it [ Europe ] apart . '' He also defended the deal to give Turkey visa-free access to the European Union after it was heavily criticised by Sir Richard Dearlove , a former head of MI6 , who compared it to `` storing gasoline next to the fire '' . He said it represented the `` best of both worlds '' . Addressing Sir Richard 's comments , Mr Cameron highlighted a recent article by Sir John Sawers , a former head of MI6 , and Lord Evans , the former head of MI5 , calling for Britain to stay in . He said : `` I have huge respect for them and the work that they did to keep this country safe . Those two individuals are now saying as clearly as they possibly could that Britain is safer from terrorism if we stay in the European Union . '' The Prime Minister dismissed claims by the Leave camp that quitting would lead to a bonfire of regulations as `` very , very weak '' and insisted three million jobs were linked to membership . `` We may have a deficit in the sale of goods when it comes to the EU but we have a very large surplus when it comes to services and one of the things that I think we should fear is that , of course , if we left the EU they might offer us a deal on goods , but it might take a very long time before they offered a deal on services , '' he said .
OECD warns Britain over Brexit : 'This will hurt you more than it will hurt the EU '
BRITAIN leaving the EU would hurt the UK more than the rest of the European Union and could plunge Britain into a long period of stagnation , the OECD has warned . Catherine Mann , chief economist at the Paris-based think tank , said there would be no winners if Britain left the 28-nation bloc . `` The OECD believes that Brexit is bad for the UK . It 's also bad for Europe and it 's bad for the global economy , '' Ms Mann said at an event in London . `` This will come through the channel of trade , but also through the channel of financial market uncertainty . '' The OECD will publish a detailed analysis of the costs of a Brexit in the coming months . Referring to the Government 's twoyear window to negotiate a new relationship with the EU if Britain votes to leave the bloc on June 23 , Ms Mann said : `` That 's a long time for uncertainty , and trade in goods will become more costly . Europe is also a very , very important market for financial services , and countries do n't have to offer an open market for services . '' Pro-Brexit campaigners have described arguments that Britain would suffer a prolonged economic shock if it left the EU as scaremongering . Gerard Lyons , chief economic adviser to Boris Johnson , the Mayor of London , has said that the impact of a Brexit would resemble a `` V '' or `` tick '' , with an initial downturn followed by a strong rebound after Britain escaped the burden of Brussels . However , Ms Mann suggested the impact of the shock was likely to be prolonged . `` I think an 'L ' would be a better way to characterise it , '' she said . `` There 's costs to renegotiation , and two years is a long time . ''
Labour benches cheered with delight ; Reconstruction
FOR Labour , it was a moment of raucous celebration . Hours after Tory rebels helped them inflict an historic defeat on the Government over Brexit , the Christmas Party in Jeremy Corbyn 's office was in full swing with music so loud it could be heard reverberating outside the building . For the Tories , however , it was a moment of bitter recrimination . While the 11 pro-European rebels boasted that their rebellion had enabled Parliament to `` take control '' of Brexit , many of their colleagues were absolutely furious . The rebels further incensed their Eurosceptic colleagues when they took to the Pugin room in the Commons and drank a bottle of white wine . As the dust settled the Prime Minister , her Cabinet and Chief Whip were left asking the question - where did it go wrong ? The dangers were obvious from the start . In September Dominic Grieve , a pro-European Tory and former attorney general , tabled an amendment demanding that the Government give Parliament a legal guarantee of a final vote on the Brexit deal . With the support of nine other Tory MPs , the `` meaningful vote '' amendment soon drew the support of Labour and the Liberal Democrats . In a bid to defuse the rebellion David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , made clear in the Commons that the Government was prepared to offer a binding vote on the final Brexit deal . The concession , however , was not enough and after weeks of fruitless negotiations , matters came to a head in the most brutal fashion yesterday . In a bid to make a breakthrough , the Prime Minister took to inviting the Tory rebels into Downing Street for one-to-one discussions about the bill . `` They were trying to pick us off , '' one rebel said . `` It did n't work . '' It became clear that the Government was not going to back down . Accepting the amendment , the Prime Minister told Tory rebels , would put a `` smooth and orderly '' Brexit at risk . By the time the debate started at 1pm , the mood was toxic . When Bernard Jenkin , a senior Eurosceptic Tory MP , made an intervention he found himself heckled by pro-European Tory MPs on all sides . `` Read it [ the bill ] and sit down , '' they shouted at him . As rebel after rebel made clear that they were not backing down , the Government attempted one last climbdown . Less than half an hour before the vote was due to take place Dominic Raab , the justice minister , pledged to include a commitment to a legally binding vote at a later stage in the passage of the bill . Of the 16 Tories poised to rebel , some were swayed . Paul Masterton and George Freeman both abstained on the basis of the pledge . Vicky Ford , the Tory MP for Chelmsford , appeared in two minds and seemed on the verge of tears . In the end she was ushered inside the Noe lobby by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who put his arm around her back and smiled at her warmly as they walked inside . It was not enough . Mrs May lost the vote by 309 votes to 305 with the result being greeted with cheers from the Labour benches as it was announced . The Government 's downfall did not just come from its rebels . A mere two Eurosceptic Labour MPs supported the Government . Within moments of the vote , the recriminations began . Sir Desmond Swayne , a former Tory minister , called his colleagues `` useful idiots '' and said their `` real motive '' was to delay Brexit . Mr Grieve insisted after the vote that it had never been his intention to defeat the Government . He said : `` Do I otherwise feel good about it ? No , it 's the first time I 've ever had to rebel on a national issue against the Government ... I have to say it was the only thing open for me to do and I 'd like to emphasise - it does n't stop Brexit in any way . '' The defeat is likely to sour Theresa May 's Brussels summit today . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator , gave Mrs May a taste of what lies in store for her late last night , hailing her defeat as a `` great day for democracy '' . Rebel roll call The 11 Tory MPs who defeated Mrs May Heidi Allen South Cambridgeshire Ken Clarke Rushcliffe Jonathan Djanogly Huntingdon Dominic Grieve Beaconsfield Stephen Hammond Wimbledon Sir Oliver Heald North East Hertfordshire Nicky Morgan Loughborough Bob Neill Bromley and Chislehurst Antoinette Sandbach Eddisbury Anna Souby Broxtowe Sarah Wollaston Totnes
Britain embarks on trade crusade ; China , India , Australia and nine other countries already in talks to make deal after Brexit , says Fox UK 'can start to pencil in new trade deals '
BRITAIN has already begun informal trade negotiations with several countries across the world , Liam Fox reveals today as he says Brexit is `` the key to Britain 's future prosperity '' . In an article for today 's Daily Telegraph , the International Trade Secretary says Britain is conducting `` trade audits '' in order to prepare deals that can be announced as soon as the country leaves the European Union in 2019 . It is understood that ministers and officials are in talks with 12 countries , including China , India , Australia and South Korea , as well as Middle Eastern nations such as Saudi Arabia and Oman . EU leaders have attempted to order Britain not to conduct any trade deal talks until after the Brexit process is complete . But , just a day after Theresa May promised that Britain would be `` bold and ambitious '' in its attempts to secure free-trade deals with nations across the globe , Dr Fox writes : `` When we leave , we will want to develop new arrangements with countries like Australia , New Zealand and India . `` We are conducting trade audits with a number of countries to see how we can remove barriers to trade and investment to our mutual benefit . `` There is a big world for us to do business with , and we intend to do just that . We should do so with considerable self-confidence . '' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , confirmed yesterday that the Government was still pledging to bring net migration down to below 100,000 , saying that once immigration was `` under your control , anything is possible '' . On Tuesday , in her speech setting out her 12-point plan for leaving the EU , the Prime Minister said that Brexit `` must mean control of the number of people who come to Britain from Europe '' . Yesterday , Mr Davis suggested that meant re-introducing the target . He said `` the simple truth '' was that the Government would get net migration down to the `` tens of thousands '' , something David Cameron failed to do when he was in office . It also emerged that the Supreme Court will rule next Tuesday on whether Mrs May will be forced to hold a vote in Parliament to trigger Article 50 . If the justices find in the Government 's favour , the Prime Minister will not be forced to ask MPs to approve her plan to begin formal exit talks in March , but experts expect the court to rule that Parliament must be given a say . Most MPs have pledged to back Article 50 in a vote , but the Liberal Democrats and a small number of other pro-Remain MPs could frustrate the formal exit process . Mrs May used her Brexit speech to confirm that Britain would quit the single market . She also indicated that the UK would leave the customs union , allowing the Government to negotiate its own freetrade deals across the world . Today , the Prime Minister travels to Davos where she will make a speech at the World Economic Forum . She will meet some of the world 's most powerful company bosses , and is expected to emphasise that the Government intends to ensure Britain is open for business as it negotiates Brexit . In his article , Dr Fox writes : `` This Government will never compromise on the prosperity of the United Kingdom . We see that Brexit is not a threat to that prosperity , but the key . `` In a globalised world , Britain must stand ready to trade , to build a free and open network of commerce and trust that will not only safeguard our nation 's prosperity , but spread wealth across the world . We have taken our first steps to establishing ourselves as the champions of free trade and taking our place , once again , as one of the greatest open trading nations in the world . '' Writing in the Sun today , Mrs May says Brexit will allow the UK to reach out `` to old friends and new allies alike '' . `` We will build a new trading relationship with our partners in Europe , but we will also be free to do new trade deals with countries from outside the EU , too . '' Speaking in India , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said Britain could start `` pencilling '' in trade deals on the `` back of an envelope '' .
Scotland Hammond : UK could become tax haven ; Chancellor prepared for make tax cuts to attract investment if EU closes off access to markets
BRITAIN could cut taxes to attract investment in a trade war after Brexit if British exporters are faced with new tariff barriers , Philip Hammond has suggested . In an interview with a German newspaper , Mr Hammond said the Government would do `` whatever we have to '' to ensure UK businesses remained competitive if European markets were `` closed off `` to them . His intervention came as Theresa May , the Prime Minister , was putting the finishing touches to a major speech setting out her approach to the forthcoming Brexit negotiations at London 's Lancaster House tomorrow . Mrs May will announce plans for a `` clean Brexit '' - withdrawing from the single market and the European customs union - to regain control of immigration and end the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . The Chancellor told Welt am Sonntag that the UK `` could suffer from economic damage at least in the short term '' if it were left with no access to the EU after Brexit . He suggested that Britain could cut taxes to encourage companies to move to the UK in retaliation . Asked if the UK 's future was as the corporate `` tax haven of Europe '' , the Chancellor said ministers were ready to change if they had to . `` If we have no access to the European market , if we are closed off , if Britain were to leave the European Union without an agreement on market access , then we could suffer from economic damage at least in the shortterm , '' he said . `` In this case , we could be forced to change our economic model and we will have to change our model to regain competitiveness . And you can be sure we will do whatever we have to do . `` The British people are not going to lie down and say , 'too bad , we 've been wounded ' . We will change our model , and we will come back , and we will be competitively engaged . '' Mr Hammond also said there was a possibility of `` a time period between Britain leaving the EU and the full introduction of a long-term future arrangement between the UK and the EU '' to allow companies to prepare for the new regulatory regime . Lord Lawson of Blaby , who was Conservative chancellor in Margaret Thatcher 's government in the Eighties , warned that the EU would reject any offer of a free trade deal . Writing in a Policy Exchange pamphlet , published today , he said : `` We must accept that our free trade offer will be rejected and that no remotely acceptable post- Brexit trade agreement between the UK and the EU is negotiable . '' This was not `` out of hostility to the UK '' but because throughout the EU `` the political establishment is threatened by the rise of anti-establishment political parties '' like the Front National in France . He said it was `` incontrovertible '' that `` in common with the rest of the world , we should be outside both the so-called single market and the customs union '' , adding : `` This is not a 'hard ' Brexit : it is Brexit . '' Mr Hammond 's comments were criticised by Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , who said Mrs May was pursuing an `` extremely risky '' negotiating strategy . He told the BBC 's Andrew Marr Show : `` It seems to me a recipe for some kind of trade war with Europe in the future . That does n't really seem to me a very sensible way forward . '' Nicky Morgan , the pro-Remain former education secretary , said Mrs May should be seeking `` maximum participation '' and warned her not to damage the economy for the sake of controlling immigration . Johan Eliach : Page 14 Labour chaos Thornberry ditches Corbyn view Labour 's freedom of movement position was in chaos again yesterday as the shadow foreign secretary said the party would not `` die in a ditch '' over it . Emily Thornberry spoke just minutes after Jeremy Corbyn refused to accept that levels of EU migration to Britain were too high . The party 's view was in disarray last week after the Labour leader indicated he would announce his party favoured `` reasonably managed migration '' . However , in his speech he said that the party did not `` rule out '' free movement in exchange for access to the single market . Speaking on ITV 's Peston on Sunday , Ms Thornberry said : `` We 're not going to die in a ditch about it , but Labour 's principle has always been that the economy is the most important thing . ''
Scotland Tory MPs ' anger at EU chief who praised Lib Dems in election victory ; Brexit Britain ; IDS tells 'proud ' Brexit negotiator to 'mind his own bloody business ' and to stop moaning
THE European Union 's chief Brexit negotiator is facing a backlash from Conservative MPs after expressing his admiration for the Liberal Democrat victory in the Richmond Park by-election . Guy Verhofstadt , a Belgian MEP , greeted the result on Twitter by congratulating Sarah Olney , the successful candidate , on her victory , adding : `` Europe is watching and we are proud . '' Tim Farron , the leader of the Liberal Democrats , said that his party 's win in the south-west London constituency proved the case for a second referendum , as they accused the Conservatives of `` perverting '' Brexit . Anna Soubry , a pro-European Conservative MP , described the victory as `` sensational '' and said `` you can forget hard Brexit '' . Theresa May , however , made clear that the Government will not be holding a second referendum and said that the `` message from the British people was loud and clear '' . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , told The Daily Telegraph that Mr Verhofstadt should `` mind his own bloody business '' . He said : `` I assume this means he is prepared to stand by the result of the EU referendum which means that we are leaving , so he should stop moaning and carping and trying to damage this . '' Steve Baker MP , a Conservative MP who helped lead the winning Vote Leave campaign before the June 23 referendum , said : `` It is foolish for an EU official to try to hijack this result . If every MP simply voted with their nearest counting area , Brexit would have a thumping majority in the Commons . For our EU exit , Richmond is a nonevent , whatever pro-EU voices may say . '' Sarah Olney defeated Zac Goldsmith by 1,800 votes after overturning his 23,000 majority . The by-election was called after Mr Goldsmith quit as a Tory MP in protest over plans to build a new runway at Heathrow airport . He stood as an independent candidate . However , it swiftly became a vote about Britain 's decision to leave the European Union , which put Mr Goldsmith , who backed Brexit , at a disadvantage against Mrs Olney , a Remainer . Constituents in Richmond Park and North Kingston voted overwhelmingly in favour of remaining in the European Union , with more than two thirds backing staying in . Mr Farron said : `` The reality is wherever you are in this country there will be a balance of opinion but what was really striking over the last week was the number of Leave-voting , former Conservatives , voting for Sarah [ Olney ] . `` Most of them do n't regret their vote in June but they do regret Theresa May taking their vote and perverting it to something they never meant it to mean . '' However , Conservative MPs said that Richmond was an `` outlier '' which does not reflect most of Britain . Andrew Bridgen said : `` We voted to leave the EU to keep the EU out of British politics . Richmond Park voted to remain but 75 per cent of constituencies voted to leave at the referendum . '' Bernard Jenkin , who also had a leading role in Vote Leave , added : `` Their reaction is understandable , but they are clutching at straws . `` Richmond Park as the seventeenthmost Remain constituency in the UK is far from typical . `` The vast majority of UK constituencies voted Leave . '' Some pundits suggested the Lib Dem victory meant that the prospect of the Prime Minister calling an early general election next year was receding . I-IMAGES Mr Goldsmith 's brother , Ben , said on Twitter that the Liberal Democrats won the seat after voters had a `` Brexit tantrum '' . IMAGES/ GETTY Mrs Olney yesterday walked out of a live radio interview after being repeatedly pushed on how she could justify calling for a second EU referendum . AFP/ PA/ 'They are clutching at straws . Richmond is 17th most Remain constituency in UK and far from typical ' Europe divided Timeline of key events Tomorrow Matteo Renzi , the Italian prime minister , could resign if he loses a referendum on constitutional reform Monday : Supreme Court case opens into whether Parliament should get a vote on triggering Article 50 January 2017 Judges rule on Supreme Court case in move that could force parliamentary vote March 2017 Theresa May will invoke Article 50 and formally begin Brexit negotiations April 2017 French presidential elections begin , expected to end in battle between far-Right Marine Le Pen and mainstream Conservative Francois Fillon The Brexit Judgment Unparalleled events require unparalleled insight From Monday the Supreme Court will consider the most important constitutional decision in decades - should Parliament vote on triggering Article 50 ? Follow every moment online with Telegraph Premium . All the live coverage , unrivalled insight and instant analysis you need at www.telegraph.co.uk/brexit
Davis and Fox to manage Britain 's exit from the EU
DAVID DAVIS and Liam Fox , two of the most prominent Brexit supporters , were last night appointed to the Cabinet to manage leaving the European Union and securing new trade deals . In a remarkable political comeback , the two backbenchers and former Tory leadership candidates were given newly created posts to help define Britain 's future outside of the EU . Mr Davis , who was beaten to the leadership by David Cameron in 2005 , was appointed Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union - a role dubbed `` chief Brexit negotiator '' . He was John Major 's Europe minster between 1994 and 1997 , giving him both experience of Brussels negotiations and an awareness of the party 's deep divisions over Europe . Dr Fox , who failed to win the leadership in both 2005 and this month , was named Secretary of State for International Trade . He was Mr Cameron 's defence secretary for a little over a year before leaving after a scandal over his adviser , and turned down at least one later chance to return to the front bench . The appointments were cheered by Tory backbenchers and Eurosceptics as proof Mrs May , who supported staying in the EU at the referendum , will stick to her promise that `` Brexit means Brexit . '' Nigel Farage , the former UK Independence Party leader , praised the `` inspired choices '' and said he was now `` more optimistic '' that the vote to leave the EU would be followed through . While the remit of the new positions remains unclear , previous suggestions for what would be needed to secure Brexit gives some insight into what the roles will entail . Mr Davis , the MP for Haltemprice and Howden , is likely to head up a team of negotiators holding regular meetings with representatives of the remaining 27 EU member states to discuss the terms of the UK 's exit . In a 2,000-word blog posted on website Conservative Home just three days ago , Mr Davis outlined his vision for securing Brexit . On access to the single market , Mr Davis said : `` The ideal outcome , ( and in my view the most likely , after a lot of wrangling ) is continued tariff-free access . Once the European nations realise that we are not going to budge on control of our borders , they will want to talk , in their own interest . '' The role of Dr Fox , MP for North Somerset , will be to head up Britain 's efforts to sign new trade deals with counties across the role - something Eurosceptics repeatedly criticised Brussels for failing to do efficiently . One of his biggest challenges will be to win over the Americans .
Scotland Future will be brighter after Brexit , says May ; Tory leadership frontrunner insists she is no 'Remainer ' and can take Britain out of EU ; May challenges Leadsom to sign 'pledge card ' in run-up to leadership contest
BRITAIN will emerge from Brexit with a `` better , brighter future '' , Theresa May pledges today as she warns that the country faces `` tough times '' while it negotiates to leave the European Union . In her first interview since she and Andrea Leadsom were named as the final two candidates vying to become the next prime minister , Mrs May tells The Daily Telegraph : `` Politics could do with some bloody difficult women . '' The Home Secretary says that a female prime minister will bring `` honesty '' and a greater focus on `` delivery '' in Downing Street , as she suggests that men tend to treat politics as a `` game '' . She also appeals to people not to consider her as a `` Remainer '' after she campaigned to keep Britain in the EU , saying that she is `` very clear that Brexit means Brexit '' . She insists that she is not the `` new Margaret Thatcher '' , describing the former prime minister as `` absolutely unique '' . `` People love to draw parallels , but I just get on with the job and that is my philosophy , '' she says . Mrs May , the longest-serving home secretary in a century , topped the second-round poll of Tory MPs with the support of 199 out of 330 members . The decision on who will lead the country out of the EU and through negotiations with Brussels now rests with the 150,000 members of the Conservative Party . Mrs May adopts a more cautious tone than her rival about leaving the European Union , admitting that `` difficult times '' lie ahead despite the fact that she is `` optimistic '' for the future . Mrs May says : `` If I am prime minister , we will come out of the European Union and part of that will be control of free movement . But alongside that , it 's important to show how we can come through what will be , I think , some difficult times with a better , brighter future . '' She urges the party to drop the terms `` Brexiteers and Remainers '' , echoing the suggestion by Lord Hague last week that `` we are all Leavers now '' . She says : `` We have a job to do in making the best deal we can in coming out of the EU and I am very clear that I will deliver Brexit . '' She pledges to act on David Cameron 's election manifesto by making a Continued on Page 2 Interview : Pages 12-13 Editorial Comment : Page 23 Continued from Page 1 decision on Heathrow and pushing ahead with HS2 . Her approach contrasts with that of Mrs Leadsom , who has questioned the need for the HS2 railway line and criticised gay marriage as part of an appeal to the Tory heartlands . She also embraces Ken Clarke 's description of her last week as a `` bloody difficult woman '' . She says : `` We [ women ] just get stuck in . Politics is n't a game . The decisions we make affect people 's lives and that is something we must keep to the forefront of our minds . `` Women often focus more on delivery - what the outcome is going to be rather than what are the interactions people have in order to get there . I also think that right now people are looking for an honesty in politics . We could go through some tough times and we need to be honest with people about that . '' She admits she likes to keep her `` personal life personal '' but says she and her husband Philip `` dealt with '' the fact they could n't have children and `` moved on '' . `` I hope nobody would think that mattered , '' she says `` I can still empathise , understand people and care about fairness and opportunity . '' Mrs May today challenges Mrs Leadsom to sign a five-point `` pledge card '' as she calls for a `` clean campaign '' . It includes a pledge not to `` co-operate in any way with other political parties '' , including donors or members . Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader , and Arron Banks , the party 's donor , have said they support Mrs Leadsom as next Tory leader . Mrs Leadsom last week refused to rule out Mr Farage forming part of her Brexit negotiating team . It came as President Barack Obama dismissed claims that the special relationship is being put at risk by Brexit as `` hyperbole '' . He said that Brexit negotiations should not be `` protracted '' .
The details of today 's Brexit triumph for Theresa May will tomorrow reveal a capitulation ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - At the last minute a deal has been reached to let the second stage of Brexit talks take place . Quelle surprise ! Following the usual pattern , Theresa May , the Prime Minister , will make a triumphant statement to the House on Monday proclaiming her success and slowly , over next few days and weeks , the true level of her capitulation will be revealed . Thirty years on , the release of government papers will show just how much the citizens of the UK have been deliberately misled by the politicians and their administrators , just as disclosed in the Heath papers . Philip Honey Lound , Nottinghamshire sir - After days of negative press reports , Mrs May should now be given the credit where credit is due . Anthony Haslam Farnham , Surrey sir - The only winners from Mrs May 's surrender to the EU ( lightly disguised as negotiations ) are the EU itself , Mrs May ( politically , at least for the short term ) and her Remainer colleagues . How can agreeing to tie the United Kingdom to EU standards ( regulatory equivalence ) mean Brexit ? Mrs May 's deal simply means we will continue to pose no competitive threat to the EU and remain fettered to its sclerotic regulatory dysfunction . The whole point of Brexit is to be free from EU fetters so we can forge an independent identity and prosperity with open trade across the world . Nicholas Dobson Bessacarr , South Yorkshire sir - Mrs May says there has been give and take on both sides . We 've seen that , using our money , she is the side that gives ; the EU is the side that takes . Martin Burgess Beckenham , Kent sir - At last Mrs May , the elected leader of the UK 's elected Government , has been given permission by the unelected president of the unelected European Commission to move on , as Nigel Farage observes , to the next stage of her ( and the UK 's ) humiliation . John GU Clark Southampton sir - What does Brexit mean ? I know what it did n't mean when I voted for it . It did n't mean `` continuing regulatory alignment '' . It did n't mean handing over £761 for every man , woman and child in the UK for the privilege of leaving . It did n't mean subjugating ourselves to the European Court of Justice . The current situation appears to be an attempt by the political classes to thwart the express will of the people . In so doing , they are playing with fire . Tony Morris Newcastle upon Tyne sir - It seems the UK will continue to have no control over immigration from the EU and that Parliament will rubber stamp laws issued by the EU . The main reasons why we voted to leave the EU were to regain control of our borders and make our own laws . This agreement must be rejected and if necessary the PM should go . Robert Stather Bromsgrove , Worcestershire sir - `` UK reaches historic EU deal , '' say the headlines . Yes , the most shameful in our history . Brian Gilbert Hampton , Middlesex sir - Once the ( entire ) UK has left the EU and gone past a transition period , what is to stop a future UK government from passing a law removing the ECJ from any input here and empowering our Supreme Court to have the final say ? John Tilsiter Radlett , Hertfordshire sir - I fear that the picture of white smoke tweeted by Martin Selmayr , an aide to Jean-Claude Juncker , indicated progress only because Mrs May had surrendered . Adrian Waller Woodsetts , South Yorkshire
Spanish violence ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Is the brutality of Spanish police , in their attempt to stop Catalans voting peacefully , part of Spain 's strategy to convince Gibraltarians about the delights of democracy Spanish-style ? Dominic Keown Cambridge sir - There is continuing propaganda from the EU against Brexit . In the Canadian Globe and Mail on Saturday , I read a diatribe against the Catalan independence referendum by Ramón Luis Valcárcel , a vice president of the European Parliament . He compared the referendum in Catalonia to Brexit : `` Those responsible for this coup against democracy prefer to ignore reality , preaching a form of populism akin to Brexit . '' For Mr Valcárcel , as for Jean-Claude Juncker and Guy Verhofstadt , the only reality can be theirs . It indicates what we face in hoping that reason will prevail in the negotiations over Brexit . Richard Hayes Banstead , Surrey sir - If we needed a clear motive for rapid departure from the EU , the action of the Spanish police in Catalonia is more than enough . Could you imagine these scenes on the streets of Scotland ? Michael Wynn Prenton , Wirral
Apart from blather about Florence , all we got from May were old banalities ; May 's Brexit speech
Was that it ? Seriously ? That was it ? Really ? Yesterday Theresa May dragged her Chancellor , her Foreign Secretary and her Brexit Secretary , plus the British print and broadcasting media , all the way to Florence in Italy , in order to read them a speech on Brexit that lasted 35 minutes . If she 'd boiled it down to the only significant new information it contained , it would have lasted 30 seconds . Essentially : the Prime Minister wants Britain to stay in the EU for an extra two years , to give her more time to sort out Brexit . This will be called an `` implementation period '' . During it , freedom of movement will continue , although there will be a `` registration system '' for new arrivals . And that , more or less , was it . She did not say how much money she was prepared to pay Brussels in the `` divorce bill '' . Nor did she say what sort of trade relationship with the EU she wanted - other than that it should n't be like membership of the European Economic Area , or a Canada-style free trade arrangement ( the two models most commonly mooted ) . Instead , pretty much all she did - apart from blather wetly about Florence and the Renaissance in the manner of an A-level history essay - was puff out the same old weary banalities we 've heard from her countless times before . Brexit , she informed us , represented a `` defining moment '' . It would be `` a new chapter '' . It offered `` opportunity '' . It presented `` shared challenges '' , and required us to be `` creative '' . The future , however , was `` bright '' . Britain and the EU would form `` a deep and special relationship '' . What that `` deep and special relationship '' would be like , however , she once again neglected to reveal . `` The question , '' she said sagely , `` is how we get there . '' Honestly . I wanted to scream . OF COURSE THAT 'S THE QUESTION , PRIME MINISTER . IT 'S YOUR JOB TO ANSWER IT . THAT 'S WHY YOU 'RE GIVING THIS SPEECH . THIS IS N'T A VOX POP IN THE STREET WITH A BEWILDERED SHOPPER FOR A REGIONAL LUNCHTIME NEWS BULLETIN . IT 'S A MAJOR SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER . WHO HAPPENS TO BE YOU . IT 'S NOW 15 MONTHS SINCE THE REFERENDUM . SO FOR PITY 'S SAKE , DO N'T JUST STAND THERE WIBBLING ABOUT `` THE QUESTION '' . TELL US THE ANSWER . OR AT LEAST GIVE US SOME SENSE , HOWEVER FAINT , THAT YOU 'RE ACTUALLY WORKING TOWARDS ONE . Presumably to make this dust-cloud of vacuity seem `` optimistic '' and `` positive '' , she kept trying to smile and speak at the same time , as if she were an American television weather forecaster . It was so squirmingly awkward and self-conscious , it made Gordon Brown look like Angelina Jolie . Still , not everyone thought so . As he shuffled out at the end , journalists leapt upon Boris Johnson . `` Uplifting ... positive ... confident , '' he burbled . `` Attractive vision ... strong UK ... Taking back control ... '' Mrs May is no nearer reaching a deal with the EU . But at least she seems to have reached some kind of deal with Mr Johnson . 'It was so awkward and self-conscious , it made Gordon Brown look like Angelina Jolie '
Labour peers wo n't want to wreck Brexit ; The Salisbury Convention will survive despite the best efforts of the undemocratic Lib Dems
If these seem like divisive times , cast your mind back to the Britain of 1945 ; a nation battered by war , a new Labour government elected on a platform of massive and radical reform , and a House of Lords so overwhelmingly Tory that Labour peers were described as `` a tiny atoll in the vast ocean of Tory reaction '' . That Labour victory was led by my grandfather , Clement Attlee . And it is hard today to understand the scale of Conservative opposition to his agenda . Yet it was two peers - the Labour leader of the House of Lords , Viscount Addison , and the Tory , Viscount Cranborne ( the Marquess of Salisbury ) - who formed what would become known as the Salisbury Convention . The Opposition would not thwart major Bills that had been in Attlee 's manifesto , they agreed , because that legislation reflected the will of the electorate . It would be constitutionally wrong - not to mention politically unwise - to do so . Today , many are worried that the Lords will ignore the Salisbury Convention - that , because we have a minority Government , Labour and Liberal Democrat Remainer peers will choose to wreck Brexit . Let me say that the Liberal Democrats do n't care and have n't cared for years about the will of the people . But Labour Lords , skilfully and responsibly led by their leader Angela Smith , will be very careful not to upset the convention . Baroness Smith and her team understand that what benefited my grandfather also benefited the Labour government of Tony Blair , whose project of Lords reform was not blocked by the very Lords it sought to turf out . The Labour Party in the Lords will , as a result , be sensible . They know that the majority of voters chose to back parties which backed Brexit and that the Labour Party was one of those parties . It is true that Lib Dem peers feel very differently , but while people could have chosen to support the Lib Dems at the ballot box , they did not , and they should take that message . Certainly , peers from the two main parties will seek to ensure there is clarity . We may send legislation back to the Commons if it does not do what it says on the tin and that is our constitutional role . But neither Labour nor Tory peers want to wreck Brexit . Many of my fellows are , like me , deeply Eurosceptic . We acknowledge that the country has voted for Brexit and are content with that . In the short term we must adopt the Great Repeal Bill , before taking advantage of the long-term freedoms that will come with Brexit . That has a popular mandate from the referendum and the last general election , and there is a constitutional justice in that . Labour , to be blunt , will not make a mess like an ill-trained spaniel because to do so will rebound upon them . Only the Lib Dems will have no inhibitions , and we in the Upper House recognise that the utterly disproportionate Lib Dem representation is a very serious problem . We 've got more than 100 Lib Dem peers , even though they only have 12 MPs . However , we Tories only have ourselves to blame . It was David Cameron who kept stuffing the Lords with Lib Dems without regard to the future position . There needs to be a cull but we are capable of organising one for ourselves . Sadly there are quite a few peers who turn up very regularly and claim their allowances even though it is not clear what they actually do . Expect a plan where each bloc in the Upper House is assigned a quota of peers , possibly depending on their representation in the Commons . But if we do reduce our numbers , we would need assurances that the prime minister of the day wo n't take up the slack and stuff the Lords again with relatively junior people . It used to be that only cabinet ministers or very senior MPs would get elevated . Now the Lords is filled with worthy backbenchers . There are far too many of them , frankly . Not all peers should survive , but the Salisbury Convention will . It will do so , first , because most peers realise that it protects electorate-endorsed laws from rejection by our unelected chamber . And secondly because it protects the very survival of our chamber , by encouraging restraint . The Earl Attlee entered the House of Lords in 1992 as a crossbencher and joined the Conservative Party in 1997 . He is one of 90 remaining hereditary peers read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland May prepared to walk away from Brexit talks to avoid 'bad deal '
THERESA MAY last night insisted she wanted to regain the `` trust '' of the British people in order to have a `` strong hand '' in the Brexit negotiations . The Prime Minister made her appeal to the public after a dramatic drop in the Conservatives ' polling figures in recent days , following the party 's U-turn over capping the cost of social care.. Following repeated questions from Jeremy Paxman over whether she would be prepared to `` walk away '' from the Brexit negotiating table , she finally conceded that in the event of a bad deal , `` we have to be prepared to walk out '' . A central theme of Paxman 's questioning was how the public could trust her when her party had reversed policies on social care and national insurance in recent months - as well as her earlier repeated claims that there would be no election before 2020 . To audience applause , the former BBC Newsnight presenter cited the Conservatives ' U-turn over national insurance earlier this year , asking if the Prime Minister was `` a blowhard that collapses at the first sign of gunfire '' . The Prime Minister insisted she changed her mind about whether to hold an election `` after it became clear `` that other parties want to frustrate the process of Brexit negotiations '' . Mrs May said : `` I am going out across the country asking people , for me to gain their trust at this election . '' Paxman also asked when Mrs May realised she had the `` wrong answer '' over the question of whether Britain should leave the EU , after she campaigned for a Remain vote . The Prime Minister insisted the British people made a choice and it was important for politicians to respect that . But asked repeatedly if she had changed her mind over her vote - or still believed it was a `` duff idea '' she refused to provide a direct answer , instead saying Britain could `` make a success of Brexit '' . Paxman repeatedly asked if Mrs May was prepared to walk away without a deal . She repeated her mantra that `` no deal would be better than a bad deal '' before conceding that , yes , she would `` have to '' walk away . One of the most passionate audience questions came from Philip Webster , who said he had started his first job 74 years ago on 32 shillings a week , and asked why his generation should vote for the Conservatives despite the prospect of the value of his home being `` eroded '' by the so-called `` dementia tax '' . The Prime Minister said her social care policy , now including a cap on the amount people have to spend on their care , was intended to take away the risk of people not being able to leave their homes to their families . Paxman asked `` explicitly , unambiguously '' if Mrs May could say what the cap on social care would be . She faced laughter from the audience when she did not provide a direct answer , instead repeating that it was fairer to have a consultation first , and `` it 's about thinking about what the right approach is to get to that figure '' . She defended her party 's record reducing the numbers of police , saying : `` We were living within our means . '' Mrs May was also criticised by a teacher and mother-of-two over her `` damaging '' plans for schools funding . Faced with heckling from the audience , she insisted that people should focus on the achievement of schools rather than funding . 'I am going out across the country asking people , for me to gain their trust at this election '
EU business chief 'sure ' UK will get free-trade deal ; Commissioner 's upbeat prediction undermines warnings bloc will try to punish country for Brexit
THE European Union is certain to strike a free-trade deal with the UK after Brexit , the bloc 's trade commissioner has said . Cecelia Malmstrom said that while Brexit represented `` uncharted territory '' the UK and the EU will reach an agreement on trade `` for sure '' . Her comments are in stark contrast to other European leaders who have repeatedly warned that Britain will be `` punished '' for leaving the EU . Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , said yesterday that Britain was suffering from `` illusions '' and that Brexit was not the EU 's `` top priority '' . Theresa May highlighted the comments during an election rally in Leeds in which she warned that EU leaders were `` lining up '' to oppose Britain . She said : `` We have seen Chancellor Merkel 's comments today . She says the UK has 'illusions ' about the process and that the 27 member states of the European Union agree . We can see how tough those negotiations are going to be at times . '' Mrs May made it clear that a vote for Jeremy Corbyn would only serve to help Mrs Merkel , saying : `` Our opponents are already seeking to disrupt those negotiations - at the same time as 27 other European countries line up to oppose us . '' However , Ms Malmstrom told a conference in Denmark : `` It 's uncharted territory but I 'm sure we will solve it . We will have a free-trade agreement , that is for sure . '' Steve Baker , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP , said : `` Cecilia Malmstrom 's comments are very welcome and confirm the impression I 've been given when I have visited senior officials in Europe . They do n't want tariffs , they want free trade with us . The fundamental axis of this negotiation is the hole in the EU budget left by our exit . That 's why there has been so much sabre-rattling . '' It came as a document submitted to the EU 's General Affairs Council in Strasbourg , poposed that the 73 British seats in the European Parliament due to fall vacant be transformed into new seats representing a `` single European constituency '' . The proposal , tabled by the Italian foreign minister and seen by The Daily Telegraph , would enable all `` the European political families to contend them on a trans-national basis '' . European leaders are preparing to recognise the potential for a united Ireland within the EU , the FT has reported . EU leaders will be asked at a summit tomorrow to endorse the idea of a smooth transition for Northern Ireland into Europe in the event of a vote for Irish reunification . 'They want free trade . The fundamental axis of this negotiation is the hole in the EU budget left by our exit '
Market Insight Sterling BODY : Despite the cheers of success and wails of defeat as Article 50 was signed and delivered , sterling sailed on serenely , writes Tim Wallace . The event was entirely expected and markets performed their role of pricing this in in advance . But that does not mean the currency 's future value is certain . Sterling dropped sharply in the wake of the Brexit vote , then dipped a little further in October when it became clear Britain really is going to leave as markets anticipate a negative impact on Britain 's economy . A weaker pound helps the economy adjust to new circumstances , making UK goods cheaper for foreign buyers , and boosting exporters ' profits . As Ben Broadbent , deputy governor of the Bank of England , said this month , that may not last . If Brexit is not , after all , bad for the economy - and growth since the referendum may indicate this - then sterling will rise again . But if it imposes unexpectedly big costs on businesses , the currency will need to fall further to reflect that and recover the lost competitiveness . With little detail on the path of Brexit talks , the pound is not set to move far for now . Since late last year it has hovered at around 660 on Bloomberg 's British Pound Index , a valuation of sterling based on the currencies of Britain 's key trading partners . But to underline how far sterling has fallen since the financial crisis struck - that index began at 1000 on the eve of 2005 . Strengths Britain 's economy is growing at a steady pace International investors see the UK as a safe haven for their money Other advanced nations come with their own risks Threats Brexit talks could go badly , denting the pound Donald Trump is pushing the dollar up , and the pound down An interest rate cut would depress sterling Weaknesses Brexit has damaged the UK 's reputation for political stability The negotiations are uncharted territory Interest rates are at rock bottom levels Opportunities The Bank of England could hike interest rates , pushing up the pound A pro-trade Brexit deal would calm the doubters Trade deals outside the EU would raise optimism
Brexit waters are muddied by confusion about the single market ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Could we have some clarity on the difference between being a member of the single market and having access to it ? Many commentators conflate these two terms as if they meant the same thing . After Brexit , we will want access to the single market but will ( hopefully ) not be members of it . Access does not include being bound by rules such as free movement . Countries outside the EU which trade with it ( India , the United States , Canada , Japan , South Korea etc ) all have access to the single market but are not members of it . If we can not agree on terminology , how can we properly discuss Brexit ? Andy Bebbington Stone , Staffordshire SIR - Angela Merkel says that Britain will not be allowed to cherry pick in Brexit negotiations ( report , December 7 ) . However , the EU chooses to do exactly that when it suits its purpose . The treaty between the EU and Morocco , drawn up some years ago , allowed for the free movement of goods , services and capital but excluded free movement of people . This could be a blueprint for Britain 's future relationship with the EU . David Starkie London SW8 SIR - It is amazing how EU myths persist in the face of overwhelming contrary evidence . You report that the Governor of the Bank of England was attempting to `` keep the UK inside the single market of goods and services until at least 2021 '' . But there is no single market in services in the EU . There never has been , and there is no likelihood of one in the near future . Given the importance of services , especially financial , to the British economy , why persist with references to an imaginary market ? Stanislas Yassukovich OppÈde , Vaucluse , France SIR - Those forecasting the euro 's demise underestimate the devastation that its EU creators were prepared to countenance in order to make their dream project succeed . This Brussels lunacy ultimately will not ensure the euro 's survival , at least not in its present form . Tragically it ensures that the resulting delayed disintegration will be that much greater.Mark Baker Tenterden , Kent SIR - William Hague ( Comment , December 6 ) fears that the eurozone tsars will never tolerate the breakup of the euro . A face-saving compromise might be to allow the good boys ( Germany , Austria , Netherlands , Belgium , Luxembourg ) to form a new club , with perhaps a historically apt name like the Thaler , and make the bad boys in class ( Italy , Spain , Portugal , Greece , Cyprus ) start their own club , with a historically apt name like the Scudo . The rest of the eurozone countries could then decide whether they want to join the good boys or the bad boys , or perhaps leave school altogether . Stuart Green Bedford
A shock on the Tory benches as Opposition remembers how to oppose
Three times David Davis has had to come to the Commons to defend the Government 's strategy on Brexit , and already he sounds tired of it . Tired of MPs opposite him always nagging him for detail . Tired of MPs behind him always nagging him for detail . Tired of Anna Soubry , a vociferous Tory Remainer , cawing at him endlessly to give way . Yesterday he sounded tired even before he began . `` Another day , another outing , '' he sighed . He may find there are a few more to come . The Brexit Secretary still has plenty of supportive Tories to fight his corner , of course . They too , though , seem put out by Labour 's criticisms of the Government 's approach . To put it another way : they seem indignant to find the Opposition opposing them . Perhaps , after a year of Labour in-fighting and incompetence , they 'd simply forgotten that that 's what an Opposition is there to do . Yesterday 's debate was n't strictly about Brexit ; it was about how MPs are going to debate Brexit . How much light the Government will shed on its plans ; how much scrutiny it will permit MPs to give them . Sir Keir Starmer , newly appointed by Jeremy Corbyn as Mr Davis 's opposite number , said Labour `` accepted and respected '' the result of the EU referendum . The Government , he acknowledged , had a mandate for leaving . But it did n't have `` a mandate for the terms '' of leaving . A mandate for , say , giving up membership of the single market . And it was these terms that MPs must be allowed to examine and debate . As might be expected from a QC and former director of public prosecutions , Sir Keir made his case authoritatively and methodically . The problem , however , came when he was asked what Labour themselves wanted from the EU negotiations . `` Best access to the single market , '' he replied . Well , that 's enlightening , because to go by what Theresa May has said ( `` Maximum possible access to the European market '' ) , that 's what the Government wants too . In short : Labour appear to be attacking the Government for holding a position as vague as their own . Just as he 'd done on Monday , Mr Davis reassured the House that the EU could n't afford to `` punish '' Britain for daring to leave . To punish us , after all , would be undemocratic , as well as damaging to their own countries ' www.economies.No doubt it would be . Then again , Mr Davis 's opponents may find his confidence surprising . One reason frequently given for leaving the EU was that its leaders are crazed ideologues who reject democracy and prize their mad project above the economic success of their own countries . Yet Mr Davis seems convinced that , now Britain has voted to leave , the crazed ideologues will magically transform into decent , democracyloving pragmatists who will prize the economic success of their own countries over their mad project . Still , who knows ? Maybe Mr Davis is right . Maybe the ideologues are more reasonable than I thought . Maybe I should stop talking Brussels down . 'He seems convinced the crazed EU ideologues will transform into decent , democratic pragmatists '
The exodus from the City is already happening
Theresa May 's trip to Wall Street last month was not a resounding success . By all accounts , she turned up to hear what the bankers had to say about Brexit and they turned up to hear what the new British Prime Minister had to say on the matter - consequently , not much got said . Tempers started fraying . And then one of May 's contingent made matters worse by saying that the UK Government understood the importance of the City and was taking the bankers ' concerns on board , but , let 's be honest , none of you guys are going to be moving to Frankfurt anytime soon . There was a similar dialogue ( if that is the right word and it almost certainly is n't ) during a financial services panel discussion at the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham last week : bankers repeatedly said that they might have to move City jobs to the Continent in the event of a `` hard '' Brexit and Tory MPs repeatedly insisted that they wo n't . What we 've got here is a failure to communicate . It 's hard to blame the politicians for assuming the bankers are crying wolf - again . How many times have we heard banks say they are going to take their ball and play somewhere else if they do n't get their way ? And it stands to reason that no self-respecting banker wants to uproot their family , cancel their membership of Glynebourne and move to the cultural blackhole that is Frankfurt ( with apologies to the Goethe-Museum and the no doubt excellent Hoechst Porcelain Manufactory ) . The trouble is , those forwarding this argument are making a monumental category error . In one sense that Downing Street flunky was bang-on - no one 's moving anywhere ; it 's jobs that will go . Speaking at a conference in London yesterday Robert Rooney , the head of Morgan Stanley 's business in Europe , said that despite all the noise about Brexit , the issue `` really is n't terribly complicated '' . If the UK stays in the single market ( which , for want of a better phrase , we 'll call `` soft '' Brexit ) then the banks will likely be able to carry on much as before , if not ( `` hard '' Brexit ) then there 's stuff that they used to do out of London that they will legally have to do somewhere else . It really is as simple as that . The complication comes in the timing . Last week , Theresa May said she would start the twoyear process of leaving the European Union by triggering Article 50 in March 2017 . This has prompted a subtle shift in the City 's focus . It is still concerned about maintaining the `` passporting '' that will allow them to sell their services throughout the EU and the rather esoteric issue of euro-clearing . But it is now really worried that the UK and the EU wo n't get round to deciding on the transitional arrangements that could bridge the inevitable gap between the end of the Article 50 process and the start of any new trade agreement . It is not just the banks that are fretting about this looming cliff edge . Last month , the Bank of England made Phil Evans its new `` Brexit coordinator '' with responsibility for trying to minimise the impact of the country 's departure from the EU on the UK 's huge financial sector . Bankers say that the Prudential Regulatory Authority is asking them what contingency plans they have in place to deal with a worst-case , hardest-of-hard Brexit scenarios . This has prompted banks to start taking what they call `` no regrets '' decisions - moving roles and entities to Europe that can be reversed or which make sense anyway . Banks have - in the most dramatic fashion - been alerted to the fact that the old ( super-efficient ) hub-and-spoke system run out of London massively concentrates political risk and are now thinking about spreading themselves around a bit . Some businesses will be too expensive to move and the plug will just get pulled . Those that have to move could take around two years to set up in Europe and queues could soon start to form . To which European cities will those activities migrate ? Take your pick . Will Bank X move X thousand staff to Paris , Frankfurt or Dublin ? No . Could Bank X cut a few hundred/ thousand jobs in London ( or just not replace natural churn ) and then hire a few hundred/ thousand people in a variety of different European cities ( with some maybe going to New York ) ? Yes . Will another European city rise to challenge London as the main financial hub in this time zone ? No . But if each takes a few percentage points of market share from the City , it will start to add up . Will London cease to be a prominent global financial centre ? Also no ( only about 25pc to 30pc of the City 's business is with the EU ) . But could Brexit diminish London 's status at the margin ? Yes . And would that result in a hit to the UK 's finances ( and therefore the economy ) ? Yes . This process has - slowly but surely - already begun . Managers have become less reluctant to sign off on European jobs , legal entities on the Continent that were slated to be shut down are being kept open , discreet inquiries are being made about office space . There will be no Big Bang , just a gradual shift . How big it will be depends not only on the form Brexit takes but also how soon decisions are reached . A report published last week by the consultancy Oliver Wyman for CityUK concluded that a soft Brexit would result in the loss of 4,000 jobs and £500m in tax revenue while a hard Brexit would result in the loss of around 70,000 jobs , £10bn in tax revenue . Bankers believe it will be possible to use current trade deals , equivalency arrangements and sensible negotiation to find a solution that works for the UK , the EU and the City . But if the Government wants to know what that is , it has n't asked yet . The clock is ticking . 'It is not just the banks that are fretting about this looming cliff edge '
Ignore the doom-mongers . Brexit should be a cause for optimism
Last week I wrote on the outlook for the UK economy in the year ahead without even mentioning Brexit once . This was not accidental . Nor was it because of a suspicion that you are all bored to death by the subject ( although you may well be ) . Rather it reflected my judgment that the Brexit negotiations will not play a major role in determining how the economy fares this year . This may seem surprising . There is a widespread belief , fanned by parts of the media , that our economic fate hangs by a thread and if Brexit negotiations go badly then the economy could be in serious trouble . This is completely misguided . Admittedly , the political world and the media world that lives off it will be on tenterhooks for much of this year . Each twist and turn of the negotiations will be reported and analysed ad nauseam . Yet the economy will trundle on much as before , whatever happens in the talks . As I never tire of telling people , on the whole , political events have next to no impact on immediate economic performance . This is determined by much more humdrum factors such as the growth of incomes or changes in interest rates . Similarly , the several serious political issues currently besetting the European Union , including Catalonia , the impending Italian election , the absence of a German government and the increasing alienation of Poland and Hungary , despite their long-term importance , are unlikely to dent the current expansionary phase in the eurozone economy . This is not to say that the terms of Brexit are economically irrelevant . Rather , their impact on the economy will unfold over several years . And even the long-term impact is not mechanistically determinate . It will depend largely on the policy decisions that we make . Nevertheless , at the beginning of the year in which many of the issues surrounding Brexit will become clearer it is appropriate to take stock . What has the effect been ? According to the Treasury , the vote to leave was supposed to send the economy into recession . This turned out to be nonsense on stilts . Even so , according to Tony Blair , you can see the ill-effects of Brexit in everything from the crisis in the NHS to our poor productivity performance . I am surprised that he did not throw in recent extreme weather events for good measure . The truth is that whatever is wrong with the British economy at the moment - and there are quite a few things - predates the Brexit vote and has next to nothing to do with it . In fact , last year 's growth rate of a probable 1.8pc was only marginally lower than the previous year 's 1.9pc . This degree of difference is not worth quibbling about . It may reflect all sorts of statistical quirks . Moreover , it may even be revised away . Admittedly , the UK has slipped down the international growth tables as other countries ' growth has picked up . But this reflects differences in the timing of the economic cycle and probably wo n't last . True , some investment was deferred but by the end of last year the overall impact of this appeared to be minor . Investment grew more strongly last year than it had in 2016 . Where there has been a continuing effect from Brexit , albeit indirectly , is on consumer spending . This has been hit by the squeeze on real incomes resulting from the rise in inflation that was caused by the fall of the pound . However , this effect is set to subside as inflation falls back . Moreover , we should soon enjoy a substantial increase in exports , reflecting our improved competitiveness . There are clear signs that this is already happening . So , Brexit has contributed to the rebalancing of the UK economy that has long been necessary . With regard to the eventual outcome of the negotiations we are still not at all sure what may transpire . Future possible trading relationships with the EU range from some continued pseudo-membership of the customs union and single market , through to Theresa May 's `` special partnership '' , which would involve tariff-free and interferencefree trade , to departure without a deal and trade on WTO rules . Far from being a disaster as so many assume , if the EU does not play ball with May , this last outcome could in fact be the best . But even if we knew this was going to be the outcome it would not fully dispel uncertainty . Simply saying that we will trade under WTO rules does not say anything specific about tariff rates . It would be consistent with imposing tariffs on imports from the EU or keeping such imports tariff-free while abolishing tariffs on imports from the rest of the world , and all stations in between . WTO rules merely stipulate that whatever tariff rate is decided must be imposed on all countries - unless there is a free trade agreement in place . This uncertainty about our future relationship with the EU does not help businesses to plan or to invest . However , to portray this as a disaster for the UK economy , as so many Remainers do , is ridiculous . This is an attempt to serve up a reheated version of `` Project Fear '' . True , British exports to the EU are an extremely important part of the economy . They account for about 12pc of our GDP . But this means that about 88pc of the UK 's GDP does not consist of exports to the EU . Moreover , whatever trade relationship is agreed , the overwhelming bulk of existing EU-UK trade will continue . And whatever trade relationship is agreed , the share of the EU in the UK 's trade will continue to fall as the EU fades in relative importance in the world . There is good reason to be optimistic . If you are to embark on a major change to your trading and economic arrangements it is best to do this when the world economy is growing well and your currency is competitive . For the first time in many years , both these criteria are currently met . Roger Bootle is chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com 'Brexit has contributed to the rebalancing of the UK economy that has long been necessary '
Brexit deal for aviation industry is 'vital to avoid a blow to trade '
THE Government has been urged to focus on the aviation industry in its Brexit talks if the country is to avoid suffering a hit to trade and investment The Independent Transport Commission think-tank , one of the country 's leading research charities , has issued a report claiming a lack of support for the sector could lead to trade suffering once the UK leaves the EU . Its research , authored by former Bank of England economist Rebecca Driver , points to the `` huge economic value '' of the aviation industry . It adds that Brexit will have a `` significant impact on the regulatory framework governing trade in aviation '' making it even more essential the UK retains global aviation ties . Establishing new aviation agreements with the EU is deemed critical given there are no historic rules to fall back on should a deal not be struck . Many industries could operate on World Trade Organisation rules . But Air Service Agreements , which enable cross-border aviation , are struck on a bilateral basis between individual countries . This means there is no underlying global framework to fall back on . `` In order to preserve the UK 's air connectivity , the UK will need to ensure that there is a timely renegotiation of a significant number of aviation treaties , including with third countries such as the US , as well as with the EU , '' the report states . The UK 's large aviation manufacturing sector was also singled out as an area of potential concern due to its reliance on factories across the globe . In 2016 , the trade surplus in aircraft and aircraft parts in the UK was the largest of any of the country 's goods sectors , showing how important the industry is to UK plc . `` The aviation manufacturing sector is part of significant global supply chains , with aircraft being assembled from parts from many different countries , '' it said . `` This means that the competitiveness of the UK sector will depend on minimising regulatory barriers post-Brexit . '' Air passenger duty , the levy bemoaned by the industry for its high rate compared to other nations , also drew criticism from the report . `` If the UK is going to achieve its vision of becoming a truly global player post-Brexit , having a tax that penalises travel to far-flung locations is likely to be counter-productive , '' it said . Cutting or even removing the tax seems unlikely in the near future , however , given moves by Philip Hammond the Chancellor , in his Budget last month to increase the rate for those flying business class or with private jets . More broadly , the research showed the importance of aviation by stating that a new airline route between two metropolitan areas leads to a 4.6pc increase in venture capital investment , while a 10pc increase in the number of intercontinental flights leads to a 4pc increase in business headquarters . Matthew Niblett , director of the ITC , called for decisive action from the Government given trade talks were about to begin with the EU and the UK 's aviation policy remained `` bogged down '' in Parliament . 'The UK must ensure there is a timely renegotiation of a significant number of aviation treaties '
City requires 'swift clarity ' on transition deal , says HSBC boss ; Shift towards to Asia drives $ 3.8bn rise in underlying profits at HSBC in third quarter
THE outgoing chief executive of HSBC Stuart Gulliver has warned of the dangers of an empty Brexit transition deal and said the bank would wait `` as long as we possibly can '' before deciding whether to move up to 1,000 staff from the UK to France . After posting profits and revenue growth for the nine months to September , Mr Gulliver said HSBC had not experienced any `` material '' negative impact from Brexit so far but wanted swift clarity on the UK 's terms of withdrawal . He warned a transition deal devoid of detail would only provide false comfort to the City . `` When it comes to international clients , what they 're really keen on is to have clarity , '' he said . `` A transitional period without clarity may just postpone investment . What matters is the timing of precision around the UK 's relationship with the EU post-Brexit . '' At the time of HSBC 's half-year results in July , Mr Gulliver advised the bank expected to incur around $ 200m- $ 300m ( £152m-£227m ) of restructuring costs in a hard Brexit . To date it has booked just $ 12m of costs related to legal advice and planning.Mr Gulliver said the bank 's major presence and separate EU banking licence in France allowed it to hold off from doing `` anything precipitous '' on Brexit . `` We do n't need to move as early as some others , '' he added . In the third quarter HSBC posted revenue growth across all its main global businesses as its `` pivot to Asia '' continued to drive expansion . More than 70pc of its adjusted profit for the year to date came from Asia , with retail banking and wealth management performing particularly well . However a rise in costs led to a slight dip in adjusted pre-tax profits , to the disappointment of investors . Underlying revenues for the three months rose 2pc to $ 13bn ( £9.9bn ) , while underlying pre-tax profits slipped $ 100m to $ 5.4bn . Despite both figures narrowly beating analyst expectations , HSBC shares fell 1.5pc to 737p . Over the nine months to September HSBC grew both underlying revenue and pre-tax profits by 3pc and 8pc respectively . Exceptional costs in the third quarter hit $ 770m , including a further $ 101m put towards the cost of setting up a ring-fenced UK retail bank to comply with new regulations , taking total spending on this to $ 277m . With one-off costs and currency impacts stripped out , HSBC posted a $ 3.8bn leap in pre-tax profits to $ 4.6bn for the third quarter , as it had made a $ 1.7bn one-off loss on the sale of its Brazil business last year . HSBC is in the process of handing over to new management , with new chairman Mark Tucker starting this month , while HSBC lifer John Flint will take over as chief executive in February . Mr Gulliver said he expected Mr Flint - who is stepping up from heading HSBC 's retail banking operations - would follow `` the same approach '' including `` the mantra that revenues need to grow faster than costs '' . He said he would spend his last few weeks at HSBC `` working with intensity '' to improve shareholder returns and on hitting the final two of 10 strategic targets set out in 2015 that had not yet been met - to improve profitability in the US and to grow its global renminbi trading business . Mr Gulliver said the bank was cooperating with UK enforcement agencies investigating potential links between HSBC and corruption allegations in South Africa . He also said the bank was working with more than 1,000 UK business customers who had had their business banking privileges curtailed after being caught up in a crackdown on money laundering . He insisted companies caught up had been repeatedly warned to provide more information and represented a small minority of customers . HSBC 's core capital ratio declined marginally to 14.6pc , down from 14.7pc , but was still well up on 13.6pc at the end of last year . $ 12m The amount the bank has booked to date on costs related to contingency planning for Britain 's exit from the European Union
UK seeks close data protection partnership with EU after Brexit
BRITAIN will seek to remain `` fully involved '' in shaping EU data protection regulations after Brexit in a hugely ambitious attempt to retain the status quo for businesses , the Government announced yesterday . The plan , which was set out in a position paper from the Department for Exiting the EU , was welcomed by tech industry chiefs , although they quickly warned it would not be easy or straightforward to accomplish . The question of how both business and government will maintain legal cross-border data exchanges after Brexit remains one of the most pressing of the negotiations , with data flows the lifeblood of both trade and security ties . The 13-page position paper argues that the UK will depart the EU with rules on data-sharing at an `` unprecedented point of alignment '' , and will seek an early determination from the European side that flows will be maintained unimpeded immediately after Brexit . Subsequently , Britain will seek to build a new , bespoke UK-EU model `` which could build on '' the existing model in which the European Commission grants `` adequacy '' status to non-EU countries which it has determined comply with its data protection standards . The new model would allow the UK 's data authority , the Information Commissioner 's Office ( ICO ) , to be `` fully involved in future EU regulatory dialogue '' , with an `` ongoing role '' for the ICO with the existing network of EU data protection authorities . The Government has conceded that no other non-EU country has such a role and that such an arrangement would be unique and unprecedented . Antony Walker , deputy director of Tech UK which represents more than 1,000 UK-based tech firms , welcomed the ambition of the proposals , but urged more detail . `` What the Government says it wants to achieve is positive , but we urgently need more detail on how we get there , because it wo n't be easy or straightforward - although it is not impossible , '' he told The Daily Telegraph . `` There really is a mutual interest to getting a solution to these issues . '' Businesses hoping for a regulatory arbitrage on EU data rules after Brexit will be disappointed , with the Government making clear that it is seeking no additional privileges for the UK after its departure from the EU . Instead , the Government believes it can use its `` unique '' alignment with the EU at the point of Brexit to win a seamless deal . However , EU sources have cautioned that even though the UK will this year absorb the EU 's new General Data Protection Regulation into British law , a determination of `` adequacy '' after Brexit is not guaranteed . As a non-EU country , any such designation will have to take into account the UK 's security establishment which has sweeping powers under the new 2016 Investigatory Powers Act . 'What the Government says it wants wo n't be easy or straightforward - although it is not impossible '
UK to axe EU 's green targets ; EU green energy targets to go after Brexit
BRITAIN is preparing to scrap EU green energy targets that will add more than £100 to the average energy bill as part of a bonfire of red tape after Brexit . The UK is currently committed to getting 15 per cent of all energy from renewable sources such as wind and solar by 2020 . Ministers have long been critical of the targets because they exclude nuclear power , carbon capture or gains from energy efficiency . The UK is currently on course to miss the target and incur millions of pounds in fines from the EU . Government sources told The Daily Telegraph that the target , under the EU Renewable Energy Directive , is likely to be scrapped after Brexit . The Telegraph has called on the Conservative Party to promise a bonfire of EU red tape in its 2020 manifesto to put Britain on a radically different course . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , has `` applauded '' the campaign and he backed calls to sweep away decades of `` burdensome '' EU regulations after Brexit . It comes after civil service documents , photographed on a train , revealed Britain plans to scale down concern on climate change after Brexit . Details of the policy change were contained in the papers of a senior civil servant at the Department for International Trade photographed by a passenger this month . The notes say : `` Trade and growth are now priorities for all posts - you will all need to prioritise developing capability in this area . Some economic security-related work like climate change and illegal wildlife trade will be scaled down . '' Earlier this month Bloomberg , the news agency , revealed that officials at the Treasury and Department for Business , Energy and Industrial Strategy have been discussing axing the renewables target . The EU Renewable Energy Directive requires the UK to generate 15 per cent of its energy from renewable sources by 2020 . The target has led to billions of pounds of government subsidies for renewable power sources such as wind , solar and biomass power plants , which are ultimately paid for by customers through their energy bills . The National Audit Office estimated that green energy subsidies will cost every household £110 a year by 2020 . Owen Paterson , a Conservative MP and former environment secretary , said : `` It 's distorting the whole energy market . It 's like the Sheriff of Nottingham - it transfers money from my poorest constituents to my wealthiest constituents who are putting up pointless wind turbines heavily subsidised . I would be happy to see the back of it . '' According to a Commons report , ministers will have to import 19,000 EU rules and regulations on to our statute books as part of the Great Repeal Bill , which will take shape in a white paper published on Thursday .
Scotland Do n't mess with Brexit Bill , Rudd tells peers
THE Home Secretary has written to every peer in the House of Lords urging them not to hand the Government its first defeat over the Brexit Bill . Labour believes it has the numbers to `` handsomely '' defeat the Government today with an amendment to Theresa May 's Article 50 Bill that would guarantee the rights of EU migrants living in the UK . The amendment is expected to win the support of more than 200 peers including Labour , the Liberal Democrats , cross-benchers and a dozen Tory rebels . A Lords defeat would mean the Bill would enter into `` ping pong '' , with Mrs May having to use her Commons majority to vote down the amendment . In her letter , Amber Rudd says the Government has the `` utmost respect '' for EU migrants living in the UK and that the Government wants to guarantee their rights as soon as possible . Ms Rudd says the responsibility for the failure to reach an early agreement lies with the refusal of `` a few EU countries '' - understood to include Germany - to discuss the matter . However , she warns that if the UK `` unilaterally '' guarantees the rights of EU migrants living in the UK it will leave British citizens living in the EU facing uncertainty over their status . Ministers are pushing for a `` reciprocal '' deal . It came as Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , hit back at Sir John Major and said he was fed up with people `` droning and moaning '' about Brexit , adding that he feels like telling them `` come off it , sunshine '' . The Foreign Secretary said Brexit presented an `` unrivalled opportunity '' for a new free-trade deal with the EU . On Monday Sir John had warned that leaving the union could mean cutting the NHS and welfare state . Asked about his intervention , Mr Johnson said : `` I think it 's very important that as we set out on this journey that we are positive about the outcome , for the very good reason that the outcome will be fantastic for this country . When I became Foreign Secretary and first went to other European capitals they were in a state of shock some of them , of puzzlement . That mood has almost entirely vanished . They really want us to help us to do a good deal . '' He added : `` Sometimes I feel impatient when I hear people droning and moaning about the state of the world . I hear them warn the sky is likely to fall on our heads . Every generation hears its prognostications of doom . '' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , warned the Cabinet yesterday that Britain must prepare for the `` unlikely scenario '' that a trade deal with the EU could not be reached before Brexit . Philip Johnston : Page 16 Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , will today launch a blueprint for Europe 's survival after Brexit amid dissent from poorer eastern states over plans for deepen integration . The plan will set out five `` pathways to unity '' for the 27 member states left in the EU after in 2019 .
Scotland Our man in Brussels is 'a gloomy pessimist ' ; Diplomat condemned by Tory MPs for saying Brexit deal could take a decade and end up being rejected
BRITAIN 'S ambassador to the EU was accused of being a `` gloomy pessimist '' last night after saying it could take a decade to complete Brexit . Eurosceptic Tory MPs claimed Sir Ivan Rogers was `` completely out of his comfort zone '' after he warned that a trade deal may not be completed until the mid 2020s and could ultimately be rejected by EU member states . The European Commission itself yesterday appeared to contradict Sir Ivan after leaked minutes of a private meeting with EU negotiators , obtained by The Daily Telegraph , suggested Britain could secure a quicker trade deal . Theresa May yesterday told European Union leaders at a summit in Brussels that she wants a `` smooth and orderly '' Brexit as she pushed for the UK to secure a trade deal within two years before Britain leaves the EU in 2019 . Eurosceptic MPs said Sir Ivan had been `` scarred '' by the EU referendum and said his failure to secure a better deal with Brussels played a key role in persuading people to vote to leave . Sir Ivan `` diluted '' Mr Cameron 's attempts to win significant reforms by repeatedly warning that they were likely to be rejected by Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , it was said . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , went further . He said : `` The Foreign Office have been taking us in the wrong direction for decades , they want to delay or stop Brexit . The old guard all need clearing out , every single one of them . He is top of the list . Brexit was supposed to mark a new departure , a change of direction for our country . They are clearly mentally not up to it . '' Sir Ivan advised ministers in October that securing a free trade deal with the other 27 members of the European Union could take a decade . He said that even once concluded it would need to be approved by national parliaments , which involved every country in the EU having to sign off the deal . He suggested that EU leaders expect that a free trade deal , rather than continued membership of the Single Market , is the most likely option for the UK after Brexit . Dominic Raab , a eurosceptic Conservative MP , said : `` He was the diplomat who persuaded David Cameron to dilute his ambitions for the renegotiation , which was one reason the referendum was lost . So , he has been rather scarred , in fairness , by his own pessimistic advice in the past . `` I respect the Foreign Office 's professionalism , but they have always been very pro-EU , and very anti-leaving the EU . Let 's not be consumed by Sir Ivan 's gloomy pessimism , let 's get behind the Government , let 's set out the case for a strong , post-Brexit relationship with the EU on trade , security , and other areas . '' Sir Iain Duncan Smith , the former Work and Pensions Secretary , said : `` People like Sir Ivan Rogers are now utterly out of their comfort zone . They are not to be treated like Gods who know the ins and outs of this . '' European Commission officials said at a seminar held in October by Michel Barnier , the Commission 's chief Brexit negotiator , that it could negotiate a new trade deal with Britain `` faster '' than the seven years it took to agree a deal with Canada . Downing Street said that Sir Ivan , who spoke to Mrs May yesterday , was passing on the views of other EU nations . `` Ivan is there to report the views of others , he is doing the job of an ambassador , '' a source said . Being the Prime Minister can be lonely at times . Particularly if you turn up for a meeting of the European Union club having told your fellow 27
Britain told full control of border must wait until 2021
EU FREEDOM of movement rules must continue to apply in Britain during the Brexit transition period and until 2021 , Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's Brexit coordinator , yesterday warned . Mr Verhofstadt insisted Britain would not be able to fully take back control of its borders until the transition was over , meaning an extra two years of unlimited EU immigration after Brexit Day on March 29 2019 . Warning that the transition period would not allow `` cherry-picking '' , he said any changes to immigration rules `` would only apply after the Withdrawal Agreement and the transition period '' . That would push back , by just under two years , the cut-off date for EU citizens to qualify for special residency status allowing them to live and work in Britain indefinitely . `` On content , there is no discussion , '' Mr Verhofstadt told MEPs in the constitutional affairs committee , `` it will be the whole acquis [ the EU 's body of law ] and nothing else . '' His comments backed demands made by EU-27 diplomats in draft instructions for Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator . Speaking in the European Parliament in Brussels , Mr Verhofstadt also raised the possibility of the transition period , which is meant to start immediately after Brexit Day , lasting for longer than 18 months . `` It is not a question of religion that it has to end on 31 December , '' he said , suggesting an extension of a few months would be allowed and noting that MEPs would accept a transition period of up to three years . Negotiations over the transition period , which will effectively freeze Britain 's EU membership while stripping it of voting rights and representation in Britain , are expected to start next month . The EU will demand it ends in December 2020 and that Britain obey all EU laws during the period .
Scotland Sturgeon : independence best for Scots after Brexit empties pockets ; SNP priority is 'second independence vote - not a good EU deal
NICOLA STURGEON yesterday published a report warning that Brexit will cost up to £2,300 per person , but gave no figures to support its conclusion that independence was `` best '' for Scotland 's economic prospects . The First Minister unveiled Scottish Government research that stated Scotland 's economy , environment and society `` will be best served as a member of the European Union as an independent state '' . But it produced no figures to substantiate its claim and the Tories said it ignored the benefits of the UK 's internal market , which is worth four times as much to Scottish companies as that of the EU . In contrast , the report calculated that Scots would each be £2,300 worse off if the UK and EU fail to negotiate a trade deal and are forced to revert to World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules . This would be reduced to £700 if the UK stays in the single market , the report said , with Ms Sturgeon insisting that untrammelled immigration from the EU must continue after Brexit if the Scottish economy is to flourish . The report 's firm conclusion that independence is Scotland 's best option appeared to undermine Ms Sturgeon 's claim that she will only decide on a second referendum after she has seen the terms of the Brexit deal in the autumn . She insisted a separate Scotland would get a special deal that would allow it to trade freely with both the UK and EU , citing Ireland as a precedent . However , the Irish border issue is yet to be resolved and it is being considered in the context of the Good Friday Agreement . The report was intended to `` relaunch '' her Brexit strategy after Ms Sturgeon 's demand last year for a second independence referendum triggered a major public backlash . But David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , said : `` These figures fail to acknowledge that above all we need to avoid anything that might fracture the vital UK 's internal market , which is wortharound £48 billion to the Scottish economy - or four times more than trade with the EU . `` At the weekend , Nicola Sturgeon made it clear her real priority is holding a second independence referendum in Scotland , not getting a good deal as we leave the EU . '' Adam Tomkins , the Scottish Tories ' constitution spokesman , said : `` The SNP government has gone completely over-the-top in its scaremongering here . As the nationalists proved with their independence White Paper , their financial forecasts simply can not be trusted . '' Willie Rennie , the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader , said the report made some `` worthwhile '' points but `` without any attempt to quantify the costs of dismantling the UK single market . '' A study published last week said Ms Sturgeon 's calls for single market membership have made `` little headway '' over the past year , with Scots opposed to freedom of movement and having a different immigration system from the rest of the UK . Unveiling the research , she insisted there was no contradiction between warning that quitting the single market will have a dire economic impact and claiming that leaving the UK would be beneficial . Although EU member states will be bound by the terms of the Brexit trade deal , she cited the Irish situation as evidence this would not apply to a separate Scotland . She said : `` I do not want to compromise or give up trade with the rest of the UK , or these islands generally , and there is absolutely nothing that should make us say that is necessary . `` You only have to listen to the UK Government itself right now when it talks about Ireland , when it says very clearly to the Republic of Ireland that it can continue to trade freely with the UK and with the European Union post-Brexit ... This is not an either/or for Scotland . '' She also argued that free movement must continue seamless '' after Brexit .
A 'cliff-edge ' Brexit is just another name for Project Fear
The referendum campaign continues . Proposals for transition periods and the various scare stories concerning a `` cliff-edge '' are really Project Fear in disguise . The British public risks being misled by the establishment - all over again . Moreover , as Brexit shenanigans continue within the Conservative Party , you could be forgiven for believing that the most serious issue at stake is the self-interest of those who are positioning themselves to become the next Prime Minister . Some of our senior civil servants are hoping that a combination of delay , only half-leaving , and the inexorable approach of the next election will see the cherished membership of the Union preserved in substance , if not in name . They are not doing this for personal advancement but rather in pursuit of what they perceive to be the national interest . Meanwhile , large established businesses and their lobbying organisations are , as usual , arguing in favour of the status quo , which happens to protect them . The City is trying to bamboozle ministers , lacking in both detailed financial knowledge and intellectual selfconfidence , with tales of its importance and future threats to its success if we do n't cling to something very close to EU membership . The Delayers ( aka the Remainers ) have tried to gain advantage through the use of language . `` Hard '' Brexit seems to imply a reduction in our living standards , so if you support this type of Brexit presumably you accept the reduction as a price to be paid in order to recover sovereignty . Yet there is no conflict between the recovery of sovereignty and economic self-interest . Quite the reverse . Brexit can bring economic gains - escape from the EU 's trade protectionism that obliges us to impose tariffs on imports from the rest of the world , and escape from its regulatory burdens . This is what makes yesterday 's launch of a document called `` From Project Fear to Project Prosperity '' by Economists for Free Trade ( EFT ) so significant . EFT is comprised of a number of economists ( including me ) who believe that Britain 's economic interest is best served by Brexit , and a full Brexit at that - the sooner the better . The voice of consumers is seldom heard above the cacophony of special pleading by business interests . At the heart of our analysis is the large potential gain to consumers from lower prices made possible by Brexit . Unless the UK can wring some remarkable concessions from the EU , a transition period will delay these gains . Supposedly , though , a transition period would avoid a `` cliff-edge '' in March 2019 . But would n't this simply put off the `` cliff-edge '' for two years ? In reality there is no cliff-edge . If we do not secure a free-trade agreement ( FTA ) with the EU by the time of our departure then trade can continue , albeit with EU tariffs on British exports . But we know that , on average , such tariffs are trivial . Where they are not , the lower pound is a major offset . In any case , why should agreeing an FTA with the EU be so difficult ? Why ca n't the essence of it simply be to continue with the status quo ? As the former Cabinet Minister , Peter Lilley , has pointed out , this is the first negotiation in history about an FTA between two parties who currently do n't impose any tariffs on each other . Admittedly , a transition deal is allegedly also about buying time to ensure that customs procedures are fully adapted . Yet most countries undertake trade with the single market without running into customs problems . And customs procedures are now almost entirely electronic and undertaken before goods cross the border . Why is the EU dragging its feet about setting up the relevant procedures and kit for trade with us ? Of course , money is at the heart of this - lots of it . The public is being softened up for a sell-out by the British establishment under which it agrees to pay huge sums to the EU . Yet we should n't pay a penny for so-called `` access '' to the single market . What does America pay for such access ? Or Singapore ? The answer is zilch . The supposed rationale for the idea of a large payment to the EU is that the latter 's planning periods run over several years and the UK has already signed up to the last one . Yet the UK 's acceptance of this financial plan was clearly predicated on the implicit assumption that we would continue to be a member of the EU and would meanwhile benefit therefrom . ( EU membership does provide benefits , does n't it ? ) The EU made no provision for a country leaving . Now that we are set to do so , it should simply redo its financial planning . And we should pay nothing after our membership ends . The adoption of a transition period sounds so mild and reasonable . But what should really worry you is that many of those pushing for one were not only on the losing side of the Brexit referendum but were also on the wrong side of the debate about joining the euro . For most of the British establishment ( but not , in this case , the Treasury ) , this was another instance of standing on the wrong side of history . There they are , now standing by the `` cliff-edge '' , still trying to tell us that they know best : gilded , cosseted - and profoundly wrong . Roger Bootle is chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com 'The voice of consumers is seldom heard above the cacophony of special pleading by business '
Scotland SNP threatens Brexit process with demands for new powers
SNP ministers yesterday threatened to derail the UK Government 's plans for an `` orderly '' Brexit unless they are handed a swathe of new powers repatriated from Brussels . Mike Russell , the SNP 's Brexit Minister , warned the Scottish Parliament could withhold consent for a swathe of legislation required to plug gaps in the statute book after EU law ceases to apply . In particular , he said the Nationalists would not agree to the UK Government unilaterally creating post- Brexit laws covering agriculture , fisheries , environmental policy and justice in Scotland . Mr Russell said all powers repatriated from Brussels in these areas have to be devolved to Holyrood . SNP ministers would then decide if it was `` sensible or desirable '' to agree a common UK framework with their counterparts in Whitehall . In a separate threat to withhold consent for the Repeal Bill , which will replace thousands of redundant EU laws , the minister said that the Scottish Parliament would use any vote on it `` to express its view on Brexit '' . His proposal clashes with Theresa May 's blueprint for Westminster to create UK-wide replacements for the Common Fisheries Policy ( CFP ) and Common Agricultural Policy ( CAP ) , before devolving responsibility for delivery to Scotland . The Prime Minister has warned that the SNP 's plan to devolve all powers in these areas would create different regimes north and south of the Border and trade barriers within the UK . However , creating UK frameworks could require the Scottish Parliament to pass a series of Legislative Consent Motions ( LCMs ) . These are usually needed when Westminster passes laws that cover devolved responsibilities . Mrs May confirmed the Government is considering whether an LCM is required for the Repeal Bill . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , has previously said that one will likely be needed and warned of `` significant implications '' if consent was withheld . The row broke out after the Queen 's Speech included fisheries and agriculture Bills to set up replacements for the hated CFP and CAP after Brexit . Scot-land 's fishermen welcomed a UK Government pledge to bring `` prosperity '' by taking back control of British waters and quota . But Mr Russell said the SNP had been `` consistently clear '' that all repatriated powers over agriculture , fisheries , environment policy and justice must be devolved . Referring to future Scottish Parliament LCMs , he said : `` There can be absolutely no question of the UK Government attempting to reserve powers in devolved areas and the Scottish Government would not recommend the Scottish Parliament consents to such proposals . Where it is sensible or desirable to introduce a common UK framework to replace that provided by EU law , this must be achieved through agreement and negotiation . '' He said it was `` deeply concerning '' that the UK Government believed that repatriated powers in these areas `` should go by default to Westminster '' . But Mr Mundell said the legislative programme set out in the Queen 's Speech was the first step in repatriating laws held by Brussels and promised to work closely with the SNP administration in Edinburgh to ensure an `` orderly '' Brexit . The Scottish Secretary said : `` We will bring powers back in a way that works best for Scotland and the rest of the UK . `` There will undoubtedly be more decision-making powers coming to Holyrood , and I look forward to working closely with the Scottish Government on this . '' Background briefing notes issued by the Government said the UK-wide frameworks replacing the CFP and CAP would be created immediately after Brexit . This will be a transitional arrangement `` to provide certainty '' and will allow time for `` intensive '' consultation with the three devolved administrations on permanent replacements to the two systems . The notes said the Fisheries Bill would help `` ensure prosperity for a new generation of fishermen '' . 'There can be no question of the UK Government attempting to reserve powers in devolved areas '
Scotland Union is 'unstoppable ' , May to tell Sturgeon ; Special Leaving the EU May to tell Scots she will work for a 'more united ' nation
THERESA MAY will make it clear to Nicola Sturgeon that Britain will be `` a more united nation '' outside the EU when the two leaders meet today , before the formal Brexit process is triggered . The Prime Minister will travel to Glasgow where she will meet Scotland 's First Minister and tell her , face to face , that there will be no new Scottish independence referendum while the Brexit negotiations are ongoing . Mrs May will describe the Union as an `` unstoppable force '' whose strength will be `` even more important '' during the Brexit talks . Then , on Wednesday , she will trigger Article 50 . Before that , she will address staff at the Department for International Development 's offices in East Kilbride , where she will promise to build `` a more united nation '' where the interests of the entire Union are `` at the heart of `` decisions . Ms Sturgeon wants to force a second referendum before Britain leaves the EU , unless Mrs May can secure a special deal for Scotland that will give it access to the Single Market . Mrs May has made it clear that neither of those things will happen , meaning her meeting with Ms Sturgeon today is likely to be a tense affair . The Scottish Parliament is expected to vote tomorrow in favour of a new referendum , which will trigger a demand from Ms Sturgeon for a Section 30 order that would transfer the power to hold a referendum from Westminster to Holyrood . The Prime Minister will ramp up the rhetoric over an independence referendum when she tells development department staff : `` When this great union of nations - England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland - sets its mind on something and works together with determination , we are an unstoppable force . `` In those policy areas where the UK Government holds responsibility , I am determined we will put the interests of the Union - both the parts and the whole - at the heart of our decision-making . '' She will say that her intention is to build `` a more united nation '' , fully respecting the devolution settlements but `` never allowing our Union to become looser and weaker , or our people to drift apart '' . Emphasising the values of freedom of speech , democracy and respect for human rights , she will say : `` This proud shared heritage provides the bedrock of our lives together in the UK , and on that foundation we have built a country where we share the challenges that we face , and bring all the expertise , ingenuity and goodwill we share across this Union to bear to tackle them ... . `` So , as Britain leaves the European Union , and we forge a new role for ourselves in the world , the strength and stability of our Union will become even more important . '' An SNP spokesman said : `` The next two years will determine the kind of country Scotland will be . So , once the terms of Brexit are clear the people of Scotland should have the final say . `` That 's why the First Minister set out a plan to give the people of Scotland a choice between Brexit and becoming an independent country . '' A spokesman for Ms Sturgeon said : `` We understand the UK Government wishes to discuss Article 50 . `` Given we are just days from the formal process of Brexit being triggered there has , as yet , been no discussion with the Scottish Government over what will be in the letter triggering departure from the EU . `` There has been no discussion over how Scotland 's interests will be represented , what role the Scottish Government will play in negotiations , nor which powers [ remitted from Brussels ] the Tories intend to take for Westminster . `` Most worryingly there has been no discussion over how the UK Government intends to manage the financial impacts of Brexit and the consequences for jobs and the economy in Scotland `` There are clearly a lot of areas where we hope the Prime Minister intends to provide answers . '' The spokesman added : `` It is appearing that this is another area where a Tory Prime Minister intends to simply dictate the rules and expect people in Scotland to go along with it . '' Tom Harris : Page 16 Brexit bias BBC accused of breaching impartiality THE BBC is embroiled in a fresh bias row after a study found just one in six speakers on the business news section of Radio 4 's Today programme saw Brexit as positive for Britain . A report from the campaign group Newswatch suggests that the BBC 's negativity has breached its own impartiality rules . It found that of 366 guest speakers on the show 's business segment in the second half of last year , 192 ( 52.5 per cent ) were negative . Only 60 ( 16.3 per cent ) could be said to be pro-Brexit and 114 ( 31 per cent ) were neutral . News-watch has been scrutinising the BBC 's EU output since 1999 . A spokesman for the BBC said the coverage was `` an accurate reflection of the business community 's viewpoints '' .
Scotland Trump salutes Brexit ; In the week he moves into the White House , president-elect declares Britons were right to vote to leave EU
DONALD TRUMP said last night that Britain was right to vote for Brexit because the country `` wanted to get its identity back '' . The comments came in an interview with Michael Gove , the former minister who led the Brexit campaign then was sacked by Theresa May . Speaking in Trump Tower , the president-elect said : `` People , countries , want their own identity and the UK wanted its own identity . '' Mr Trump also criticised Angela Merkel 's immigration policy . `` I think she made one very catastrophic mistake and that was taking all these illegals , '' he said . Mr Trump is expected to launch a widespread review of America 's place in the world when he takes office later this week - and has already spoken disobligingly about both the EU and Nato in recent months . There is growing anticipation in Washington and around the world over how Mr Trump will behave when he moves in to the White House later this week - and which leaders will be invited to meet him first . Mr Trump is said to harbour deep reservations about the EU and has expressed concern over the dependence of Nato on American money and resources . He has suggested he will make negotiations over a bilateral trade deal with the UK a priority . Mr Trump 's Brexit comments come at the start of a major week in geopolitics . Mrs May is expected tomorrow to set out her vision for a `` hard Brexit '' days before the Trump administration takes control . Yesterday , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , warned the EU that the UK could cut taxes for businesses and undercut European rivals in an attempt to encourage investment in Britain if exporters face new tariffs outside the EU . Meanwhile , Mr Trump was warned he fails to understand the threat posed by Russia by the outgoing director of the CIA , who cautioned him against forging closer ties with Vladimir Putin . John Brennan , the head of the US 's intelligence agency , said Mr Trump should not lift sanctions currently in place against Russia and said that the president-elect 's undisciplined style could pose a risk to US national security . Mr Trump has said that if he is liked by Mr Putin it is an `` asset , not a liability '' but his aides yesterday denied there were any imminent plans for a summit between the US and Russia . Mr Brennan , who will step down as CIA director on Friday , said Mr Trump does not understand the risks posed by Moscow , or by his own statements . `` I do n't think he has a full appreciation of Russian capabilities , Russia 's intentions , and actions that they are undertaking in many parts of the world , '' Mr Brennan told Fox News . `` I think Mr Trump has to understand that absolving Russia of the various actions that it 's taken in the past number of years is a road that he , I think , needs to be very , very careful about moving down . '' Before his inauguration , the CIA director said that Mr Trump must change his ways for the sake of the security of the US . `` I think Mr Trump has to understand that this is more than being about him , '' he said . `` Now that he 's in a position to actually do something about our national security as opposed to talking and tweeting , he is going to have tremendous responsibility to make sure that US national security interests are protected and advanced . '' Mr Trump has called on US intelligence chiefs and media to apologise over the dossier controversy , thanking Bob Woodward , the reporter best known for his role in the Watergate investigation , for calling the documents `` garbage '' that should not have become public . Juliet Samuel , John Eliasch : Page 14 Editorial Comment and Charles Moore : Page 15 'People , countries , want their own identity and the UK wanted its own identity '
Scotland can be a beacon for the UK after Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Holyrood 's plans should be given a fair hearing - they could help to reduce costs by maximising trade
In what is the first comprehensive proposal by any administration within the UK to deal with the Brexit challenge , the Scottish Government has now published its plan for Brexit , entitled `` Scotland 's Place in Europe '' . The Standing Council on Europe , an advisory body set up by the Scottish Government , which I chair , was consulted on these proposals , which were developed by Scottish ministers . As with any group of experts , we each brought specialist perspectives and different shades of opinion on matters of detail . But the Standing Council was unanimous on the following points : First , membership of ( not simply access to ) the European Single Market ( ESM ) is vital to protecting the economic and social interests of the UK and Scotland . Secondly , a Brexit which moves away from membership of the ESM and the customs union will be extremely damaging to an economy such as the UK which relies so heavily on service exports , or the exports of manufacturing , where the supply chain is spread across Britain and Europe . There is no equivalence between a bespoke free-trade agreement ( FTA ) and membership of the single market . Even if the UK were to negotiate tariff-free access to the EU , which is possible , it will be the non-tariff barriers that will damage our economy . This is especially the case in financial services . Over two million jobs depend on this key sector , and £66 billion of tax revenues - much more than we pay into the EU budget - help sustain the NHS and other vital public services in Britain . What has caught the eye of a number of commentators about the Scottish Government 's proposal is the notion of a so-called `` differentiated agreement '' . This means that , in the event that the UK Government opts for a hard Brexit , outside of the customs union and the ESM , the Scottish Government wants to explore the possibility of leaving the EU but remaining in the single market . To be clear , the proposal is one to keep Scotland within both the UK and the ESM : in essence , a `` parallel market '' solution . This would not imply a border within the UK single market for goods . So any UK company wishing to sell products to Scotland , or vice versa , would encounter no barriers . This is because the customs border would lie between the whole of the UK and the ESM . Under the differentiated solution , the whole of the UK would leave the customs union . Systems of checking goods between Europe and the UK , including Scotland , would have to be set up as a result of Brexit , not as a result of the differentiated model . But is this is good for UK business ? By keeping part of the UK within the ESM , there will be smaller losses in terms of falling trade flows with Europe . This in turn will help to sustain economic activity in the whole of the UK . The Office for Budget Responsibility currently estimates that there will be around £15 billion in higher borrowing per annum due to Brexit . There are challenges to be faced . Some worry that increasingly divergent regulations between Scotland and the UK over time could impact on intra-UK trade . But there are mechanisms which could help here . For example , the UK and Scotland could coordinate their regulatory regimes , perhaps by having a federal markets authority , which seeks to coordinate the ESM and UK regulatory frameworks both for business and products . One advantage of this is that it would keep UK goods market regulation anchored more closely to that of the European Economic Area ( EEA ) : in essence Scotland would be an `` EEA beacon '' which UK regulators could follow . It would make it easier for UK exports to trade with our EU neighbours . Indeed , the differentiated model would work best if the negotiated FTA between the UK and the EU ensured maximum access . The selfconfident Brexit supporter , who believes that the UK negotiation with the EU-27 will go extremely well and will result in a bespoke UK zero-tariff FTA on goods and great market access in services , should be extremely sanguine about a differentiated Scottish solution . In such a case the differentiated model would impact minimally on production and trade patterns within the UK . The proposed differentiation in immigration rules between Scotland and Europe would not create difficulties in terms of the free movement of people within the UK . As a City of London report showed recently , a differential regional visa system , based on employer monitoring , and enforceable through the national insurance and tax systems , has been used in Canada and Australia and would provide a differential solution that addresses regional skills needs in different parts of the UK . All of this is complex , but the only simple Brexit is UK-wide singlemarket membership outside the EU . Beyond that any Brexit is complicated and very costly . These proposals can reduce costs by maximising trade and the flow of skills with European markets . They deserve serious scrutiny . Professor Anton Muscatelli is the Principal of the University of Glasgow
'No special Brexit deal for the City ' ; Philip Hammond and David Davis tell bankers that they can not expect favourable treatment
THE City of London will not get any special treatment in Brexit negotiations , senior members of Theresa May 's Cabinet have told a group of high-profile banking and insurance chiefs . The Daily Telegraph understands that Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , told a group of City leaders yesterday that , despite accounting for 11.8pc of gross domestic product ( GDP ) , financial and professional services is only one industry and can not be seen to be treated differently . `` There was quite a blunt warning that , politically , the Government does not want to be seen to do a deal to favour rich bankers if it does n't comply with Brexit voters ' wishes - that there is more to the negotiation than just the City , '' said one of the 10 industry leaders who attended the meeting , which took place at the Shard . Another said : `` The message was : 'You 're not the only sector . You 're a very important sector but you 're not the only sector . '' That is likely to mean the UK will not keep precisely to EU finance rules , indicating banks and other firms will not keep the passports which allow them to trade freely across the Continent . As a result , the Government and the Square Mile expect a modest amount of business to move from the UK to other European financial centres . City insiders praised Mr Hammond and Mr Davis for presenting a united front and displaying a thorough knowledge of the issues facing the financial services sector . Mr Davis is also understood to have opened the meeting with reassurances that skilled staff from overseas will be welcomed to Britain , calming fears that the City would be cut off from the foreign workers crucial to London 's status as a global financial hub . The Brexit Secretary told the financiers that the Government understands that `` the City needs foreign talent too , and is not intending to put any serious impediments to that '' , an attendee said . Ministers and financiers also discussed the timetable for leaving the EU and the transition arrangements which the City may need to implement any new rules in the wake of Brexit . The meeting was attended by senior representatives from across the City , including Baroness Vadera , chairman of Santander , John McFarlane , chairman of Barclays , and Inga Beale , chief executive of Lloyd 's of London . `` As the UK exits the EU , we are determined that our country remains a great place to invest and to do business , '' Mr Hammond and Mr Davis stated . `` That is why these meetings , where we listen closely to the sector 's views on the potential impact and opportunities offered by us leaving the EU , are so important . Our financial services sector makes a crucial contribution to our economy and we will work together to ensure it continues as the hub for both Europe and the rest of the world . '' Meanwhile the minister responsible for the digital economy has said there is no need for a post-Brexit tax deal with technology companies . Matt Hancock , the minister for digital and culture , rejected the suggestion that Silicon Valley giants Facebook , Apple and Microsoft have been encouraged to set up new London sites with attractive tax breaks .
Scotland Sturgeon to seek legal ruling that Brexit can only be triggered with Scottish consent ; Sturgeon 'wrong ' to insist UK can not leave Europe without Scottish approval
NICOLA STURGEON announced yesterday that her government will attempt to intervene in the Supreme Court 's Brexit case and argued that the Scottish Parliament should have to consent to the triggering of Article 50 . The First Minister said Lord Advocate James Wolffe , Scotland 's most senior law officer , will lodge a formal application asking for leave to make representations in the hearing over whether Theresa May can start the Brexit process without a vote by MPs . Ms Sturgeon was vague over the details of Mr Wolffe 's case if he wins permission , but he is expected to argue that the Article 50 process for leaving the EU can not be triggered without a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) from the Scottish Parliament . Although Ms Sturgeon denied that she was trying to infuriate the English , an LCM would allow MSPs to block Brexit , with a majority of members in the Holyrood chamber vigorously opposed to leaving the EU . The Department for Exiting the European Union responded by stating that no part of the UK has a veto over Brexit . Ms Sturgeon refused to say whether her Cabinet had sought any legal advice that her Supreme Court challenge could be successful . However , academic experts have previously said the UK Government is not legally bound to seek LCMs from the three devolved administrations and all they can do is make the process more `` politically awkward '' . Ms Sturgeon 's announcement came as she attempted to get back on the offensive over Brexit after The Daily Telegraph disclosed last week Continued on Page 2 Alan Cochrane : Page 18 Continued from Page 1 that Alex Neil , who served in her Cabinet , had voted Leave and claimed other SNP MPs did the same . Pressed again on the disclosure , she said it was up to SNP parliamentarians whether they disclosed how they voted in the EU referendum but expressed confidence the `` vast majority '' backed Remain . The Scottish Government had legal representatives observing the High Court case at which three senior judges ruled last week that the Mrs May , the Prime Minister , does not have the power to trigger Article 50 without the prior authority of parliament . The UK Government immediately announced plans to appeal against the judgment to the Supreme Court and it emerged yesterday that the challenge will get under way on Dec 5 . Ms Sturgeon used a press conference at her Bute House residence in Edinburgh yesterday to confirm her administration plans to get involved . The SNP leader said her government was clear that the triggering of Article 50 would impact on its devolved responsibilities and `` deprive '' Scots of EU-related `` rights and freedoms . `` It simply can not be right that those rights can be removed by the UK Government on the say-so of a Prime Minister without parliamentary debate , scrutiny or consent , '' she said . `` So legislation should be required at Westminster and the consent of the Scottish Parliament should be sought before Article 50 is triggered . '' The First Minister added : `` Let me be clear - I respect the right of England and Wales to leave the European Union . This is not an attempt to veto that process . `` But the democratic wishes of the people of Scotland and the national Parliament of Scotland can not be brushed aside as if they do not matter . '' She refused to discuss any detail of what the Lord Advocate will argue , but made it clear she personally believes the UK Government should seek approval for triggering Article 50 through an LCM . The device is used to enable the Scottish Parliament to give permission for Westminster to legislate in devolved areas . Ms Sturgeon has claimed one should be required for Brexit but James Chalmers , Regius Professor of Law at Glasgow University , has previously said the LCM process `` was n't ever a rule of law , it was just a matter of politeness as much as anything else '' . A spokesman for the Department for Exiting the European Union said : `` It is for the court to decide on whether this intervention will be granted . As we have already said , we believe we have strong grounds for appeal and we are pressing ahead with this . `` We have been clear that the result of the UK-wide referendum should be respected , and that no part of the UK can have a veto . However , we are determined to deliver a deal that works for the whole of the UK . '' Jim Sillars , the SNP 's former deputy leader , rejected Ms Sturgeon 's analysis , pointing out that Scots had voted in the referendum on whether they wanted the United Kingdom to stay in the EU , rather than any constituent part . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , is today expected to outline a plan to share civil service analysis of leaving the EU with the devolved administrations `` as part of a two-way flow . '' He will also use a meeting of the Joint Ministerial Committee to offer monthly talks with his Scottish , Welsh and Northern Irish counterparts with `` continual informal engagement '' . Mr Davis said he wanted devolved administrations `` to bring us their analysis that will help shape our priorities for the negotiation with the EU '' . SNP 'divided ' by Brexit Challenge to secret Leavers The SNP 's supposed `` united front '' against Brexit has been `` shattered '' by The Daily Telegraph 's disclosure that Alex Neil and other SNP MSPs voted to leave the EU , it was claimed yesterday . Donald Cameron , the Scottish Tories ' shadow health secretary , asked SNP MSPs in the Holyrood chamber : `` How many of your colleagues sitting here today are secret Brexiteers ? Because your supposed united front against Brexit has been well and truly shattered . '' He noted that Mr Neil , a former Scottish health minister , must have been aware of the implications for EU workers in the NHS before voting Leave in June 's referendum . Mr Neil disclosed last week he secretly voted Leave and said he has been approached by `` a number '' of other SNP MSPs who did the same .
Scotland Hungry McDonnell makes dog 's breakfast of his Brexit speech
If politicians learn one lesson from the events of 2016 , let it be this : never give a speech about Brexit on an empty stomach . Because , however valiantly you try to soldier on , it 's practically guaranteed that at some point you 'll accidentally call Brexit `` breakfast '' instead . Look what happened to poor Andrew R T Davies , leader of the Welsh Conservatives , during his midmorning speech at Tory conference this month . He intended to cry , `` We WILL make Brexit a success ! '' Instead he cried , `` We WILL make breakfast a success ! '' Still , at least he only did it once . In a speech in London at 11 o'clock yesterday morning - that dangerous hour , when blood sugar is running low and the stomach is starting to growl - Labour 's John McDonnell did it not once , not twice , but three times . `` The Government , '' glowered the shadow chancellor , `` is hurtling towards a chaotic breakfast . '' Less than two minutes later , he warned the nation that `` a chaotic breakfast will lead to job losses '' . ( Presumably in brasseries and greasy spoon cafés . ) Then , three minutes after that - during a passage attacking the notion of an elitist , free-market `` bankers ' Brexit '' - he argued that Tory voters `` do n't want a bankers ' breakfast any more than I do '' . Three times in five minutes . The poor man must have been starving . Personally , while I share the shadow chancellor 's misgivings about the prospect of a chaotic breakfast , I would query his assertion about the appetites of Tory voters . I suppose it depends on what exactly a bankers ' breakfast consists of . I would imagine it to be a lavish affair : teetering log piles of the finest sausages , king-size rashers of sumptuous bacon , a skyscraper of blueberry waffles cascading with syrup , and all washed down with a bottle or two of exquisitely chilled Pol Roger champagne . Equally , of course , it could just be a triple espresso and four lines of coke . Either way , I suspect it would have more public appeal than Mr McDonnell gives it credit for . After all : breakfast means breakfast . What the shadow chancellor was trying to say , amid all this muddle , was that the Government had to get its act together . `` It 's absolute chaos at the moment , '' he said . `` This is chaos . '' Within the last hour , a journalist pointed out , it had been announced that the economy had grown faster than expected , and that Nissan - thanks to what its chief executive called the Government 's `` support and assurance '' - had decided to build two new models of car at its plant in Sunderland . Mr McDonnell stuck to his guns . `` This approach is chaotic , '' he said . `` There 's no coherence to it . '' This , of course , is in sharp contrast to the consistency of Mr McDonnell 's approach , which is to keep saying the word `` chaos '' over and over , irrespective of what the news is . I 'm not knocking it . I 'm a big believer in pessimism . Keep predicting things will go wrong and sooner or later you 're bound to be proven right .
Ask migrants : what can you do for Britain ? ; Finally , for the first time in decades , we have the chance to put the needs of British people first ; THE BREXIT DIVIDEND
When Theresa May announced at the recent Cabinet awayday at Chequers that restricting EU immigration will be at the heart of the Brexit negotiations , you could almost hear the sound of 17.4 million people collectively sighing with relief . They , like me , voted to Leave the EU on June 23 and , like me , they have been left on tenterhooks for weeks waiting to find out precisely what our new Prime Minister actually means when she says things like `` Brexit means Brexit '' . So , now we know that Mrs May wants to control the numbers of European immigrants , the question still remains as to how she plans to do it . We now have the first opportunity in a generation to replace our current mess - to which the British people never consented - with sensible border controls at long last , cutting net immigration from 330,000 a year to something more practical . While the minutiae have yet to be worked out , any new immigration should undoubtedly be based on one simple principle : it should unashamedly be for the benefit of the British people , and not for the benefit of those who want to come here . Cue the anguished cries of horror from the pro-immigration brigade who fervently believe that it is Britain 's job to offer a haven to the poor and huddled masses from every country under the sun . Sorry , but it is n't . We have no duty of care to improve the lot of poor Romanians or Poles or Pakistanis or anyone else who is not a British citizen . While I have nothing but admiration and respect for anyone who wants to travel across a continent to make a new life for themselves and improve their lot , the reality is that British taxpayers do n't owe the rest of the world a living . We can offer trade deals or international aid , by all means , and we should never desert asylum seekers in their time of need , but we do n't have a moral responsibility to open our doors to the five billion-odd people on this planet who live in poorer countries than ours . Instead , to paraphrase the former US President John F Kennedy , we should instruct would-be immigrants : `` Ask not what this country can do for you , ask what you can do for this country . '' If you have something to offer Britain , whether it be much-needed qualifications or skills , entrepreneurship , creating jobs , or big wads of taxable cash , then by all means do come in and make yourself at home , I 'll put the kettle on . If , however , you have no qualifications , no professional skills other than a driving licence , and can barely speak English , or you have a criminal record , then thanks but no thanks . If that sounds harsh , then tough . While we are each lucky to be born here in a wealthy country where we enjoy the rule of law and freedom , it is not a matter of luck that Britain is the country it is . Great Britain did n't just happen ; the British people created this country through decades and centuries of hard work , fighting for democracy , the welfare state and all the other benefits we currently enjoy . That is why we have every right to close our doors to economic migrants who will contribute less than they will take out - whether it be in terms of working tax credits , housing and child benefits , or in publicly funded schools , housing , healthcare and public transport . Britain is a very desirable place to live and , thanks to English being the world 's international language , we are ideally placed to pick the brightest and the best to come to live and work here . So why are n't we more choosy ? The only sensible immigration policy is one using skills-based work permits . Yes , that will involve more paperwork than an open-door policy , but most countries manage it . And indeed , we already operate such a system for non-EU migrants , so it is hardly beyond the wit of man to devise one that operates across the board . Currently , an EU citizen needs to fill out more paperwork to get a Sainsbury 's Nectar card than they do to come to Britain , so a little more red tape wo n't do anyone any harm . But there is one other crucial requirement that should also be at the heart of any new immigration policy , and that is the ability of new arrivals to integrate and assimilate into British society . Admittedly , this is a rather more difficult and subjective criterion than a university diploma , but it is just as vital - and especially after years in which mass immigration has enabled many new arrivals to live and work in entirely separate ethnic , religious or national communities in many of our cities . If you do n't want to learn English and you do n't embrace fundamental British values like democracy , women 's equality and the freedom to choose who you marry , then Britain is probably not the country for you . Controlled immigration does n't require us to close our doors to the rest of the world - far from it . But it does mean us getting to decide who we want to live here and , for the first time in decades , putting the needs of the British people first . Julia Hartley-Brewer is a journalist , broadcaster and talkRADIO presenter
WAITING FOR A WAVE OF CONFIDENCE ; DOMESTIC
After Theresa May 's annus horribilis , her rather modest wish for next year will be that it is n't as bad as the one she has just endured . With a Budget U-turn , a lost majority , Cabinet resignations , a sexual harassment scandal , trouble in Brussels and that conference speech , the Prime Minister will likely be desperate to rip down the calendar and never speak of 2017 again . Whether or not 2018 proves to be a finer vintage depends almost entirely on one thing : Brexit . When Parliament returns on 8 January after its break , the deadline for reaching an EU deal will seem terrifyingly www.close.No longer will ministers be able to talk about the Brexit date being in 2019 ; instead we 'll be discussing Britain leaving the EU next year . One almost wo n't Brexit Secretary David Davis wants trade talks to be more or less wrapped up by October so that Parliament can have plenty of time to debate the prospective deal . But even he has admitted that negotiations with Michel Barnier could carry on until `` the 59th minute of the 11th hour '' . Hence , we can expect deadlines to be pushed back , red lines to be rubbed out and plenty of dissent from the Tory backbenches as British resolve is tested to the limit in Europe and Mrs May 's resolve is tested by her own party . March will be a key month for the PM , not only because it will mark the halfway point between Article 50 being triggered and Brexit day arriving , but also because Philip Hammond will make his Spring Statement , a stripped-down version of what used to be the Spring Budget . After the disastrous economic forecasts made by the Office for Budget Responsibility in November 's Budget , the Chancellor is clinging to the hope that progress in Brexit talks will have persuaded jittery business leaders to unfreeze investment . One thing we almost certainly wo n't see is a leadership election . Having survived the summertime mutterings of a coup and come through the Conservative Party conference intact , Mrs May can expect to stay in Number 10 until at least March www.2019.No serious contenders to succeed her want to be burdened with taking over the poisoned chalice of Brexit talks , nor would they have support from the party to do so . However , the Tory conference next autumn will become a classic political `` beauty pageant '' as Boris Johnson , Amber Rudd and others try to shore up support for a tilt at Downing Street the following spring . On the domestic policy front , the big moment will come in the summer , when the Government publishes its delayed green paper setting out how it intends to tackle the problem of funding social care . Having been badly stung in the election - when its attempt to address the issue was shot down by the opposition as a `` dementia tax '' - the Government will need cross-party support for a funding model that will inevitably be unpopular with those whose taxes increase to pay for it . Still , no one said politics was meant to be easy . REMAIN One thing we almost certainly wo n't see is a Tory leadership election
Scotland Stay clear of Brexit 'cliff ' , warn Scottish businesses
A COUNTRYSIDE organisation has called on the UK Government to avoid a `` cliff-edge '' Brexit and safeguard the `` unique interests of Scottish agriculture '' . Scottish Land & Estates , which represents landowners and rural businesses , has joined 13 other farming organisations in issuing a joint statement to the Government . It urges ministers to secure an agreement on an initial transition period that will give the UK `` unfettered access to European markets '' and keep it in the customs union . It also calls for a fully functioning immigration system to be in place before freedom of movement ends to ensure farmers can access EU workers . The organisations say they are committed to working with the government and devolved administrations to `` establish a new and better agriculture and land use policy '' once the UK leaves the Common Agriculture Policy , and ask the administrations to work with them to establish a `` collaborative policy framework and budget '' . The statement recognises `` opportunities '' from Brexit but urges ministers to provide greater certainty for farmers . David Johnstone , chairman of Scottish Land & Estates , said : `` It is vital that the unique interests of Scottish agriculture are taken account of during Brexit negotiations and we would urge the UK Government and the devolved administrations to work to deliver a new farming landscape that delivers for all . `` Scottish Land & Estates has been clear that there is a need for the sector in Scotland to change over the next decade and beyond , especially in the drive to increase business resilience , but that needs to be accompanied by a gradual transition in terms of our support framework as we leave the EU . `` There should be no cliff-edge , and that means ensuring the industry has access to the support , labour and trade markets required to ensure our farming sector remains a world leader . '' A spokesman for the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs said the Government was committed to getting a deal that allowed `` tariff-free , frictionless access for goods and services into the European market '' .
Scotland Davidson 's campaign saved Tory party from defeat , says Osborne
RUTH DAVIDSON is the `` heroine of the party '' for saving the Conservatives from general election defeat , George Osborne said yesterday as he backed her demand that Theresa May drops her plan for a hard Brexit . The former Chancellor praised the Scottish Tory leader , as David Mundell was last night reappointed Scottish Secretary in the Cabinet reshuffle . Mr Osborne said Ms Davidson had run a `` more open and optimistic campaign '' than Mrs May and that the Scottish Tory leader 's success had been the difference that prevented Jeremy Corbyn from entering 10 Downing Street . He gave his backing to her demand that the UK Government draw up a new `` open Brexit '' blueprint that prioritises free trade and the economy over restricting immigration . But Dominic Raab , a Tory MP and leading Brexiteer , argued that Scottish Tory MPs were elected on a manifesto that pledged to come out of the single market and end free movement . The row broke out the day after Ms Davidson raised the prospect of her new group of 13 Scottish MPs torpedoing a hard Brexit . They are pivotal to keeping the Conservatives in power in the hung parliament that resulted from last week 's election . The Scottish Tory leader flexed her new political muscle by warning that `` they will vote entirely as they believe they should '' and putting a pro-trade Brexit deal `` at the heart of what I 'm after '' from Mrs May . Mr Osborne , who now edits the London Evening Standard , said : `` She is the heroine of the party who if she had not won seats in Scotland with a much more open and optimistic conservatism than the national campaign was providing there would not be a Conservative government and Jeremy Corbyn would be in Downing Street . '' He added : `` She has said she now wants to prioritise the economy and free trade over immigration in the negotiations around Brexit , by the way I completely agree with her . '' Across the UK , the Tories failed to win a parliamentary majority but finished 56 seats ahead of Labour . However , if the Conservatives had not gained the 12 seats in Scotland from the SNP then the pro-independence party , Labour and the Liberal Democrats would have been able to outvote the Conservatives in the Commons . Anna Soubry , a Tory MP and former minister , backed Ms Davidson 's call for a Brexit rethink but Mr Raab hit out at the Scottish Tory leader , telling the BBC 's Sunday Politics programme that he did not know what she meant by the term `` open Brexit '' . Mr Raab argued that Scottish Tory MPs stood on the UK manifesto and should back Mrs May 's blueprint to come out of the single market but negotiate a free trade deal .
Migrants 'free to enter Britain until 2022 ' ; Brexit
MIGRANTS from the EU could be allowed to come to Britain with full citizens ' rights for several years after Brexit in 2019 , Theresa May has hinted . The Prime Minister admitted there would have to be `` a period of time '' after Brexit , as businesses and governments are implementing the deal with the EU , when free movement could still be allowed . It raises the prospect of Britain having no control over its borders until 2022 , as EU leaders have suggested that a three-year transition period will be necessary after Brexit . Mrs May also said she is confident she will reach a final deal with the EU member states within two years . On the second day of her tour of the Middle East , Mrs May said : `` If you think about it , once we 've got the deal , once we 've agreed what the new relationship will be for the future , it will be necessary for there to be a period of time when businesses and governments are adjusting systems and so forth . '' She added that Britain would have `` control of our borders and control of immigration '' but would not set a date for that . Richard Tice , co-chairman of the pressure group Leave Means Leave , warned that more than a million extra migrants could arrive in Britain . He said : `` If the Prime Minister fails to set a cut-off point on immigration , Britain must prepare for a crisis as around 1.25million extra EU migrants will likely move to Britain . '' An ICM poll published this week found that 54 per cent of voters thought that free movement `` for a few years after Brexit , as part of a transitional deal '' would be acceptable . Alp Mehmet , vice chairman of Migration Watch , said : `` The reason so many people voted out was because they wanted controls on immigration . It 's essential that immigration from the EU is controlled at the very first opportunity and that is March 29 , 2019 . '' 1.25m The number of migrants Leave Means Leave claims could enter the UK after Brexit
Sturgeon has picked a fight on her terms ; The SNP leader is not a bit interested in compromise or whether we land up with a hard or soft Brexit
The idea that Nicola Sturgeon was on the point of throwing caution to the wind and plunging Scotland into another independence referendum was considered far fetched until only very recently . But in the last few weeks there has been growing confidence in the First Minister 's circle that the strategy being pursued by Theresa May was playing into their hands . For the nine months since the referendum , Ms Sturgeon has plotted a carefully judged course from which she 's never deviated , always aiming to lead her adoring activists to the point when yesterday 's announcement could be put off no longer , while at the same time constantly declaring that she was a victim of an intransigent Prime Minister in Westminster . Despite their words to the contrary , the losing separatists have never accepted their defeat in the 2014 referendum , even if Nicola Sturgeon insisted it was a `` once-in-a-lifetime '' event . They were always liable to find a way back to the ballot box . Ever the wily operator , raised in the hard-knocks school of West of Scotland politics and shaped at Glasgow University 's famous debating society , Sturgeon at all times preached compromise . She did n't want a new referendum , she said . She just wanted to protect the Scottish people , who voted massively to remain in the EU , from the dastardly `` Hard Brexit '' being pursued by an extreme Right-wing Government in London . What 's more , she emphasised , she had drafted compromises whereby Scotland could benefit from special deals and stay in the single market and customs union . Forget the fact that such opt-outs were never likely to win favour with the Cabinet , and had been vetoed in advance by other EU members - notably Spain . The truth is that Sturgeon was never in the slightest bit interested in compromise . Neither she nor her ultras cared if there was to be a hard Brexit , a soft Brexit or anything in between , because all they wanted was to get to where they arrived yesterday - the declaration of another vote to break up Britain . Determined always to be on the front foot , she brought forward by five days her announcement of another independence referendum , which she had been due to make in her keynote speech to her party conference in Aberdeen this Saturday . By doing it yesterday in the Scottish First Minister 's official residence in Edinburgh 's New Town , this incredibly partisan leader sought to make her announcement seem a non-party occasion . Acting as a sort of `` Mother of the Nation '' may seem an odd role for such an abrasive lady , but it 's how she now wants to be seen . In the purely personal contest of one-upwomanship between two formidable politicians , keeping Mrs May on the back foot in London and forcing the PM always to react to what she was saying in Edinburgh has been a constant , and successful , Sturgeon tactic . Alex Salmond may have remained the darling of the London broadcast media but his caterwauling from the sidelines has made no impression on the cool approach of his successor . Certainly , she has been aided and abetted by some startling own goals from the Unionist camp - Jeremy Corbyn 's support for # indyref2 being but the latest . But Defence Secretary Sir Michael Fallon 's statement that London would never permit another vote also caused a storm of protest , and Brexit Secretary David Davis 's support for an open border between Ireland and Ulster after Brexit allowed the Nats to declare that such an arrangement should also apply between England and an independent Scotland . Even Chancellor Philip Hammond 's excuse that the special circumstances of Brexit meant he could break Tory manifesto promises on national insurance helped Sturgeon - permitting her to say Brexit justified her U-turn on another referendum . Biggest of all , however , has been Mrs May 's declared opposition to Britain remaining in the EU single market - undermining Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , often seen as Unionism 's best hope north of the border . So while Nicola Sturgeon may be a politician with no economic policy - or even a currency - to back up her independence dream , she has chutzpah on her side . As she and Theresa May lock horns , then , it 's an even money bet as to which one wins . READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Davis : Britain 's border controls are not up for negotiation with the EU ; News
BRITAIN 's border controls are not up for negotiation in EU talks , David Davis has told MPs . The Brexit Secretary made it clear that the Government will decide how its immigration system will look before presenting the option to European leaders . His comments , a sign that Britain intends to leave the EU 's freedom of movement for workers system , come as Theresa May today travels to Brussels for tense negotiations with her European counterparts . Mrs May will warn EU leaders that they risk losing public confidence if they allow hundreds of thousands of economic migrants into Europe . EU leaders will then hold a dinner without Mrs May in a snub to Britain . Speaking to MPs on the Brexit select committee , Mr Davis said that Brussels will have no say over the UK 's immigration system after its EU exit . `` The example I will point you to is the Swiss example , '' he said . `` They thought they had control over their own migration via an emergency brake system . `` When they tried to exercise it they were unable to because it was tied into so many other treaties . `` What we have to bear in mind is we have to pay respect to the outcome of the referendum , there has got to be clear control by this Parliament . '' He added : `` My job is to bring the decision back here , not exercise the decision . '' Asked by MPs if that would be part of the negotiations , Mr Davis said : `` No I do n't . I think that the operation of that decision after we have left the EU will be in the national interest and that will affect all of us . `` The judgment the Government comes to as to what is necessary for universities , what is necessary for business and what is necessary for fruit picking . '' Mr Davis said he is ready to accept a transitional arrangement to implement the terms of Britain 's withdrawal from the EU `` if it 's necessary , and only if it 's necessary '' . And he indicated that the Government is working on four possible outcomes from the Brexit talks in relation to the European Customs Union . These range from being fully or partially inside the union , having a free trade agreement and customs arrangement with the remaining EU nations , or being `` completely outside '' the bloc . Mrs May will hold bilateral talks with the leaders of Latvia and Lithuania and have a brief talk with Martin Schultz , the President of the European Parliament . The Prime Minister will call on EU leaders to do more with migrants ' countries of origin to help them tackle smuggling networks and control their borders , and to do more with Egypt to reduce levels of migration . Britain will also reiterate its support for the EU 's deal with Turkey and send an extra 40 border staff to Greece to help deter economic migrants . Brexit means ... OED comes up with the answer Theresa May famously declared that `` Brexit means Brexit '' , but now the Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ) has come up with its own definition . Six months after the Prime Minister delivered the elusive explanation , lexicographers have clarified that `` Brexit '' is `` the ( proposed ) withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union , and the political process associated with it '' . The definition adds that the term is sometimes used specifically to refer to the referendum held on June 23 . The word was added to the dictionary this month , with the OED noting the `` impressive '' speed with which it became widely used . Grexit - `` the ( potential ) withdrawal of Greece from the eurozone monetary union '' - was also added .
You put your left leg in , your left leg out ... what is Labour all about ?
Labour do n't seem to be supporting Brexit . Yet they do n't seem to be opposing it , either . In the circumstances , it would be easy to run away with the idea that they do n't know what they 're doing . On the contrary , explained Sir Keir Starmer yesterday , during a speech in London . Labour 's refusal to commit themselves either way is `` a huge strength '' . The Tories had erred , said the shadow Brexit secretary , by speaking only for the 52 per cent who voted Leave . The Lib Dems had erred , meanwhile , by speaking only for the 48 per cent who voted Remain . `` I absolutely see it as Labour 's role , '' declared Sir Keir , `` to speak for both sides . '' A noble ambition . But given the bitter divisions between Brexiteers and Remainers , it 's hard to imagine how it 's going to work in practice . `` Mr Speaker , the position of the Labour Party is clear . We speak for both sides . We therefore believe that Britain must leave the EU . Provided , of course , that Britain stays in the EU . That 's a red line . `` It is time to end the in-fighting that has riven this country . People who voted Remain must stop insulting the xenophobic dupes who are squarely to blame for the oncoming disaster . And people who voted Leave must stop insulting the scaremongering snobs who 've spent the last six months throwing their toys out of the pram . `` Mr Speaker , we respect the will of the people . That 's the will of the people who want to leave the EU , and the will of the people who want to stay in the EU . `` That 's because we 're the only party that recognises Brexit for what it is : an unmitigated catastrophe bursting with golden opportunities , which will create and cost millions of jobs , boost and ruin our economy , and give this country the shot in the arm and slap in the face it both does and does n't deserve . '' Some people want hard Brexit . Other people want soft Brexit . Labour , it seems , want Schrödinger 's Brexit . Sir Keir , of course , would say that their view is far more nuanced than I 've allowed . Sometimes in politics , though , a nuanced view can sound dangerously like indecision . At yesterday 's speech , a journalist asked Sir Keir for Labour 's official policy on freedom of movement : keep it , or end it ? `` Well , erm , '' began Sir Keir . The `` Labour Party position '' was that freedom of movement `` is there to be negotiated '' but `` the rules will have to change '' . As for numbers of immigrants , `` the direction of travel '' should be `` downward '' , but he refused to set any `` arbitrary targets '' . Good to get that cleared up , because Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , has defended freedom of movement - while Andy Burnham , her predecessor , has said it must end . Sir Keir appears to be somewhere between the two , but closer to his former colleague than to his current one . Labour : speaking for both sides . And if necessary , a third or fourth side too . 'We respect the will of the people who want to leave the EU , and the will of the people who want to stay '
Brexit is a big opportunity for Mrs May to offer new ideas - not the status quo ; The PM will be defined by exit from the EU , so the Autumn Statement should have had a clear vision
Even before her first Cabinet meeting as Prime Minister , in July , Theresa May said `` ... we will not allow the country to be defined by Brexit '' . The point she was making seemed sensible : she wanted to talk about lots of other important things too , such as education , skills and social mobility . Nevertheless , I think she made a mistake , which is becoming clearer over time . First , her aim is pointless , since the country under her administration will be defined by Brexit , whether she likes it or not . She will carry it off well or badly - or , just conceivably , not at all - and by that she will be judged . Second , Brexit is an enormous thing . You ca n't imagine George Washington , having become first president of the United States in 1789 , telling the American people that independence was great , but now it was time to talk just about taxes and infrastructure . He would have understood that his overarching task was to make the new republic work . Brexit is n't quite that big , but it 's big enough . The task of becoming a selfgoverning country once again should organise the way government thinks about most other things . It 's not just a complex negotiation : it 's the establishment of a new identity , or at least the recovery of an old one . Third , Mrs May 's wish to avoid definition by Brexit discloses her own unease , maybe even confusion on the subject . She was a Remainer , though not an ardent one , and she has never had to argue for Brexit at the ballot box . We still do n't know whether she sees Brexit as a necessary , but irksome , task like , say , getting rid of our African colonies in the 1950s , or as the great national opportunity of our times . The fact that she wants to put it in a special file by itself suggests the former . Britain will win more victories if it is the latter . Does she see her task as transforming the country to deal with the change which , as she herself announced in her party conference speech , is coming ? Or is she , in the phrase she likes to use in another context , `` just managing '' it ? This unease expresses itself in her decisions and indecisions . This week 's Autumn Statement by the Chancellor was presented in terms of helping the right sections of society , but it is better understood as an insurance policy to cover what she and Philip Hammond see as a very tricky two or three years . Whatever the merits of the statement , it was not visionary . Or take early dealings with Donald Trump . As the political beneficiary of the Brexit decision , Mrs May has the chance to range herself with the change-bringers in the free world , not with the status quo . She did not need to buy Mr Trump 's whole bag of tricks ( even he does n't do that ) , but she could have been ready to get alongside him - embracing a likely trading alliance with a waxing power , against EU rivals in a waning one . Instead , she looked as if she had sucked a lemon . Cruel jester that he is , Mr Trump accordingly mocked her by expressing his love for Nigel Farage . Or take the Article 50 legal case which is now heading for the Supreme Court . The Prime Minister and the Lord Chancellor should have been instant in defending the integrity of the judges , but tougher in thinking through and publicly expounding the Government 's legal case . Why did they not robustly challenge whether the whole thing was justiciable in the first place ? They remind me of a rider who heads for a fence while not really believing his horse can jump it . A fall often results . At her party conference in October , Mrs May made two speeches , the first about Brexit , the second about everything else . This was part of her policy of separating the two . It is producing some incoherence . Brexit should not be seen as a special subject on Mastermind ( though its negotiating details certainly could be ) . It is the context for everything . If she sees it that way , Mrs May can then bring direction to whatever else she wants to say . Take her support for reviving grammar schools . This has come out looking rather retro and partisan ; she may even be tiptoeing away from it . But it could be presented so differently . Suppose she painted a picture of how Britain , out of the EU , would have to live more on its wits than in the past , and how those wits could best be sharpened by a new generation of unashamedly excellent , globally competitive schools . Then an idea from a chalky old past could be turned into a plan to capture the future . The same with immigration . If we are to trade with the whole world without the protections and restrictions of a European bloc we need a high number of immigrant workers . The point about migration is not to strangle it , but to direct it to our advantage . It is not about giving unfeasibly large numbers of non-British people universal `` rights '' at our expense , but about satisfying our needs . One also wants to know much more from Mrs May about what she thinks is happening to the world as she works towards Brexit . Does she think that a dark night of illiberalism is descending , or does she believe it is broadly a good thing that voters are trying to reassert their democratic rights over rulers who have taken them for granted ? What is her vision of the defence of the West at a time of Russian aggression and Islamist subversion ? Does she believe that a strengthening Anglosphere can compensate for a weakening EU ? She has spoken eloquently for the small people who get the headache from globalisation , but how does she think a modern country can reconcile its national independence with forces - often digitally driven - which can sweep the world ? In formulating her views on these matters , she is hampered because she had no time to develop them as Opposition leader and has never led her party into an election . Nor has she yet used the `` convening power '' of her office to rustle up all sorts of able people , inside her party and out of it , to influence her thought and advance it in public . At present , her style and her advisers are transferred from her time at the Home Office , where she was famous for control . Her two closest aides are able people , but they are a bit like Richard Nixon 's famous pair , Ehrlichman and Haldeman , who were known as the `` Berlin Wall '' for their ability to cut the president off from others . If a prime minister , in a time of massive change , has not yet formed her own ideas and has few conduits to new ones , she will be the victim of the old orthodoxies . Sure enough , up pop ex-prime ministers - and one recent ex-deputy prime minister . Mr Blair wants to help ( `` Let 's just keep our options open '' ) . Sir John Major warns against `` the tyranny of the majority '' . Mr Clegg conjures up an exciting new bogey , `` the Brexit elite '' , which must be countered . It all reminds me of Ted Heath in about 1980 warning eloquently , egotistically and misguidedly that if only we could revert to his economic policies which had quite recently collapsed , all would be well . Mrs Thatcher could rebut the seductive arguments of the once-mighty because she had something new to offer . Does Mrs May ?
Scotland Leave single market ? Davis was out of line , says May ; Brexit minister was 'setting out his own opinion ' to MPs , not official policy
THERESA MAY has rebuked one of her most senior Cabinet ministers after he said it is `` very improbable '' that the UK will remain a member of the single market if the country is to regain control of its borders . The Prime Minister 's spokesman said it is wrong to be `` putting all your cards on the table '' and claimed David Davis was setting out `` his opinion '' , not government policy , when he spoke in Parliament yesterday . The minister for Brexit told the House of Commons that it is `` a simple truth '' that if the UK was forced to accept free movement of people it would be unlikely that the country could remain in the single market . Mr Davis told MPs : `` This government is looking at every option but the simple truth is that if a requirement of membership is giving up control of our borders , I think that makes it very improbable . '' His comments go much further than those made by the Prime Minister , who has been cautious not to discuss any detail for Brexit plans . During her visit to China , Mrs May dismissed proposals to introduce an Australian-style points-based system for immigration saying that it was not a `` silver bullet '' to reduce numbers coming into the UK . The rebuke is a stark sign of the disagreement at the heart of the Cabinet surrounding Britain 's exit from the EU . Asked whether the Prime Minister agreed with the comments made by the Brexit Secretary her spokesman said : `` The PM has set out that we are going to need to be able to address people 's concerns about migration with the EU and get the best possible deal in trade and services and now work is under way . `` She is approaching that with an open mind , with a view that we should n't be taking a model off the shelf , we should be working through what are the issues for Britain what we do we want for this relationship and addressing it . `` With a view that this is a negotiation , it 's not always the right approach to start putting all your cards on the table at the start . '' The spokesman added that Mr Davis was `` setting out his views '' on the single market , not stating the Government 's policy on the issue despite addressing the Commons as a member of the Government . The comments will be viewed as a warning to Mr Davis , who as a member of the Government is not supposed to state his own opinions in the Commons . She added : `` The PM recognises that people have their differing views , that 's why we need to do the work that there is and all of this is going to have to be negotiated with our EU partners but we should go after the best deal we can . `` He 's setting out his opinion ... policy tends to be a direction of travel of what we 're doing , saying something is probable or improbable I do n't think is necessarily a policy . '' The issue of immigration was not on the agenda at a meeting of Cabinet which Mrs May chaired after returning from the China 's G20 summit yesterday .
Scotland Food and drink firms defy Brexit doom-mongers
SCOTLAND 'S food and drink industry is `` bullish '' about its prospects after the Brexit vote led to an increase in confidence and growth expectations , according to a major report published today . The Bank of Scotland survey of the sector found half of all firms said the result of the EU referendum had resulted in them increasing their business growth estimates compared with only a quarter who said they had cut their projections . Almost two-thirds of the largest companies ( 62 per cent ) revised growth estimates upwards after the Brexit vote , and more than half ( 52 per cent ) of all food and drink firms said the result had led to an increase in their investment plans . When asked how they planned to achieve growth over the next five years , the most common response ( 49 per cent ) was by entering new markets in the UK . However , more than two thirds ( 69 per cent ) said they are also planning to target new international customers . The results appear to defy SNP warnings SNP that thousands of jobs in the industry are at risk from Brexit , thanks to potential trade barriers being raised in the EU . They also confirm the importance to Scottish producers of the UK , which remains by far the largest export market . The industry , which is worth £14 billion a year , is Scotland 's largest manufacturing sector and employs 34,000 people . Between 2004 and 2004 exports increased by more than 50 per cent . The report concluded that it shows `` every sign of resilience '' in the wake of the Brexit vote , with the fall in the value of sterling helping make Scottish food and drink cheaper for foreign customers . Jane Clark-Hutchison , a Bank of Scotland regional director , said : `` It 's incredibly heartening that , just weeks after the EU referendum result , our survey shows that bullish food and drink firms expect to grow , invest , recruit and innovate . They believe in the provenance of their produce and the skills of their staff , and they are confident enough to invest in taking their goods to new markets across the globe . '' James Withers , chief executive of industry body Scotland Food & Drink , said : `` Change is nothing new to the sector , and there will be opportunities as we build new markets for our produce . '' Although 31 per cent of firms predicted a cut in investment following the Brexit vote , the response among the largest employers was more confident . Forty four per cent of large-scale producers said confidence had increased compared with 11 per cent of the smallest firms . Lord Dunlop , a Scotland Office minister , said it was `` great news to see such optimism and resilience . '' He added : `` We can be confident in the fundamental strength of the UK economy , and our tradition as a trading nation , as we forge a new role in the world . '' A Scottish Government spokesman said : `` Brexit is without doubt the biggest threat to Scotland 's long-term economic success , with the referendum having a negative impact on 40 per cent of food and drink businesses surveyed . ''
Farage tells the US that Brexit is a blueprint to get Trump to White House ; Ex-Ukip leader due to be first British politician to address Republican presidential election rally
NIGEL FARAGE told Republicans last night how to use the lessons from the successful campaign to take Britain out of the European Union to send Donald Trump to the White House this autumn . The former leader of the UK Independence Party was set to address 15,000 Republican supporters at a rally for the party 's presidential nominee in Jackson , Mississippi . Just months from November 's presidential election , the pair were expected to meet for dinner for the first time tonight . Mr Farage is in America with Ukip donor Arron Banks . He is understood to have been invited to address both the dinner and the rally by Phil Bryant , the governor of Mississippi . Mr Farage is thought to be the first British politician to address a Republican presidential election rally . Speaking from the United States , Mr Farage told The Daily Telegraph : `` Brexit is just massive over here . `` I went to the [ Republican Party ] convention in Cleveland and I just could not believe that ordinary people are talking to me about Brexit . `` They see it as a victory of ordinary people against big business , big banks and big politics . `` The Republican activists and man-agers here are keen to hear the Brexit story , hear how we managed to get 2.5 million people who do n't normally vote at all to go to the polling station . `` It was a victory for the little people - and if the Trump camp reaches out to those same people who have been disadvantaged by corporatism , under cutting wages , a lot of strong similarities to the United Kingdom , then it does not matter what the polls say , what the liberal media say - in the end elections are won by numbers . '' Mr Farage continued : `` There is a potential target out there that the Republican Party needs to reach . We reached them in Brexit - if they do the same they can completely turn this election around . '' Mr Farage said that he would not be endorsing Mr Trump at the rally because it was wrong for a foreign politician to intervene in a US election . He added : `` I sha n't be endorsing anybody but I will say that I would n't vote for Hillary [ Clinton ] if you paid me . '' There was some doubt later yesterday about whether Mr Farage will appear on stage ahead of Mr Trump 's speech . Hope Hicks , spokesman for the Trump campaign , told Sky News she would `` highly doubt '' such a joint appearance . She added that she knows nothing about it and `` they do n't know each other '' . Mr Farage countered by saying he had been invited to the dinner with Mr Trump and the rally . He said : `` I have been invited to speak at both by the governor of Mississippi . '' Mr Trump caused a stir last week with a cryptic tweet in which he said : `` They will soon be calling me MR BREXIT ! '' The real estate businessman supported June 's UK vote to leave the European Union and described it as `` the people taking the country back '' - a phrase used by Mr Farage at dozens of Brexit rallies before the referendum day . During a visit to his golf resort in Ayrshire shortly after the referendum , Mr Trump said the UK 's vote to leave the EU was a `` great thing '' , adding : `` People are angry all over the world . '' Ahead of the appearance Mr Farage told the radio station SuperTalk Mississippi that the fact that most politicians were in favour of staying in the EU highlighted the disconnect between voters and the political class in Westminster , which was similar to Washington and the rest of the US .
It 's simple : Brexit will make Britain richer . That 's why Leave can win ; Middle-class floating voters must be told of the benefits we 'd gain in terms of influence and flexibility
It is far from over for the Leave side . The received wisdom in Westminster is that the outers are all but finished , and that the only question now is how badly they will be thrashed . That 's nonsense . With four weeks left , and the Government now banned from deluging us with its taxpayer-financed propaganda under the purdah rules , anything remains possible . But the Leave campaign faces an increasingly difficult dilemma : as a broad Left-Right independence coalition , whose members disagree on just about everything other than the need for self-governance , it is finding it tricky to articulate a strong macroeconomic case for Brexit . This is becoming a major issue , especially for more prosperous , middle-class , centrist and Toryleaning voters in London and across the country , who are craving reassurance that it 's safe to vote for Brexit . Many Telegraph readers fall into this camp ; and we all have friends , relatives and neighbours who are vacillating , wondering whether maybe - just maybe - there may be some truth to the endless supply of screaming , hysterical anti-Brexit reports . As it happens , such studies are a farrago of nonsense , based on question-begging , unrealistic assumptions designed to lead to a pro-Remain conclusion . In some cases - especially the Treasury 's analysis of the short-term consequences of leaving - they are a scandalously unethical concoction of a kind eerily reminiscent of Tony Blair 's dodgy dossier prior to the Iraq war . But the fact that they are flawed does n't mean that their arguments can be ignored . It is desperately important that the economic case for Brexit be made much more vigorously . It needs to be divided into two components : a takedown of the EU as an ultimately doomed , job-destroying , declining and mismanaged behemoth that stands no chance in an increasingly agile , globalised world ; and the mapping out of a clear exit strategy , compatible with Leave 's objectives , that shows how we would maintain and enhance our openness to the world . The message must be clear : we would be better off out - in terms of jobs , wages and growth . The costs of leaving will be smaller than the benefits , and this would become evident within a few years of leaving . The core assumption of the anti-Brexit economists is that leaving would erect damaging barriers to trade ; the pro-Brexit side must take on and demolish these arguments . The good news is that it 's quite easy to do so . The Leave campaign 's long-term aim is to break away completely from the EU . But there is no doubt that , were we to vote Leave on June 23 , the UK would seek to adopt , as an interim solution , a Norwegian-style relationship with the EU which ensures that we remain in the single market , giving us plenty of time to work out new arrangements with the rest of the world . That is both the only realistic way we would quit the EU - the only model that , plausibly , MPs would support as a cross-party compromise deal - and the best possible way for us to do it . The Norwegians would welcome us with open arms , as their own influence would be enhanced , and other EU nations would seek to join us . Such a deal would eliminate most of the costs of leaving , while delivering a hefty dose of benefits as a down-payment . As part of the European Free Trade Association , we would remain in the single market , complete with its Four Freedoms , while withdrawing from agricultural and fisheries policies , justice , home affairs and the customs union . The City would n't lose access and virtually all of the anti-Brexit scare stories would be neutralised , which is presumably why that option was mysteriously absent from the Treasury 's ludicrous analysis of the short-term impact of Brexit . We would save money : Norway 's net contribution per person is lower than Britain 's . We would have to follow fewer rules : Norway has adopted 1,369 out of 1,965 EU directives , and just 1,349 out of 7,720 EU regulations . So Norway has been forced to swallow just 28 per cent of the total `` acquis communautaire '' , against all of it for the UK . Leaving the EU and joining EFTA would make us more , rather than less , influential . We have only a small share of the votes in Brussels and can thus easily be outvoted . But Norway , which has technically no votes , has regularly moulded key rules , including the Consumer Rights Directive . The real reason why we - as a large and powerful economy - would have greater influence in EFTA than in the EU is that Brussels is increasingly not the place where big decisions take place . Rules are increasingly negotiated under the auspices of global bodies : automotive norms are determined by the World Forum for the Harmonisation of Vehicle Regulations ; food standards are determined by Codex Alimentarius ; naval rules are under the aegis of the International Maritime Organisation ; and the crucial new banking regulations are being determined by the Financial Stability Board . These regulations are then passed down , with the odd gold-plating , by the EU . These global bodies proceed by consensus , not qualified majority ; we are currently represented by the EU at these meetings . A Brexit would allow us to have a seat at these top tables , and thus to disintermediate Brussels . We would also be able to sign free-trade deals with countries such as China : the EU has proved incompetent at this task , partly because it needs the agreement of all 28 members . Norway has been far more successful ; we would be even more so . It is true that being outside the customs union would require some additional bureaucratic form-filling for our exporters . But the government could help by earmarking some of our reduced contribution to the EU to helping these companies : for example , slashing corporation tax on all exporters to 10 per cent . It could do the same to compensate farmers , were they to face any new barriers , and in any case consumers would benefit hugely from being able to buy cheaper food from all over the world . The economic case for Brexit is remarkably strong . If Brexiteers want to reassure floating middle-class voters , it will need to be made again and again , loudly and clearly , over the next four weeks . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Siemens in Brexit swipe as it opts to float in Frankfurt
GERMAN engineering giant Siemens is to float its medical business in Frankfurt in what is set to be the country 's largest flotation in a generation - and a blow to the London exchange caused by Brexit . The initial public offering is expected to see the company sell up to 25pc of its Healthineers medical imaging and diagnostics business early next year in a deal that values the division at up to ( EURO ) 40bn ( £35.3bn ) . Siemens took a swipe at the UK 's vote to quit the European Union as the company set out its plans . `` Frankfurt is one of the world 's largest trading centres for securities , and its importance will continue to increase due to Brexit , '' said Michael Sen , Siemens board member responsible for healthcare , in an apparent reference to London losing global standing as a consequence of Brexit . While Siemens is a German business , the decision to list in Frankfurt is something of a coup for the exchange which has been overshadowed in recent years . The New York bourse is also understood to have been considered before being ruled out . According to data from Dealogic , the expected listing in the German bourse would make it the country 's biggest since Deutsche Telekom 's ( EURO ) 13bn float in 1997 . A float of Healthineers would be the biggest development yet in the company 's wholesale restructuring under boss Joe Kaeser . Under the threeyear-old Vision 2020 plan , Siemens ' activities will be concentrated around its core industrial businesses and the wider company streamlined . Siemens ' decision to list in its home country will also keep German unions onside , with the company in the process of slashing jobs as part of its wider restructuring . As part of this strategy , Siemens has combined its wind power division with Spanish renewables business Gamesa and is in the process of combining its rail operations with France 's Alstom .
Corbyn is bigger risk than Brexit , warns US bank ; Morgan Stanley warns of damaging consequences of a Left-wing lurch as snap election chances increaseFTSE could fall by a third if Brexit happens under Labour , Morgan Stanley warns
THE prospect of a radical Left-wing lurch under Jeremy Corbyn is a more serious threat to British asset markets than Brexit and risks setting off a drastic repricing of UK plc , a leading US bank has warned . Morgan Stanley has told clients that there is a two-thirds likelihood of a snap election in the second half of 2018 once it becomes clear the UK can not secure the sort of Brexit deal it wants and the Tory party starts to fracture , bringing political country risk into sharp focus . `` We could see the biggest shake-up in the political backdrop since the Seventies . This is much more scary from an equity perspective than Brexit , '' said Graham Secker , the bank 's chief European equity strategist . The bank said the `` double whammy '' of Brexit and a Labour government together could prove toxic for the UK stock markets , with its full-blown `` bear case '' leading to an economic recession and a 32pc crash in the FTSE 100 index by 2019 . Gilts could also face a reckoning given that 10-year yields are trading at just 1.26pc at a time when inflation is running at 3pc , with a further depreciation of sterling on the cards . `` Bond investors are losing money faster in the UK than almost anywhere in the world , '' said Andrew Sheets , the bank 's global asset strategist . Fund managers must plan for the serious possibility that a developed OECD country may nationalise power utilities , water companies , mail delivery and rail transport in sweeping moves unseen in the trading life of most investors now alive . The new agenda includes a rise in corporation tax to 26pc , a surtax on financial entities , and a financial transactions tax or `` Robin Hood '' tax on derivatives and bonds , as well as some shares . `` The direction of travel we have seen for the last 30 years is going to change by 180 degrees , '' he said . The thrust of policy would shift `` in favour of labour over capital '' with rises in the minimum wage , an end to the public sector pay cap , and a revival of sectoral collective bargaining . This would erode profits , especially for lowmargin firms such as retailers . `` Even if we see good progress in the Brexit negotiations , the scope for UK sensitive assets to rally may be muted , unless we also see an improvement in the Government 's position in the opinion polls , '' said Mr Secker . Worries about a duumvirate of Mr Corbyn and John McDonnell - the `` Marx brothers '' as they are known in the City - are approaching systemic levels . One senior banker told The Daily Telegraph last week that even familyowned firms are thinking of cashing in their wealth before the guillotine comes down , either in the form of a higher capital gains tax or ultimately through de facto wealth confiscation . The sense of unease has echoes of the `` red scare '' that gripped French investors before Leon Blum 's Front Populaire swept to victory in 1936 . City veterans no longer rule out capital controls . Emma Marcegaglia , head of the pan-EU lobby BusinessEurope , said Labour 's apparent tilt towards a softer Brexit would not compensate for the damaging effects of its radical policy manifesto . `` What Corbyn proposed during the election campaign is not pro-business , that is for sure . There would not be a good outcome even if there is a fantastic free trade agreement , '' she told The Daily Telegraph . Ms Marcegaglia said her members were pushing the EU institutions to take an open and friendly line in the Brexit talks but also warned the British side to eschew wishful thinking . `` The UK must put concrete proposals on the table otherwise things are just going to get worse and worse , '' she said . `` We had a meeting of 24 CEOs along with the Japanese last week and the feeling was that the situation is very bad . Some companies will start to activate their contingency plans even before March : that could be to stop investing , or leaving the UK altogether . '' Morgan Stanley says a Labour Party victory poses a threat to defence companies , UK-focused financial groups like RBS , utilities such as SSE or Severn Trent , telecommunications , bus operators and rail companies . It has drawn up a basket of those most at risk from changes to UK employment law - made worse if their earnings are generated in Britain - such as Ocado , Wetherspoons , Halfords , Sainsbury 's , Stagecoach , Royal Mail , Card Factory and Greene King . Those that rely on foreign earnings are far better insulated , led by oil drillers Ophir , Shell and BP , as well as miners Rio Tinto , BHP Billiton and Anglo American . British American Tobacco earns 99pc of its revenue abroad , and Diageo 94pc . AstraZeneca and Glaxosmithkline are also likely to be well protected . The problem for Britain is that the Brexit talks may come to a head just as the financial cycle enters choppy waters in mid-2018 . Morgan Stanley thinks the global economy has enough momentum to steam on through next year , but asset markets will anticipate the next downturn and may de-couple much earlier . Stocks could start wobbling - and perhaps roll over - once US inflation picks up in March and April , as investors wake up to monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve and perhaps the Bank of Japan . 32pc The crash in the FTSE 100 share index estimated by 2019 under the combination of Brexit and a Labour government
Scotland 'A United States of Europe ' ; Juncker lays out his vision for future of the EU - led by a European president - and warns UK it will regret Brexit
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER yesterday called for an ever-more powerful European Union and warned that Britain would `` regret Brexit '' , in a defiant speech that was branded a blueprint for a United States of Europe . The plans push for `` ever-closer union '' on defence , asylum and foreign policy in a bigger , more powerful bloc under a new , directly elected EU president . A eurozone finance minister would be appointed , with every country to adopt the euro . Mr Juncker called for a special summit of the 27 remaining member states the day after Brexit in March 2019 , in the Romanian city of Sibiu , to map out the future of the EU . He insisted the `` wind is back in Europe 's sails '' despite deep divisions on eurozone reform , migration quotas and democratic values . `` I have lived the European project my whole life , '' Mr Juncker declared as he outlined his federalist vision of common EU policy . `` I have fought for it through good times and bad times . '' After almost one hour of his State of the Union speech in the European Parliament in Strasbourg , Mr Juncker , the European Commission president , mentioned Brexit for the first and only time . `` We will always regret this , '' said Mr Juncker , before rounding on Ukip MEPs , who had begun to heckle him . `` I think you will regret it as well , '' he told Nigel Farage , the former party leader . `` We will move on . Brexit is not everything . It is not the future of Europe , '' he said to applause in the chamber . `` It is not the be all and end all . '' Mr Juncker said the roles of European Commission president and European Council president should be merged . `` The European landscape would be clearer and more understandable if the European ship was steered by a single captain , '' he said . The passport-free Schengen zone should extend to Bulgaria , Romania and Croatia , he added , and measures should be taken to allow Western Balkan countries to join the bloc . He demanded that every EU country adopt the euro and submit to EU banking supervision . `` The euro is destined to be the common currency of the entire Union , '' Mr Juncker said . National governments should give up their vetoes over tax and foreign policy , he added . Speaking afterwards , Syed Kamall , the senior Conservative MEP , said : `` Mr Juncker said the EU had the wind in its sails . Anyone that heard his speech now knows what direction he is sailing it in - towards a United States of Europe . '' Mr Farage described the speech as `` the most open , honest and truly worrying speech I have ever heard in my long years in this place '' . Mr Juncker praised Italy for bearing the brunt of the migration crisis but scolded Hungary and Poland for defying Brussels over asylum-seeker quotas . He hailed steps toward EU cooperation on defence . `` By 2025 we need a fully fledged European Defence Union . We need it . And Nato wants it , '' he said . Last year , Mr Juncker conceded , Europe was `` battered and bruised by a year that shook our foundations '' but employment had risen , the EU economy was growing and the migration crisis had been brought under control . `` Let us make the most of the momentum and catch the wind in our sails , '' he said . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , praised the speech , but there were `` longer-term , institutional things I am less keen on '' . He said : `` Juncker is a romantic . I am a politician , not a romantic . '' Reports : pages 4-5 Editorial Comment : page 17 2025 The date by when Jean-Claude Juncker said Europe needed a 'fully fledged European Defence Union '
EU will 'stall ' Brexit talks if UK refuses to pay settlement bill
BRITAIN will wait until the `` 11th hour '' before agreeing a final deal on the EU 's so-called Brexit Bill , it has emerged , as negotiators locked horns over the financial settlement . As the first round of substantive talks entered a second day , it has become clear that the biggest gaps between the two sides remain over the EU 's demand for a gross ( EURO ) 100billion ( £88billion ) financial settlement . In a sign of the tensions on the issue , the EU diplomats had reportedly threatened to `` stall '' the Brexit talks if the UK did not make a serious offer . Last week the UK conceded it did have financial `` obligations '' to the EU , but it is refusing to agree hard numbers until the EU side provides legal justification for demands that British officials have described as `` ludicrous '' and `` outrageous '' . Among the disagreements is the insistence from Brussels that it will not deduct the UK 's share of the EU 's multibillion euro asset portfolio when calculating any final bill . `` The EU view seems to be that we have liabilities but no share in the assets , which is nonsense , '' said one senior UK official . Both sides have done little to hide their frustrations , with the EU skittish about how it will fill the ( EURO ) 10billion-ayear black hole that will be left in its annual budget after Brexit . British negotiators expect that the EU will find it increasingly difficult to defend its rigid pre-talks positions . Boris Johnson apparently mocked the EU 's negotiating team yesterday by jogging in a T-shirt covered in French exclamations of Captain Haddock from the Tintin books . The fashion choice was taken as a dig at EU negotiators who once hung a poster on the wall of their negotiation room showing a spoof Tintin book cover , Tintin and the Brexit Plan , that depicts the Belgian boy reporter warming his hands on a fire in a wooden boat . The EU has also been briefing that the UK is `` not well-prepared '' for the talks , a move that is causing irritation in Whitehall , which has spent months developing detailed negotiating posi-tions on Northern Ireland , the financial package and the rights of EU and UK expats after Brexit . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , has said that `` sufficient progress '' must be made on these three areas before the EU will discuss trade and the future relationship with the UK . Meanwhile , it emerged that Owen Paterson , the former Cabinet minister , will go to Hamburg today and tell an audience - in German - that `` Brexit is going to happen '' . Writing on www.telegraph.co.uk , Mr Paterson said he would tell a conference that `` spiteful protectionism by the Commission is in no one 's interest , and German politicians are realising this '' . British officials have also risked upsetting their EU counterparts by suggesting an amendment to the schedule after it emerged that one of the original days in August fell on a Bank Holiday Monday . The change could potentially split the August talks into two separate two-day sessions , disrupting the holiday plans of Eurocrats . 'The EU view seems to be that we have liabilities but no share in the assets , which is nonsense '
The Brexit revolution has fanned the flames of a hard-Left rebellion ; The Tory Right thought a post-EU debate would be on their terms - now they have to save capitalism
Revolutions often end up a long way from where they started . A year after triumphing in the Brexit referendum , many Conservatives learnt this the hard way during a brutally disappointing election night . The rebellious spirit that carried them to victory last June had seemed sure to manifest itself again by lifting the Tories , the newly committed champions of Brexit , to unprecedented heights . Instead , like a train switching tracks , the momentum suddenly turned and took a hard Left . With the Government now in paralysis , Tory Brexiteers are in danger of losing control of the revolution they began . History is full of examples of campaigns and rebellions that , once started , unleashed new political currents and took up new causes . Yesterday it was sovereignty . Today , austerity . My current reading , a history of the Habsburg Empire , seems to be full of analogous events . The book , a revisionist take by Pieter Judson , is n't quite explicit about mapping the EU on to the Habsburg Empire , but it argues that nationhood is a recent , contingent invention in Europe and that ordinary Europeans are just as capable of loyalty to a supranational authority . This is , of course , music to the ears of EU federalists . Like the EU , though , the Habsburg Empire ran into trouble because it had a centralising tendency that often rubbed its subjects up the wrong way . In 1846 , tired of Vienna 's supremacy , a group of Polish landowners tried to re-establish an independent Polish state . They gathered their forces and marched into Galicia , a Habsburg territory that straddles modern-day Poland and Ukraine , hoping to rally the peasants to their cause . But instead of joining the nobles , the peasants massacred them . The violence was so bad that Vienna intervened to protect the rebels . What the lords had failed to realise is that , to the Galician peasants , the reformist Habsburg Empire offered the prospect of emancipation . Local rule meant continued serfdom and forced labour . Two years later , with revolutions sweeping Europe , the nobles had another chance . This time , like Boris Johnson and Michael Gove with their `` £350 million to the NHS '' bus , the landowners were falling over themselves to make appealing promises about the end of forced labour . Unfortunately for them , the Habsburg governor announced the emancipation of the peasants one day before the nobles had planned to do the same and their populist drive was punctured . Political movements do n't succeed unless they maintain support from a wide alliance of interests . You might think you 're starting a revolution about sovereignty , until suddenly it turns into a fight over emancipation - or austerity . For Brexiteers like Mr Gove and many pro-immigration , Tory internationalists I know , Brexit was purely about democratic control . But they rallied voters against a centralised and remote foreign rule by including a wide range of juicy promises in their programme , from immigration cuts to public services funding . Unfortunately , political alliances are unstable and it is easy to mistake voters ' instincts and moods for commitment to a cause , particularly if it is a cause you have championed for decades . It was always the elites who chafed most against EU authority . The unauthorised transfer of powers from Westminster to Brussels is most keenly felt by those accustomed to wielding power . That does not mean that voters do not understand or care about it . It just is n't their top priority . It is not easy to influence what their priorities are , particularly after a political upset . This time last year , immigration was far the most important issue to most voters , according to YouGov . Since then , the importance placed on health has risen dramatically . Tory Brexit campaigners knew that the referendum would open up policy areas that had been ignored or outsourced for many years , like immigration , agricultural policy and state aid . This was , indeed , the point . But they thought the battle over the interpretation of Brexit would be on Right-wing territory , whether it was about free trade and a `` global Britain '' or a Nigel Farage-ist emphasis on sharp immigration cuts . Their hope was that Britain would move in a Tory direction , towards deregulation and economic competitiveness . What they never considered was the possibility that Britain might leave the EU only to embrace radical socialism . Brexit seems to have thrown all sorts of taboos out of the window and Conservatives now find themselves in a pitched battle to save capitalism . Who could have predicted that the anniversary of the referendum would be greeted by Corbyn-mania at Glastonbury ? Who considered that Brexit Britain wanted to be neither Singapore nor little England , but Greece ? All of this is under way as the Brexit negotiations begin . The political instability has left the interpretation of Brexit down to an unpredictable tussle between Parliament and a hamstrung Government . The dynamic is not favourable for Tories . Every concession the Government makes will feed support for a Labour Party run by the hard Left . Meanwhile , the Right faces a difficult challenge . Making the case for Right-wing ideas would be a start , but in itself is n't enough . Like the Polish nationalists in Galicia , Conservatives need to construct a new proposition for voters - one potent enough to rival the prospect of Labour 's largesse . Whether that means rebranding the NHS bus again , building more homes or offering incentives to make Britain a nation of owners and savers , it is just as important as making the ideological arguments . Brexiteers thought that winning the referendum would be the glorious culmination of their struggle to restore democracy . But the vote for Brexit was just the start of the argument . The Right started this fight . However , with the Left in the ascendant , Conservatives are now in danger of losing the war . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel Read MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
The economic rebirth that 's good for Brexit ; All around the world the signs are encouraging , which should mean a better deal for Britain
Amid all the interminable and ultimately unanswerable debate about how good or bad Brexit might be for the UK economy , something rather important is being quite widely missed . It is this : there are much bigger forces at work in shaping our island economy than the negotiations on Britain 's future relationship with the European Union . These forces are the great oceanic currents of the global economy . As one of the world 's most open economies , the UK is unavoidably nearly always far more beholden to such forces than almost anything else . When things are bad externally , they tend to be pretty grim here too ; by the same token , when the global economy is doing well , that same buoyancy will also be mirrored on these shores . It would take almost unimaginable , Venezuelan-style , economic mismanagement for the UK to be in recession when all around are growing like topsy . So , momentous though the process of leaving the European Union undoubtedly is , these external influences are considerably more likely to determine the success or otherwise of the UK economy over the next two years and beyond than the diplomatic wranglings over the terms of Brexit . That 's good , because as luck would have it , the global economy is perking up across the board . We should , of course , beware of false dawns . There have been many of them since the dark days of the banking crisis nearly a decade ago . It is not yet clear the wounds have entirely healed . There is , moreover , still much that could go wrong . China might yet keel over under the growing weight of its own debts , the eurozone crisis could all too easily reignite , or Donald Trump could be as good as his word , and destructively retreat behind high , protectionist walls . Yet uncertainty is always with us , and if anything , the known risks today seem to be rather less threatening than for quite some time . Even the political risk of European populism seems to be in retreat . Unusually , moreover , today 's growth spurt is not confined to a single region . There is a confluence of economic revival . I 've recently returned from the Far East , where the economy seems once more to be approaching near boom conditions . The major global trading hubs of Taiwan , Shanghai and Singapore are positively buzzing with excitement and activity . International trade , seemingly permanently becalmed by the catastrophe of the Lehman crisis , is once more in the ascendant . Similarly in the US , where despite the apparently chaotic and ineffectual nature of the Trump presidency , a spirit of economic optimism not seen in years seems to be taking hold . Keynes 's famous `` animal spirits '' have returned with a vengeance . Always a year or two behind the US in the economic cycle , Europe too seems slowly to be raising itself from its sick bed , buoyed by the recovery in the wider global economy . We have grown used to unsynchronised economic progress , of one region collapsing down even as another tries to struggle back up . Yet , today , the world economy seems to be firing on all cylinders in a way not seen since the late Nineties . This economic rebirth ought to prove supportive of Brexit in two ways , assuming it holds . First , it should help mitigate any economically depressing side effects from Brexit uncertainties . This in turn will make the politics of Brexit easier , cauterising business and economic opposition to the process . But perhaps more important , it ought to help Europe feel more at ease with itself , and therefore more rational and magnanimous in the way it deals with Britain 's departure . The EU has been fire-fighting on multiple fronts for an awfully long time now . This is easily forgotten in the already developing acrimony of the Brexit divorce courts . First there was the eurozone debt meltdown , which proved almost www.existential.No sooner had the policy-makers calmed the financial flames than they were hit by the migrant crisis . Brexit was the final kick in the proverbials . A potentially dangerous , back-against-the-wall way of thinking has taken hold in the EU hierarchy , a desire for revenge and punishment which although not rational is all too easily explained by the series of crushing blows dealt to European hubris and vanity . It 's of the utmost importance that this siege mentality is not allowed to gain the upper hand in forthcoming negotiations . A baited bear is not easily tamed , which is why an adversarial approach to the coming negotiations is almost bound to fail . There is absolutely no reason why Britain should not enjoy a similar relationship with the EU as Canada does with the US , highly integrated on many levels , but separate sovereign nations with their own laws and mutually recognised standards . This is what the talks must aim for , and with goodwill on both sides , it 's eminently achievable . That goodwill is going to be much more likely in a growing economy . We can but hope that the present sweet spot persists . Follow Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ jeremywarneruk ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Sturgeon 'out of touch ' with Scottish public ; Brexit delivered Survey undermines call for second independence vote as voters north of border reject call for separate deal
NICOLA STURGEON was today accused of being completely out of touch with Scotland about Brexit after a major survey found almost two-thirds of Scots oppose her demand for a different deal and support Theresa May 's UK-wide blueprint . The First Minister 's justification for a second independence referendum was severely undermined by the NatCen research , which found 62 per cent of Scots think trade and immigration rules should be the same as in the rest of the UK . An overwhelming majority also support Mrs May 's plan to curtail free movement from the EU and oppose the First Minister 's insistence that it continue , with 64 per cent believing that immigrants from the Continent should be subject to the same restrictions as those from elsewhere in the world . The research concluded that Scots ' views are similar to those of people in the rest of Britain and warned Ms Sturgeon that her argument that the Prime Minister 's Brexit blueprint justifies an independence vote `` is unlikely to prove particularly persuasive . '' The Tories said the survey showed Ms Sturgeon was out of touch , with even a majority of independence supporters demanding curbs on immigration . It was published as David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , formally rejected Ms Sturgeon 's highly complex proposal for Scotland to stay in the EU single market . This would have seen Scotland adopt completely separate trade and immigration regimes from the rest of the UK . Mr Davis said this was not deliverable and argued that the Prime Minister 's vision would achieve almost all of Ms Sturgeon 's aims using a different method , such as a comprehensive free trade agreement . The research was conducted by Prof John Curtice , Britain 's most eminent psephologist and a senior research fellow at NatCen . He said : `` This means that on immigration , in particular , voters in Scotland seem to be more in tune with the stance taken by the UK government than that adopted by the Scottish Government '' . Prof Curtice concluded that it was `` far from clear '' concerns about Brexit would translate into increased support for independence if the UK Government succeeds in delivering free trade and immigration control . Adam Tomkins , the Scottish Tories ' constitution spokesman , said the report exposed the `` myth '' that Scots have different opinions about the Brexit deal from people in the rest of the UK . This survey , conducted between February 5 and March 2 , found almost unanimous support north and south of the Border for maintaining free trade . The proportion of Scots who wanted EU immigrants to face the same restrictions as those from elsewhere in the world ( 64 per cent ) was only slightly lower than the UK-wide figure of 68 per cent . While Remain voters in Scotland were much less likely than Leave supporters to back immigration control , more than half ( 53 per cent ) were still in favour of ending free movement . Scots were slightly more likely ( 61 per cent ) than their counterparts in England and Wales ( 54 per cent ) to forego immigration control in order to get a free trade deal But it found only 34 per cent of Scots want more relaxed EU trade rules compared with those in force in England and Wales , and a mere 25 per cent said they wanted a more liberal immigration policy north of the border . At least three in five of those who voted for independence are opposed to freedom of movement , while they are no more likely than those who voted No in the independence referendum to back free trade . Contrary to the SNP 's claim that the EU referendum result justifies another independence vote , the study found clear evidence that Scots ' views on one issue do not `` necessarily correspond in any way '' to their opinion on the other . It concluded : `` Those who voted Yes in 2014 are on balance barely any keener on having a closer relationship with the EU than are those who voted No . '' A Scottish Government spokesman said : `` The poll demonstrates people in Scotland continue to value the protections and rights offered by the EU , particularly on key issues such as free trade and freedom of movement . `` It also highlights greater support in Scotland across many important issues to maintain the benefits of EU membership , compared to the UK as a whole . '' David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , said : `` Today 's report underlines the need for the Scottish government and the UK Government to work together to secure the right deal for the whole UK . ''
Call me a heretic - there 's more to life than Brexit ; Schools and the health service are in urgent need of reform - and the Prime Minister must take the lead
One of the lesser pleasures of Christmas was not having to talk or think much about Brexit . Many people , I suspect , find the way Brexit dominates national debate a bit trying : are they still going on about that ? Have n't they sorted it out yet ? However you voted in the referendum , best accept two facts . First , we are going to leave , and second , it 's going to involve a little more time and a lot more talking than many people would like . If you thought 2016 was all about Brexit , you ai n't seen nothing yet . Sorry . Still , the people who 'd like to talk about something else are on to something . Until June 24 2016 , political convention said that voters did n't care very much about Europe . Yes , they had a view , and that view tended to be negative . But they did n't consider it as important as the economy , health , education and immigration . Since the referendum , with politicians and pundits rushing to ditch anything that smells of outmoded thinking , a new consensus has emerged - that Brexit is not just the most important issue facing the Government , but the one that matters most to most voters . All consensuses should be challenged . So here 's a holiday heresy : there 's more to life than Brexit . Some things the Government does matter at least as much as getting our EU exit right . High on that list are education and health . Long term , a good Brexit or bad Brexit will make a big difference to Britain 's wealth and status , but for now , the most tangible effect of British politics probably comes in the school your children or grandchildren attend and the quality of care you get when you fall ill . The most optimistic Brexiteers will argue that leaving the EU will dramatically improve both services by reducing the number of EU citizens in the UK and thus the pressure on them . But the people who oversee those services know such pressures are marginal at best . The problems we have with the way we educate our children and treat our sick and elderly wo n't be solved by tougher immigration rules . In the NHS , the picture is bleak . Whitehall officials speak in unusually grim terms about this winter . Hospitals are desperate to stop people entering ( `` triage teams '' block the doors of A & E for non-urgent cases ) and desperate to push people out of beds and back into their own homes , but ca n't when those people ca n't cope at home . A service used to running hot is unnervingly close to melting point . In his heart , Jeremy Hunt knows the NHS model is n't working , but he also knows that no Health Secretary alone can change it . It would take a Prime Minister in good standing , leading a concerted charge into the guns of public veneration for the NHS to get Britain to the point where we could sensibly discuss health reform . Absent of such support , Mr Hunt silences himself on the fundamental questions about the NHS and focuses on the things he can do . Like a mechanic trying to coax a few more years out of a car with 100,000 miles on the clock , he 's trying to squeeze more efficiency out of an organisation not always culturally inclined to maximise productivity . After the bloody business of getting junior doctors to work more weekends , he must ask consultants to do the same . Education also demands urgent attention , not least in the context of Brexit . If the UK economy is to be weaned off its addiction to cheap European labour and trade its way to glory , the indigenous workforce needs to be smarter and sharper and inclined to work even harder . Despite some recent progress , England 's schools are n't fit for top-flight competition : international league tables have their flaws , but figures suggesting English pupils do worse than those in Poland , Canada , Japan and even Belgium can not be ignored . Justine Greening secretly knows that new grammar schools alone will not fix Britain 's problems of low productivity and stalled social mobility . Indeed , whatever the merits of grammars ( and some Tories remain deeply unconvinced ) , the fight to create what may end up being a very small number of selective schools risks absorbing time and political capital that might be spent on more useful educational improvements . Yet she too knows that in government , direction must come from the top . In bureaucratic terms , No 10 is always a relatively small unit , a few dozen staff at most , and thus vulnerable to being overwhelmed , focusing on immediate needs and neglecting long-term ones . The allconsuming nature of Brexit and Mrs May 's habit of governing through a handful of advisers mean the Downing Street bottleneck is especially narrow these days : schools and hospitals are not squeezing through . Is it unreasonable to expect Mrs May to manage the most complex diplomatic , legal , political and economic negotiation of our time and at the same time push for historically important health and education reforms ? Probably . But no one said being prime minister was going to be easy . FOLLOW James Kirkup on Twitter @ jameskirkup ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Brexit 'may hit England hosting hopes ' ; Sport Football
Greg Clarke admitted yesterday that Brexit could damage England 's hopes of staging the World Cup or European Championship . The new chairman of the Football Association claimed it may even be forced to enter into a joint bid with another European Union country following Great Britain 's vote to withdraw as a member state . Clarke revealed one of his main objectives was to establish whether Brexit had damaged the FA 's standing within Fifa or Uefa . Speaking after watching England win their opening World Cup qualifier in Slovakia on Sunday , Clarke said : `` I was mulling on the way back on the plane from Slovakia what Brexit does to our chances of a future tournament because I never had any expectations of a new tournament [ bid ] in my tenure . The timescales are too long but you have to build a platform for the person after you or the person after them to be able to harvest some goodwill and get a tournament . `` But we are leaving the EU . Can we count on EU support or will they vote for EU nations in the future ? I do n't know the answer but we have to get to the bottom of that . We have to build relations directly within Uefa now and not rely on the support of the EU nations because they might say we 've got an EU member who wants it this year . So it 's doubly important to have really strong relationships in Uefa and Fifa . '' England have been linked with bids for the 2028 European Championship and 2030 World Cup and Clarke added : `` I need to find out before we waste a lot of money . It could mean we have to slightly change our tactics for getting a tournament . It might be jointly hosted with an EU member . '' Clarke was speaking at the official launch of Kick It Out 's `` Call Full Time on Hate '' campaign . The antiracism watchdog released figures yesterday showing the number of reported incidents of discrimination in football last season was up 2.5 per cent on the previous campaign , 402 compared with 393 . The rise was down mainly to abuse in relation to religion and sexual orientation , while there was an 18 per cent increase in incidents involving social media .
Why Trump has little chance of 'doing a Brexit ' ; The presidential hopeful has certainly changed his tone - but it 's the lack of substance that 's the issue
Donald Trump is so loud that he even shouts in print . Last Thursday , he tweeted : `` They will soon be calling me MR . BREXIT ! '' He meant that he 'll defy the polls and pull off a surprise victory in November . That 's unlikely . It 's a safer bet that we wo n't be calling him Mr President . Trump 's tweet reflects a change of plan . In the primaries there was no plan at all : he said the first thing that entered his head . It worked : he won the Republican nomination . But the shift from primaries to a general election requires moderation , and Trump has struggled to fulfil a promise to be `` so presidential that you people will be so bored '' . Instead , he insulted and argued and outraged - while privately complaining that Trump was n't allowed to be Trump enough any more . This week the campaign manager , Paul Manafort , was effectively demoted and one Steve Bannon replaced him . Bannon is a fascinating character . A former Goldman Sachs banker , he is the man behind Breitbart - a far-Right news website that has been one of Trump 's few consistent supporters . It 's part of what is sometimes called the `` alt-Right '' , a coalition of conservatives in perpetual war against both the Left and the establishment Right . The coalition counts sexists and neo-racists among its number . Some of Breitbart 's most arresting headlines include `` Birth Control Makes Women Unattractive and Crazy '' and `` Young Muslims in the West are a Ticking Time Bomb . '' Breitbart has a UK bureau that is shameless , friendly to Ukip and boasts Nigel Farage as a columnist . The conservatism of Mitt Romney was well-mannered , ethical . Breitbart 's people are political punks who , just like Sid Vicious , revel in being despised by the folks they despise . They have a reputation . Ben Shapiro , a former Breitbart editor , called Bannon : `` a vindictive , nasty figure , infamous for verbally abusing supposed friends and threatening enemies . '' In Shapiro 's view , `` Bannon is a smarter version of Trump . '' So when Bannon joined the campaign we expected Trump to go turbo . Perhaps extend that wall to keep out the Canadians , too ? Instead , he offered what is being labelled an `` apology '' for his past behaviour . A very Trump apology : he delivered it without humility , shouting that , `` believe it or not , '' he regrets that sometimes people take offence at the things he says . Expect to hear more about this apology . Expect Trump to refer to it as `` the most BEAUTIFUL apology ever given ! '' What the apology shows is that Bannon might be a maverick but , presuming he agreed with this manoeuvre , he is also clever . He and the rest of the staff can read polls : Trump is behind even in oncecompetitive states such as North Carolina and Florida . As one Republican insider put it to me , it 's too late to catch up . The new goal wo n't be to overtake Clinton but to get close enough - say just three points behind - to be within striking distance on polling day . That 's when the Brexit part of the strategy kicks in . Trump 's people hope that Americans are lying to pollsters about their voting intentions - just as many Britons may have done during the referendum . Team Trump dreams of victory by stealth . The candidate may even think that he 's buying some of the genius behind Brexit . After all , one can draw a direct line from Bannon to Farage through the UK Breitbart branch , and the two men are reportedly close . But Brexit can not be bought and imported . For a start , while Farage 's anti-immigration campaign was a key component of victory , it probably alienated as many as it seduced . What was far more important was the endorsement of senior Tories and personable characters from Labour . It was a bipartisan movement based on an idea that , love or loathe Euroscepticism , had been on the table for 40 years . Trump , by contrast , is brand new in political terms and fraught with far greater risk . Leaving the EU is a single policy ; Trump is a package . Americans are weighing up whether or not to give this guy the nuclear codes . Moreover , Brexit appealed to a coalition of middle-class Tories and working-class Labour supporters . Trump is doing well among the bluecollar voters but haemorrhaging whitecollar Republicans . Swing-state polls show Trump losing college-educated whites , a group Romney won by 4 per cent in 2012 . Brexit also did well in a few majority non-white areas , such as Slough . In some polls , Trump scores zero per cent among African-Americans . Trump 's hope to `` do a Brexit '' is rooted in a misunderstanding about what Brexit was . It was a less risky , less Right-wing a choice than its opponents thought - far less so than the Trump candidacy is . And there 's no sign of a real pivot to where Trump needs to be to achieve Brexit 's breadth of support . His apology represents a change in tone , but it 's not just tone that puts off voters . It 's substance . Nothing will undo the things Trump has said about immigration , trade or terrorism . What it took to excite Breitbart readers and win the Republican primary has probably damned him in the opinion of everyone else . FOLLOW Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Control migration with points system , former ministers tell May
THERESA MAY must adopt an Australian-style points-based immigration system by 2020 or face a backlash from Brexit voters , two former Cabinet ministers have said . Theresa Villiers , the former Northern Ireland secretary , told The Telegraph that Britain had voted to end the `` free-for-all '' of `` open-door '' immigration . At the same time , Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , said people were `` living in cloudcuckoo land '' if they thought voters did not choose complete control of their borders by backing Brexit . The comments will add pressure on the Prime Minister to adopt a hard line in negotiations over Brexit , and expose a growing Cabinet split on the issue . At least five Cabinet ministers are believed to support a points-based system : Liam Fox , Boris Johnson , Priti Patel , Chris Grayling and Andrea Leadsom . However , Amber Rudd , the new Home Secretary , criticised the idea during the EU referendum campaign , and neither Mrs May nor Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , supported the move earlier this year . Sources have suggested the Government will not take a stance until the end of Brexit negotiations , which is at least two years away . Before the referendum , Tory Brexit campaigners pledged to introduce the system , which allows a country to control how many migrants enter based on the need for skills in certain industries . Mrs Villiers told The Daily Telegraph that matching migrant numbers to skills shortages was a `` sensible way to have a reformed immigration system '' . Asked whether it should be in place by 2020 , she said : `` That 's an achievable and sensible goal . I very much hope that it 's going to be possible to deliver that . '' Mr Duncan Smith said : `` It is my view that we will have left the EU by the time of the next election , which means we have to have a system in place that controls migration . `` People are living in cloud-cuckoo land if they think the British voters did anything else but absolutely vote to take back control . It was very explicit - that means migration , and that 's exactly what they voted for . '' Speaking for the first time since her Cabinet sacking last month , Mrs Villiers also spoke of her `` loss '' and `` grief `` at leaving office , and said she feared , at the age of just 48 , `` this is the end '' of her ministerial career . `` It was a difficult conversation because I was obviously pretty upset , to be honest , '' Mrs Villiers said of her meeting with Mrs May . `` These kind of conversations are never easy . '' She added : `` Politics is an uncertain path for anyone . It certainly comes with its ups and downs . To be very frank , I suppose I 'm still suffering regret , grief , loss , as you do in these kinds of situations . But I 've just got to accept it and move on . `` I 'm really sad to have left my Northern Ireland role behind . It 's a very special place - I left a lot of friends , the people are great and I felt I was able to achieve things . '' She identified helping to solve the political stand-off at Stormont last year among those things . Mrs Villiers also insisted that passport controls were not needed on the Northern Ireland border with the Republic ; rejected calls for an early general election and defended David Cameron 's controversial honours list .
UK could rejoin EU in future , says May deputy ; Lidington states that Brexit will stand , but in years to come Europe might be very different from today
BRITAIN could rejoin a reformed European Union within a generation , Theresa May 's de facto deputy prime minister has said , suggesting it would be `` something for future parliaments to consider '' . In an interview with The Daily Telegraph , David Lidington , the Cabinet Office Minister who replaced Damian Green at the Prime Minister 's side in this month 's reshuffle , said it was impossible to predict what the EU would look like in `` 10 or 20 years ' time '' . `` It 's dangerous to say never , '' he added . Mr Lidington , who campaigned for Remain during the EU referendum and is one of the Government 's most prominent Europhiles , said he had not changed his views on Brexit but as a democrat it was his job to implement the will of the people . The former Europe minister now chairs several key Cabinet sub-committees on Brexit . In his first interview since taking on the new role , he said it was possible Britain could join some form of cus-toms union with the EU after Brexit.The Government is committed to leaving the single market and the customs union , but Mr Lidington said if there was `` some different framework that we can arrive at in negotiations that will be mutually beneficial '' , it could work to `` everybody 's advantage '' . Earlier this week , Justine Greening , the former education secretary , suggested future generations of MPs could `` undo '' Brexit if it did not `` work for them '' . Emmanuel Macron , the French president , has said the UK could `` find its place '' in a `` reformed and simplified EU '' within a few years of leaving . Asked whether Mr Macron and Ms Greening could be right , Mr Lidington said it was a `` red herring '' to suggest Britain could rejoin the EU in its current form . However , he added : `` We may be looking in a generation 's time at an EU that is configured differently from what it is today . The exact nature of the relationship between the United Kingdom and that future system , whatever it turns out to be , of European cooperation is something that future parliaments , future generations will have to consider . '' Yesterday Mrs May refused once again to say whether she would vote Leave if the EU referendum happened now . She said : `` I would do what I did last time round which was sit down and look carefully at the issues . '' In an interview with a French television station , Mrs May was asked : `` Do you feel European ? '' She replied `` Yes '' . Since moving to the Cabinet Office , Mr Lidington has spent most of his time taking charge of the fallout from the collapse of Carillion . He rejected Jeremy Corbyn 's suggestion that outsourcing had become a `` racket '' or that PFI contracts should be taken back under public sector control . Interview : Page 6 Charles Moore : Page 22
Banks may be forced to raise buffers further ; Disorderly Brexit poses potential risks for lenders , says Bank of England , as it mulls widening safety net
BANKS could be ordered to build up their capital buffers even more to guard against the threat of a disorderly Brexit that risks cutting finance firms off from their continental customers , the Bank of England has said . Officials are already making banks increase the countercyclical capital buffer ( CCyB ) , a fund that is built up in the good years and can be used in bad times to ensure banks are safe and can carry on lending when times get tough . But Brexit adds in an extra element of uncertainty . The Financial Policy Committee , which is headed by Mark Carney , has decided not to hike the rate further to reflect Brexit just yet , but will consider doing so next year . The CCyB is rising from 0.5pc of banks ' risk-weighted assets to 1pc , reflecting the relatively `` normal '' risk conditions faced at the moment . This puts the CCyB at £11.4bn . The Bank of England stress tested banks ' finances to see how they could cope with a major recession , and found they have enough capital to survive and to keep lending . But a disorderly Brexit on top of such a crunch could be more dangerous . `` In such circumstances , capital buffers would be drawn down substantially more than in the stress test and , as a result , banks would be more likely to restrict lending to the real economy , '' said the record of last month 's FPC meeting . The committee therefore debated the merits of increasing the UK CCyB rate above 1pc at this juncture . This would help keep banks safe , the committee said . `` On the other hand , the likelihood of a disorderly Brexit occurring in combination with both a severe global recession and very substantial additional conduct costs ( as in the stress test ) could be seen as extremely remote ; if that were the case , the potential economic costs to ensuring the banking system was resilient to this combination of risks could exceed the benefits , '' the FPC said . `` The FPC agreed that , when making its decisions on the UK CCyB rate during the first half of 2018 , it would reconsider the adequacy of a 1pc UK CCyB rate in light of the evolution of the overall risk environment . '' Officials are also worried that an extra rise on top of that already planned would be a painful shock for banks . `` An increase in the UK CCyB rate above 1pc would also be a surprise for banks and market participants , given the committee 's previous communications , '' the FPC said . `` This could undermine the effectiveness of future communications , and the FPC recognised the benefits of acting in a predictable manner . '' The Bank of England has also alerted the High Court that it might face extra demand from insurance companies preparing for Brexit . Depending on the result of negotiations with the EU , the finance firms might need to set up new entities in the correct locations , and transfer contracts to those new entities . `` The UK process of transferring insurance contracts relied on a court procedure that could take 12-18 months ; given the volume of these applications was expected to be three to five times the normal level , there was a risk that transfers would not be completed in time , '' the FPC minutes said . `` The PRA [ Prudential Regulation Authority ] and FCA had been working to ensure that firms ' plans were as robust as possible , and the Bank had written to the High Court to alert them to the potential for increased applications . '' 'An increase in the UK CCYB rate above 1pc would be a surprise for banks and market participants ... '
As Brexit pressures mount , we must remain open for business
Ahead of last year 's referendum , I was optimistic about Britain 's future outside of the European Union . I still strongly believe that the country made the right decision to leave the EU and that businesses and the economy will thrive . But the short-term impact and opportunities arising from Brexit will only ever be as good as the execution of the separation and how it is negotiated . And I fear that , unless action is taken on two fronts , we are heading towards a very sub-optimal outcome . With regard to the Brexit negotiations , money needs to be front and centre . Most recently , we have seen the Prime Minister generously offering approximately £20bn in payments to the EU during the proposed transition period , without having a firm EU-UK trade deal in place post-Brexit . Unless the EU begins trade talks without further delay , we will - to use a phrase coined by Lord Bridges , the former minister from the Department of Exiting the EU - be discussing Britain 's gangplank , rather than the bridge to our final post-Brexit destination . Government negotiators should also have the confidence to spell out to the EU 's negotiators what the consequences will be of failing to agree terms of trade with Britain , specifically the full implications of not having access to our markets . In essence , our position ought to be that we will not pay a penny unless we have proper access to EU markets on fair terms ; and that if we did n't get that access , the EU should not expect to have access to our markets on fair terms . On the other hand , we should make clear what our financial offer would be , should we reach appropriate terms , as an inducement for European governments to put pressure towards a settlement . Such an offer should be spread over a number of years , say 10 , to help ensure adherence to the deal . Thus , for instance , £5bn a year over 10 years as a carrot , or nothing if no deal is reached . Jean-Claude Juncker 's recent `` state of the union '' address was a timely reminder of the EU 's direction of travel . Governments across the EU listened patiently to what he had to say and several replied : `` No , thank you '' . This laid bare the divergent interests of the European Commission and the member states that pay for it and provided a useful reminder to British voters that the EU is still on an integrationist track . On the domestic front , the Prime Minister provided a defence of free enterprise to a Bank of England audience , shortly before the Conservative party conference . But these words now need to be matched by a policy vision to support wealth creation in a post-Brexit Britain . We need more pro-business policies ; more commitment to deregulation ; more encouragement for small businesses ; and more tax incentives . As well as aspiring to be the number one trading destination in Europe , we should aim to make Britain the number one destination in Europe for entrepreneurs to set up . One only has to look at how clever both Ireland and Luxembourg have been with their tax policies and measures designed to encourage talented people to go there . The priorities for a pro-business agenda are simple : Deregulate - red tape continues to exert an especially onerous burden on SMEs that lack the resources to handle regulatory compliance ; Cut corporation tax - creating a globally competitive tax regime encourages businesses to be in Britain and will enlarge the overall tax take ; Give SMEs employing under 20 people a more flexible employment regime - enable firms to manage a changing commercial environment and reduce the regulatory downsides of hiring ; Focus government grants - adopt the Israeli model where the government matches start-up funding for technology businesses . In the UK , funding should be available to start-ups outside of the South East in sectors where British ingenuity is world-class , such as pharma , biotech and medical devices ; Commit to infrastructure - upgrades originally promised to realise the economic potential of the Northern Powerhouse initiative should be built without delay ; Expand capacity at both Heathrow and Gatwick - airport capacity is vital to Britain 's future ; Cut stamp duty on housing - the higher rate of stamp duty has caused tax take to fall as the top end of the housing market becomes illiquid , discouraging foreign wealth creators that want to live and work in the UK . The clock is ticking - the Conservatives have four and a half years to put in place measures to fundamentally improve the economy . If they succeed , they can win the next election . Fail and Britain may face the seemingly unthinkable prospect of a Labour government led by Jeremy Corbyn . The stakes are high and the Government faces two challenges , not just one . Howard Shore is executive chairman of Shore Capital Group 'We should aim to make Britain the number one destination in Europe for entrepreneurs to set up '
Britain to keep European standards ; The decision to maintain 20,000 industry directives will enable 'frictionless ' trade , says 'Kitemark ' chief
BRITAIN is to keep all of Europe 's business standards after Brexit by applying to remain a full member of Europe 's three business standards agencies after March 2019 , the head of the UK 's official standards agency has told The Daily Telegraph . Howard Kerr , the chief executive of the BSI which bestows the 'Kitemark ' symbol , said the move will commit the UK to maintaining some 20,000 industrial and technical standards in order to facilitate `` frictionless '' trade after Brexit . `` The preference in industry and government is for the UK to continue to trade using single standards across Europe and for the UK being a full member of the three [ European standards ] agencies , '' he said in an interview . The BSI , which is a private body that operates under a UK government mandate from the Department of Trade , is already in the process of formally requesting the right to remain a member of the European Committee for Standardisation ( CEN ) after Brexit . The move will require CEN and two other European standards organisations to re-write their membership statutes to enable Britain to re-join when the UK becomes a non-EU country . The BSI and Government are quietly confident this will happen . CEN , and its sister-organisations CENELEC and ETSI which produce electro-technical and telecoms standards , are not European Union bodies , and includes EEA member states like Norway as well as EU accession countries , like Turkey and Serbia , among their membership . The Government committed to remaining a full member of the three bodies in the Brexit White Paper earlier this year as a means of retaining British influence in the creation of global standards . However , the move will raise some questions about the extent to which Brexit will enable the UK to diverge from EU standards , with some 25 per cent of published European standards being developed `` as a result of requests from the European Commission '' , according to the White Paper . `` As a full future member of the European future standards system , with harmonised standards and national adoption of those standards , it would not be possible for the UK to diverge on harmonised EU standards [ after Brexit ] , '' Mr Kerr conceded . In theory it would remain possible to create specific UK standards for products being sold solely in the UK market , but in practice Mr Kerr said business had no appetite for creating cumbersome dual standards regimes . `` Why would business want different standards for trading in the UK ? Business wants to make products once , to one single standard , '' he added . The adherence to EU product standards could have a bearing on Britain 's ability to cut trade deals with the rest of the world , according to Prof Alan Winters , director of the UK Trade Policy Observatory at Sussex University . `` The UK will be negotiating with third countries , but with a good deal less muscle than the EU , '' he said . `` The EU has more ability to lean on a partner to accept their standards , but it will be the same dynamic . '' Allie Renison , the head of EU and trade policy at the Institute of Directors ( IoD ) , said the decision would send the right signal to the EU 27 . 'Why would business want different standards for trading in the UK ? Firms want to make products once '
Mrs May failed to learn the lessons of the Leave campaign 's victory ; A message of hope over pessimism will always prevail - and it could be needed in the days ahead
On this day last year , I mournfully made my way to the polling station and ended my lifelong support for the European Union . Most people do n't change their mind in election campaigns , but the referendum was different . I have always believed in an ever-closer union of peoples , but the EU 's intransigence had turned it into a source of instability and division . Not that I expected my vote to do anything : David Cameron was anticipated to win easily . At noon on polling day his campaign chief , Andrew Cooper , predicted a 10-point victory for Remain . I 'm not sure how many of us who voted for Brexit expected anything to come of it . That referendum result seemed to break every rule of political science . On one side you had the government , opposition , almost every business group , spymasters , national icons like Stephen Hawking and divinities like Keira Knightley . And those opposed ? A rag tag team led by a 10-month-old outfit , Vote Leave , that had been beset by feuding and forced to fight at a time of its opponent 's choosing . It ought to have been a walkover . So why was n't it ? Even now , it 's hard to have a rational discussion about what Vote Leave got right . The referendum result was a profound psychological blow for many of those in the business of political analysis , so they ended up talking about voters duped by a `` post-truth '' era . Vote Leave itself dissolved in the turmoil that followed Mr Cameron 's resignation . As a result , very few of the lessons of the campaign a year ago were learnt by the Tories - which is rather a shame . If they had been , Theresa May might not have lost her majority in the general election . The Prime Minister wanted to run her own Brexit campaign , perhaps to atone for not supporting it last time . But she never quite explained what Brexit was for , or what it might lead to . She needed to tell people why we were leaving , and never did . From the offset , Vote Leave sold Brexit as an agenda of national renewal , of tending to people who had been left behind . Its message - `` take control '' - actually meant something . `` Strong and stable '' did not . So the idea , last year , was to serve up an inspiring message that would lead millions to back change . Lesson one : hope sells . Perhaps it was because Mrs May did not support Brexit that she never quite saw the need to frame it as being open and globalist . As Vote Leave knew from the offset , they would be accused of being xenophobic little Englanders with no interest in life beyond the English Channel . So they chose internationalist arguments : why , they asked , do we discriminate against immigrants from non-EU countries ? Why not trade fairly with the Third World ? And yes , let 's offer immediate and unconditional assurances to every single EU migrant in Britain : we need them , they can stay . But it is a colder , meaner version of Brexit that Mrs May ended serving up in the election . The warmer version that Boris Johnson worked on - offering unilateral security to EU migrants , emphasising good relations with European neighbours - is a policy that ended up being stolen by the Labour Party . The Tories found themselves looking a bit like ( as someone once put it ) the nasty party . It was as if the Conservatives had grown addicted to the negative campaigning deployed in the Scottish referendum then by Remain . When so much is at stake , voters want more than to be told to fear the other side . Lesson two : Project Fear does n't work . Then came the great Brexit variety show . Vote Leave 's two star strikers were Boris and Michael Gove , but if you do n't like them then there were the Labour MPs Kate Hoey and Gisela Stuart . In fact , if you found Boris a bit too wet - with his declarations of being `` passionately pro-immigration '' - then there was Nigel Farage , with his ( to me , repulsive ) points about HIV-infected migrants and his notorious `` Breaking Point '' poster showing Syrian refugees . And then the other outriders : Business for Britain , Muslims for Britain , Labour Leave , Out and Proud . So the Brexit campaign had a great many people with a great many messages . A contrast to the 2017 Tory general election campaign which only featured one Tory : Mrs May herself . If you found her indecisive , robotic , power-hungry ( or all three ) then there was n't an alternative . It was Jeremy Corbyn who used outrider groups - like his Momentum and other Leftwing campaigners - with different messages spread on digital platforms to reach younger voters , two thirds of whom turned up . Lesson three : coalitions win campaigns . Perhaps the strongest weapon in Vote Leave 's arsenal was its claim that Britain sends £350 million a week to the EU , and that this could be better spent on priorities like the National Health Service . Monstrous lies , said Remain : factor in the rebate and the real figure is far lower . And to be sure , the real sum that Vote Leave was promising for the NHS was closer to £100 million a week . But whether you believed the big or the small figure , the overall impression was the same : there 'd be a lot more money for the NHS after Brexit . And here was something else that Theresa May lacked in the election : a firm offer for voters . None of this is genius : times change , and successful campaigns change with them . Politicians take note and adapt : or do , if they want to win majorities . But given that the Tories might find themselves fighting another campaign at any moment , it might be worth thinking about a message that goes beyond attacking the other chap . In all of the drama of the last year , the Tories have lost sight of what people voted for in the referendum . It was not about using EU nationals as bargaining chips , or snarling at Brussels . It was about retrieving sovereignty while managing immigration better , disengaging from the European Union while finding better ways to be good Europeans . This is not about a hard Brexit or soft Brexit - neither of which mean anything - but an open Brexit , one that lets Britain better engage with the rest of the world . A rather compelling agenda , and one that 's still there for the taking . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Hammond accused of stalling DUP deal as he pushes for softer Brexit terms ; Sources claim the Chancellor is 'nitpicking ' over airport taxes to buy time for his EU agenda
PHILIP HAMMOND has been accused of preventing Theresa May from concluding her pact with the DUP because of a row over airport taxes in Belfast . Whitehall sources blamed `` nitpicking '' by the Treasury for the fact that no agreement had been reached by last night following two days of talks . The Daily Telegraph has been told that the deal is `` 95 per cent agreed '' but a key stumbling block is a demand by the DUP for an end to Air Passenger Duty at Northern Ireland 's airports , which has been described as `` an anchor on tourism '' to the province because the taxes are not levied in the Republic of Ireland . Mrs May 's hoped-for deal with the DUP , which she is depending on to be able to govern , could now be delayed until next week , meaning Brexit talks and the Queen 's speech could both be put back until later this month . One Tory source even suggested Mr Hammond might be deliberately `` footdragging '' to delay Brexit talks and give him more time to argue for a softening of the Government 's position on Brexit . Mrs May will face a showdown over the DUP deal with the Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams in Downing Street today . The Prime Minister has invited Mr Adams and the leaders of Northern Ireland 's other main political parties to No 10 in the hope of breaking the deadlock over Stormont power-sharing talks . But her conversation with Mr Adams and Sinn Fein 's Stormont leader Michelle O'Neill will be dominated by the proposed DUP deal . Mrs O'Neill yesterday warned the Prime Minister that she must do nothing to `` undermine '' the peace process in Ulster . The former Conservative prime minister Sir John Major had previously warned Mrs May that making a deal with the DUP could result in violence returning to Northern Ireland . The Queen 's Speech , originally scheduled for next Monday , could be put back as far as June 27 . Several financial issues remain unresolved between the parties : one of the most complex revolves around Air Passenger Duty ( APD ) . The Government has already given the Stormont executive the power to scrap APD on long-haul flights , but passengers on short-haul flights must still pay a tax of £13 each way . The DUP wants the Treasury to give it the power to scrap the tax , but Mr Hammond is said to be concerned that if he gives Northern Ireland an opt-out it will mean Scotland also has to be given extra cash under the Barnett formula , which determines how funds are allocated to the devolved powers . The delay means Mrs May could be forced into the humiliating position of starting Brexit talks next week without having formed a Government . A Tory source said the Chancellor was trying to garner support from colleagues in the Cabinet and the Con-servative Party for a watered-down Brexit deal that involved staying in the customs union , which would give the UK access to the single market but prevent it from making its own trade deals with the rest of the world . The source said : `` Anything involving the Treasury is cumbersome . I am not sure Philip Hammond wants these talks to succeed . '' EU negotiators have said that Mrs May needs to end the `` uncertainty '' surrounding her ability to command a working majority in Parliament before Brexit talks begin . With no DUP deal in place last night , Mrs May will come under huge pressure from Sinn Fein over the proposed pact when she meets its leaders today . Mrs O'Neill hinted that she might demand the scrapping of the DUP deal if it threatens the Good Friday Agreement , which commits the UK and Irish governments to demonstrate `` rigorous impartiality '' in their roles as co-guarantors of the peace process . Mrs O'Neill said : `` I will be making it very clear that any deal between the Tories and the DUP can not be allowed to undermine the Good Friday and subsequent agreements . `` It 's imperative that both [ British and Irish ] governments recommit to the word , spirit and implementation of the Good Friday Agreement if there is to be any prospect of re-establishing the [ Stormont ] executive . '' Mrs O'Neill added : `` Progress will not come from a deal between the DUP and Tories to prop up a government in Westminster with an austerity and Brexit agenda but through the full implementation of the agreements and an executive that respects the rights and delivers for all in society . '' As well as Sinn Fein , Mrs May has invited the DUP , the SDLP , the UUP and the Alliance Party to Downing Street . The Stormont Assembly has been suspended since January and the Government has said the parties must reach an agreement on the makeup of the Assembly by June 29 or direct rule will be re-imposed from Westminster . Ruth Dudley Edwards : Page 20 'Anything involving the Treasury is cumbersome . I am not sure Mr Hammond wants these talks to succeed '
We aim to create stability and opportunity ; A strong economy is a key to making Brexit a success , and we hope to establish a fairer Britain for everyone
The next five years will be the most challenging that Britain has faced in my lifetime . Brexit will define us - our place in the world , our economic security and our future prosperity . So now more than ever , Britain needs strong and stable government to get the best Brexit deal for our country and its people . That is why the manifesto we are publishing today is designed to confront the great challenges of our time . It is a commitment to take the big , difficult decisions that are right for our country in the long term . Dealing with these challenges is dependent on having a strong economy . And under my leadership we will create that by making the most of our existing strengths , investing in infrastructure and people , and ensuring that our economy grows across the whole country . We will deliver a smooth and orderly Brexit and forge a deep and special partnership with our friends and allies across Europe . It will allow our United Kingdom to emerge from this period of great national change stronger and more prosperous than ever before . Since becoming Prime Minister last year I have always made it clear that we need to pull down the barriers that prevent people fulfilling their true potential in order to secure a better deal for ordinary , working people . But for too many people in this country , where you end up in life is still determined by where you were born and to whom . So our manifesto will make sure that everyone has the opportunity to make the most of their talents and hard work , whoever they are and wherever they are from . It is also vital that the government in place after the general election responds to the reality of an ageing society . While always making sure that we are fair to younger generations , it is essential that we give people security in their old age and care for those with long-term health conditions . And for the sake of our economy , security and society , we must harness the power of fast-changing technology . Rather than pursue an agenda based on a supposed centre ground defined by elites in Westminster , we will govern in the interests of the mainstream of the British public . The agenda we set out in the manifesto will restore the public finances and maintain economic stability . We will reduce and control immigration and we will be resolute in defending the country from terrorism and other security threats . The Conservatives will run public services in accordance with their values as important local and national institutions . As I set out earlier this week , we will not only guarantee but enhance workers ' rights and protections . And we will develop our ambitious modern industrial strategy to get the economy working for everyone , across the whole of our nation . None of this will be easy . It will require discipline and focus , effort and hard work . On Tuesday , Jeremy Corbyn unveiled his shambolic manifesto and it immediately emerged that there is a £58 billion black hole in his spending plans . His numbers simply do n't add up and if he gets the keys to Downing Street after the election , every single family in the country will pay the price and face higher taxes and more debt . Under my leadership , the Government will look forward and be confident that we have the vision and the plan to build a better Britain . It will be a stronger Britain where everyone has the economic security they need and the chance to live a secure and happy life . And it will be a fairer Britain that works for everyone , not just a privileged few . READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Brexit will end London 's 'gateway to Europe ' status , says Bundesbank exec
BREXIT could result in London losing its status as the financial `` gateway to Europe '' , according to one of Germany 's most influential banking regulators . Dr Andreas Dombret , who sits on the board of the Bundesbank , said that any deal struck between the UK and the European Union following Brexit would be `` miles away from access to the single market '' . He was speaking in a private briefing for German businesses and banks earlier this week . His comments were first reported by the BBC . Banks in the City of London have long argued there is no alternative to membership of the single market that provides the same level of certainty or access . However , the UK Government last month ruled out retaining single market membership following Brexit . Access is therefore likely to come through `` equivalence '' - a deal whereby UK-based financial firms could sell their services to customers in the EU as long as the UK maintained a regulatory regime `` equivalent '' to that in Europe . A number of UK-based firms have also said that they will need to set up subsidiaries within the EU . However , their location and the number of jobs likely to be moved to them from London is a matter of fierce debate . According to the BBC , Dr Dombret laid out a hard line at the event , organised by the Boston Consulting Group in Frankfurt . He said : `` The current model of using London as a gateway to Europe is likely to end . '' The Bundesbank executive , who is responsible for banking and financial supervision , also appeared to react to implicit threats by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who earlier this month said that the Government could employ other means to ensure the economy remained competitive - taken to suggest that the UK could reduce corporation tax and regulatory burden . `` The EU will not engage in a regulatory race to the bottom , '' said Dr Dombret .
Scotland Scotland 's Brexit strategy could lead to EU court
A SECOND legal expert has suggested the Scottish Government 's intervention in the legal battle over Brexit could lead to the European Court of Justice being asked to rule on whether Article 50 can be reversed . Prof Sionaidh Douglas-Scott said that if the Scottish Government asked the `` vexed question '' in the forthcoming Supreme Court hearing , the matter could be sent to the EU court for a ruling . Her comments follow a suggestion from a leading QC that Nicola Sturgeon could lay the groundwork for blocking Brexit by seeking such a decision . Jolyon Maugham , a London barrister , said the First Minister should explode the `` cosy consensus '' that once Article 50 is triggered , to start the twoyear process of leaving the EU , it can not be undone . Writing in the Daily Telegraph on Saturday , he said that if the EU court ruled that the process could be revoked it would allow MPs to withdraw Article 50 notification at a later date if they did not like the shape of the Brexit deal . Mr Maugham initiated the crowdfunded legal challenge in the High Court , alongside the investment manager Gina Miller , that led to the ruling that the Prime Minister does not have the power to trigger Article 50 without the approval of Parliament . The UK Government 's appeal will be heard in the Supreme Court next month . Prof Douglas-Scott , a law professor at Queen Mary University of London , and formerly professor of European and Human Rights Law at Oxford , told the BBC 's Sunday Politics Scotland programme there was `` nothing clear '' in the wording of Article 50 on whether it was reversible and the only institution that could decide the issue conclusively was the European court . She added : `` If the issue is raised in the Supreme Court by , for example , the Scottish Government , then the question is whether the Supreme Court thinks a decision on that matter is necessary to determine the case . `` It might well think that and make a reference to the European Court of Justice and that would delay matters further . '' She added : `` There would be effects of deciding that Article 50 was after all reversible . One might be that if , two years down the line , the British Government decided that after all Brexit did n't mean Brexit , then Britain would not be perhaps out on its knees without any deal at all . '' The Supreme Court ruled on Friday that the Scottish and Welsh governments would be allowed to intervene in the appeal . Prof Douglas-Scott , who is also an adviser to the Scottish Parliament European and External Relations Committee , added that she expected that if parliamentary approval is necessary before ministers trigger Article 50 , then the Scottish Government is likely to argue that Holyrood should have to give its consent . She said that if the Scottish Parliament refused legislative consent it might not stop Brexit but it would cause `` a lot of confusion and difficulty '' . She said it was a similar situation that ultimately led to two independence referendums in Quebec .
May rules out Irish border checks after Brexit vote
THERESA MAY will today insist that peace and stability in Northern Ireland is her `` highest priority '' as she pledges to ensure that border controls will not be erected after Brexit . The Prime Minister travels to Belfast today for talks with the First Minister Arlene Foster and Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness over how to ensure stability in Northern Ireland in the wake of the EU referendum . Tony Blair and Sir John Major visited the Province a fortnight before the referendum to caution against Brexit , arguing that it would lead to controls and customs checks along the existing `` soft border '' with the Republic . People and goods move freely between Northern Ireland and the Republic under the Common Travel Area ( CTA ) . However , concerns have been raised over what Brexit means for the CTA and for both economies , especially if the UK restricts EU immigration . And , after 56 per cent of the population voted Remain , there have been calls for a referendum on the future of Northern Ireland . Mrs May has indicated that she will not trigger the formal process for leaving the EU until there is an agreed `` UK approach '' backed by Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . She has already travelled to Scotland and Wales to discuss the Brexit negotiation . Speaking ahead of her Ulster visit , the PM said : `` I want to assure the people of Northern Ireland that I will lead a government which works for everyone across all parts of the United Kingdom , and that Northern Ireland is a special and valued part of that Union . `` I look forward to underlining the Government 's commitment to the Belfast Agreement and its institutions , and to working with local parties and the Irish Government to fully implement the Stormont House and Fresh Start Agreements . '' She added : `` I have been clear that we will make a success of the UK 's departure from the European Union . That means it must work for Northern Ireland too , including in relation to the border with the Republic . ''
Rolls-Royce to take full stake in aircraft parts manufacturer
Rolls-Royce has beefed up its position in the aircraft engine business , with a ( EURO ) 720m deal to take full control of an engine parts manufacturer Industria de Turbo Propulsores ( ITP ) it already has a major stake in . Announcing the deal to buy Spanishbased business , Warren East , chief executive of the FTSE 100-listed engineer , said it would `` strengthen '' Rolls 's position in the wake of Brexit , giving it a stronger position in Europe . `` We did not analyse this deal from the point of view of Brexit - Brexit happened , '' Mr East said . `` This strengthens our position in Europe . We were already in Europe with ITP [ by owning all of it ] that strengthens growth opportunities outside the EU . '' However , he was bullish about Rolls 's future after Britain 's Leave vote . `` Brexit has been on the agenda for some time and although it is not the outcome we would have wanted it is the outcome we have got and we have to work with that . We are a global business and we are going after global opportunities - three-quarters of our work is outside the EU . '' Mr East said Rolls would seek to `` in-fluence wherever possible '' Britain 's direction as it negotiates trade deals and free movement of labour and said the company had been in touch with the Government about what it wanted to see for Britain in the form of international business relations . Other areas of concern included aerospace standards and environmental regulations . `` So far the British government has been very receptive , '' Mr East added . The deal announced will see Derbybased Rolls buy the 53.1pc of ITP it does not already own , in an acquisition which will boost revenues both in parts for new engines and replacements for those already in service . Rolls will pay for the stake in the business over two years in eight equal payments . Privately owned ITP is involved in Rolls 's Trent 1000 and XWB civil engine programmes , as well as military engine programmes . ITP , which makes parts for low pressure turbines in jet engines and has experience in complex manufacturing , is responsible for about 10pc of the value of each of £10m Trent 1000 Rolls sells . Owned by Spanish operation SENER Grupo de Ingeniería , ITP is headquartered in Bilbao , Spain , and employs over 3,000 people in facilities in Spain , Mexico , India , Malta , US and the UK . In 2015 it had revenues of ( EURO ) 710m , EBITDA was ( EURO ) 116m and profit after tax of ( EURO ) 59m .
Scotland 'Our next prime minister must believe in Brexit ' ; Brexit Battle for Tory leadership
Theresa May should not be the next prime minister because she does not `` believe '' in Brexit , one of her rivals for the Tory leadership has suggested . In an interview with The Daily Telegraph , Andrea Leadsom said that the next Conservative leader must be someone who supported the Leave campaign before the referendum . Mrs Leadsom also spoke for the first time about Michael Gove 's decision to abandon his support for Boris Johnson and instead run for leader himself , describing it as a `` tragedy '' . She said that she `` agonised '' over the decision to run for leader because of her concerns about the impact it would have on her family . Mrs Leadsom , who has served as a minister in both the Treasury and the energy department , was one of the key figures in the Leave campaign . Mrs May , the Home Secretary , backed David Cameron 's Remain campaign ahead of the referendum , saying EU membership was vital for Britain 's security . The only other candidate for the leadership who backed Remain was Stephen Crabb , the Work and Pensions Secretary . Asked whether the next party leader must be a Leave supporter , Mrs Leadsom said : `` I certainly think [ so ] because I 've been absolutely closely involved and very passionate about the opportunities from Brexit . '' Although she did not refer to Mrs May directly , she added : `` I think it 's very difficult for somebody who does n't agree with that , who is reluctantly following the wishes of the people . I think it 's quite hard for them to really see the opportunities . `` I genuinely believe that if we want to make a go of it , then we need somebody who believes in it . '' Key government positions and roles in the Brexit negotiating team will have to go to people who backed the Leave campaign , Mrs Leadsom said . `` Key negotiating people would certainly need to believe that our future is much better outside of the EU . Obviously in government you need highly competent people to do the job . But certainly in actually negotiating our future arrangements with the EU , it 's got to be someone who really believes we can do it and a team who believes we can do it . '' Mrs Leadsom campaigned for two months alongside both Mr Johnson and Mr Gove , appearing with both regularly at debates and events . Asked about Mr Gove 's decision to run as leader , which has been described by allies of Mr Johnson as `` an act of betrayal '' , she said : `` I got to know Michael and Boris during the campaign and I think both of them were absolutely committed to Leave . `` And I just think it 's a real tragedy . I feel really sad about what 's happened . Particularly that Boris is n't standing . '' She added : `` I 'm really sorry about what 's happened . I do n't really understand it but I 'm really surprised and sorry about it . '' Mrs Leadsom does not rule out the possibility of either man taking a job in her administration if she wins the Tory leadership contest . `` It would be important to have key people who were able to be competent and also believe in the project , '' she said . `` But I 'm definitely not thinking that far ahead right now . '' Asked whether Britain was ready for another female prime minister , Mrs Leadson said : `` I am a big fan of seeing more women in public life . Women have a huge amount to offer . We 're not all one homogenous bunch . We 've all got different strengths and weaknesses . What 's important is to give people the choice . They need to see women and men . '' A number of Tories have privately said that a female leader is needed to `` sort out the mess '' in the party caused by prominent male colleagues . However , Mrs Leadsom said : `` I 'd never write off a whole sex . I share people 's concern about what 's gone on in the last couple of days , but I do n't deduce that men have had their day . '' Mrs Leadsom has three children - sons aged 20 and 18 , and a daughter aged 12 . When asked whether her decision to run for the leadership was difficult because of the impact it would have on her family , she replied : `` At the end of the day , family will always come first . I really , really did agonise ... it is an incredibly important and big job to take on . And so the impact on the family - I certainly discussed it with them and we thought long and hard about it , and in the end concluded that it was the right thing to do . '' Andrea Leadsom Born Aylesbury , May 13 1963 Background Brought up in Tring , Herts , by a divorced mother in a terrace house with an outside lavatory Education Tonbridge Grammar School for Girls , Kent , Warwick University ( read political science ) Family Married to Ben Leadsom . They have three children - two sons , aged 20 and 18 , and a daughter , 12 Interests Cycling , walking in the Northants countryside and spending time with her family
Boris says Brexit will end 'scandal ' of long A & E queues
MIGRANTS arriving from the continent are driving up hospital waiting times , Boris Johnson said as he claimed Britain leaving the European Union would help end the `` scandal '' of long queues for emergency care . The former London mayor said big company bosses were supporting Britain 's EU membership because migrants from the EU helped `` keep down '' wages and training bills . Mr Johnson , who is on a UK `` Brexit tour '' , said the welloff were insulated from migration . `` These people never see the impact of those big migration flows on local housing , or school places , or of course on A & E , '' he said . `` It 's a scandal ... I think that A & E waiting times are longer than they 've ever been in the history of the NHS . We have a chance to put some more money into our fantastic NHS and try to sort out that problem . '' He also refused to take back comparing the EU to Nazi Germany , despite a backlash , by saying both bodies wanted to `` unify Europe '' . Mr Johnson hit back at George Osborne 's claims that Eurosceptics were acting like conspiracy theorists by saying there was more `` credible evidence '' of the Loch Ness monster than Treasury Brexit forecasts . He said the comments were `` a bit rich '' because they came from those who warned of another world war if Britain leaves the EU . Earlier , at a pro-EU event in Stansted airport , Mr Osborne had dismissed concerns from Brexit campaigners that their high-profile critics were `` part of some global stitch-up to give misinformation to the British people '' . He said : `` The next thing we know , the Leave camp will be accusing us of faking the moon landings , kidnapping Shergar and covering up the existence of the Loch Ness monster . '' Speaking alongside Labour 's former shadow chancellor Ed Balls and exbusiness secretary Sir Vince Cable , Mr Osborne unveiled new Treasury analysis showing the UK would be £200 billion worse off 15 years after a Brexit , and miss out on `` over £200 billion of overseas investment into our country '' . Mr Osborne also brushed off claims that campaigning to remain in the EU has damaged his chances of leading the Conservative Party . He said : `` This campaign is much bigger than any one person 's career , any one person 's party - the issue is more important than any one general election . ''
Gove : We will make Britain safe after Brexit
BRITAIN 'S borders and national security laws must be immediately strengthened in the event of a Brexit , the Justice Secretary warns today . In an interview with The Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove says that better protection of the country is the most urgent priority of the Leave campaign . Mr Gove backs David Cameron to remain as Prime Minister in the event of a Brexit . But he says that the Prime Minister would have to enact new laws `` instantly '' to stop the influence of `` rogue '' European courts and allow the immediate deportation of terrorists . The immediate powers being demanded in the wake of a successful Brexit vote include freeing intelligence agencies from European law , allowing foreign criminals and terrorists to be deported without hindrance and freeing the British Armed Forces from Brussels diktats . It had been thought that the process of Britain freeing itself from Brussels control would take years , but Mr Gove says today that it should begin immediately with a series of interim emergency laws . The Leave group will today effectively begin the main campaign for the referendum with a series of high-pro-file interventions from Mr Gove and Boris Johnson . George Osborne will tomorrow give a major television interview on the EU and the Prime Minister will make a speech on Monday . In today 's interview , his most outspoken since coming out in favour of Brexit , Mr Gove also warns that Britain 's NHS and schools will not be able to cope with the further influx of immigrants that will come to the UK if the country stays in the EU . And he rules out ever standing for the leadership of the Conservative Party , saying : `` I do n't want to do it and there are people who are far better equipped than me to do it . '' He also suggests that he could be prepared to take part in a head-to-head debate with Mr Cameron before the referendum vote . Mr Gove 's decision to throw down the gauntlet to Mr Cameron over EU justice measures will raise questions about whether the Prime Minister could remain in office in the event of a Leave vote . `` We 've stressed throughout that the day after we vote to leave , nothing fundamental changes and we still have the same trading arrangements and we start a process of informal talks and negotiations with our European partners , '' Mr Gove says . `` But there are some things that we can change relatively quickly . And one of the things we can do is that we can deal with the European Court of Justice , which has become a rogue court . '' Mr Gove claims that the ECJ `` intervened to prevent Abu Hamza 's daughter-in-law being sent out of this country '' and says that it is considering a judgment on Britain 's surveillance regime in an attempt to assert `` legal control over what our intelligence agencies can and can not do '' . He says that under the new laws `` life in this country would change because Britain would be safer '' . Interview : Page 20
Pharma firms encounter overseas talent shortages as Brexit vote hits job applications
BRITISH drug companies have been struggling to attract top talent from overseas since the Brexit vote , research has revealed . The proportion of applicants from outside the UK for senior roles at pharmaceutical firms has fallen sharply from around 40pc to 15pc in the year and a half since the referendum , data from recruiter DHR International shared exclusively with The Daily Telegraph has shown . The firm , which specialises in filling executive positions , says it is already starting to find problems filling senior vacancies . Large British drug firms said DHR 's findings chimed with their experience . One insider said overseas candidates were `` turning us down for roles because of the uncertainty around Brexit '' and it remained a big concern among existing staff who had joined from abroad . Drug maker AstraZeneca said that , while it was `` in part reassured '' by the Government 's commitment to the sector since the referendum , it remained concerned . An AstraZeneca spokesman said : `` Continuing uncertainty around Brexit is impacting recruitment for skilled roles and we anticipate that some international applicants may go elsewhere until they know more about their future employment and security for their families in the UK . '' Fellow FTSE 100 giant GSK said it was `` critical '' any new immigration system would enable drug firms to `` attract the best , diverse talent in both the UK and EU '' . The Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry , which represents the £63bn life sciences sector , agreed it was `` crucial '' to the success of the industry that it could expand . Dr Sheuli Porkess , an executive director at the trade body , said : `` This issue - alongside many other critical areas that have an impact on public health in the UK and EU - must be at the top of the Brexit negotiating agenda . '' Theo de Roij , partner at DHR International , said the hiring troubles were compounded because it was difficult for UK drug firms to move their complex operations abroad . Mr de Roij added : `` When recruiting for senior positions we always cast the net as widely as possible by looking for qualified people across many geographies . However , Brexit has created uncertainty about how matters will evolve . ''
JP Morgan begins advising staff of Brexit relocations
JP MORGAN has begun telling staff whether or not they will be relocating to the European Union ahead of Brexit , a senior boss at the US investment bank has said . The firm - which employs 16,000 people in the UK - is planning to beef up its operations in Ireland , Germany and Luxembourg in preparation for what it deems the `` worst case scenario '' of a hard Brexit . Sally Dewar , international head of regulatory affairs at JP Morgan , told a House of Lords committee yesterday that the bank was `` already in execution mode '' on its Brexit contingency plans . She said discussions with European regulators were `` already well in train '' on transferring some of its infrastructure and banking licences away from the UK . She said she expected the Treasury to get less tax revenue from the firm as a result of some of its functions moving overseas . While she did not say how many staff could move , the bank has previously warned that between 1,000 and 4,000 roles could go . `` Some key people-decisions have been taken and communicated - it will flow through between now and April 2019 , '' Ms Dewar said . `` By the end of [ the first quarter of next year ] we will start to have to take decisions around informing clients , which then become more difficult to unravel . '' Julian Adams , group regulatory and government relations director at investor Prudential , also told the committee the firm was enacting its contingency plans . The group 's asset management arm M & G will begin moving some assets to Luxembourg before March 2019 , although he said the focus was on `` jobs created in Luxembourg rather than lost in London '' . The comments come despite a redoubled effort to reassure City firms that ministers will work to protect London 's status as a global financial hub through Brexit . Theresa May met JP Morgan chief executive Jamie Dimon last week , with Mr Dimon saying afterwards he had been `` grateful for better clarity '' on her Brexit priorities . 16,000 The number of people employed by JP Morgan in the UK . The bank is suggesting 1,000 to 4,000 could go
Johnson and Gove memo piles pressure on Hammond ; Minister says attacks on Hammond 'taking advantage of the Prime Minister 's weakness '
PHILIP HAMMOND came under renewed pressure over his stance on Brexit last night as Boris Johnson and Michael Gove were accused of a `` sordid '' attempt to oust him . In a letter sent to Theresa May last month , Mr Johnson and Mr Gove accuse the Chancellor of letting the EU hold Britain `` over a barrel '' by refusing to make preparations for leaving without a deal . The memo , obtained by The Mail on Sunday , says : `` We are profoundly worried that in some parts of Government the current preparations are not proceeding with anything like sufficient energy . We have heard it argued by some that we can not start preparations on the basis of 'No Deal ' because that would undermine our obligation of 'sincere cooperation ' with the EU . If taken seriously , that would leave us over a barrel in 2021 . '' It prompted a backlash from ministers loyal to the Prime Minister . One said : `` It 's a sordid little double play - they are trying to take advantage of the Prime Minister 's weakness to get rid of Hammond . '' However , an ally of Mr Johnson and Mr Gove insisted that they were simply `` trying to win the argument '' in Cabinet by any means . The ally said : `` They see themselves as guardians of Brexit . There is more riding for them on its success than anyone else in Cabinet . `` He [ Mr Hammond ] is always the problem , he is one of the main reasons why there is not enough preparation for no deal . He is so stubborn . '' It came as Michael Gove said he would support Mrs May if she decides to offer the EU extra cash in order to make a breakthrough in negotiations in a December summit . Tory Eurosceptics have warned that the party is at `` breaking point '' over the Brexit divorce bill , and Mr Johnson is understood to oppose making further commitments . However Mr Gove is understood to believe that the divorce bill is less important than ensuring that the UK gets a good Brexit deal . Asked if he would block the Prime Minister if she had to hand over extra cash to secure a deal , he replied : `` I certainly would not . I would not block the Prime Minister in doing what she believed was right . '' He told BBC One 's The Andrew Marr Show the Government is `` doing everything we can '' to secure a good deal but is making sure that whatever happens in the talks , Britain can `` make the best of them '' . `` I am not worried , but I am determined to ensure that in my own department that we have everything in place for every eventuality . '' On the same television show , Sir James Dyson said that Britain should walk away from the European Union without paying anything towards the Brexit divorce bill . The billionaire inventor described Brussels ' demands for a ( EURO ) 60billion divorce bill as `` outrageous '' , as he said that the UK should leave the EU without a deal . He told Andrew Marr : `` It is a problem with the people we are negotiating with . I think demanding billions and billions to leave is outrageous and I think demanding it before we leave is outrageous . `` I would walk away , that 's the only way to deal with them . I have been dealing with the EU for the last 25 years ... there is no way to deal with them . We have to walk away . `` If we walk away they will come back to us because they sell all of their products to us . We are in a very strong position . We should walk away and they will come to us . We are in a very , very strong position . '' Editorial Comment : Page 17
The political turmoil over Brexit is at odds with the economic reality
We are now entering one of the worst periods in the run-up to Brexit . The clock is ticking and EU negotiators are trying to ratchet up the pressure . Meanwhile , there appears to have been little solid progress with regard to the trade agreement that Theresa May has been seeking . The EU continues to press for more money upfront before it will deign to negotiate on trade . The British government should stand firm . There is nothing in the Lisbon Treaty to say that a departing country should make a large payment to the EU before starting trade talks . And there is nothing in economics justifying the payment of a large sum to the EU in return for `` access '' to the single market . What do countries as diverse as the United States and Singapore pay for their `` access '' to the single market ? The answer is precisely zero . What makes the current difficult period especially problematic is the profound weakness of the British government . At the best of times , politicians are not usually blessed with a good grasp of economics and they are liable to make bad decisions . In particular , they tend to overestimate the importance of agreements , while underestimating the importance of the impersonal forces of competition and incentive . And they are all too susceptible to the special pleading of Sir Thingummy Whatnot of Widget PLC . In keeping with this , they are currently fixated on the importance of doing `` a deal '' . On the Continent , politicians and officials tend to believe that prosperity emerges from the pens that they wield to sign various documents . Accordingly , they genuinely believe ( and some undoubtedly hope ) that without `` a deal '' the UK is sunk . They could not be further from the truth . As I have repeatedly written , the history of the EU is one of blundering economic policy . This erroneous belief about the UK 's position without a deal is yet another example . We can now add another `` ism '' - namely `` dealism '' - to the `` sizeism '' and `` proximity fetishism '' that have dominated EU economic thinking . Given the current disarray among our leaders , you could be forgiven for thinking that the UK is in a parlous state . In fact , the economy is doing pretty well . Admittedly , last week , the EU published forecasts saying that , while the eurozone 's growth rate is set to pick up , the UK 's is going to fall back . Supposedly , the UK is set to underperform the eurozone for an extended period . Well , there 's a surprise ! By contrast , although the UK will probably grow by only about 1.5pc this year , I expect growth to accelerate next year as the squeeze on consumers ' real income eases and the growth of exports picks up . This is , after all , the logic behind the Bank of England 's decision to raise interest rates . And it looks as though there are a few more rate rises to come . Although Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , only acknowledges our robust performance through gritted teeth , the fact is that when it cut interest rates in 2016 in the wake of the Brexit vote , the Bank was seriously worried that the economy would suffer a profound downturn . We learned last week that the Bank 's agents around the country are advising that the rate of growth of average earnings is going to rise next year . That is a good thing and it backs up the story of an economy on the up . Of course , over the impact of the Brexit vote the Treasury was equally amiss . Its Brexit blunder had several components . In common with many other forecasters , it used a so-called `` gravity model '' which rests on the belief that international trade is very heavily influenced by proximity . In fact , though , whatever model they used , the assumptions made by the Treasury were bound to produce a forecast in which the UK economy functioned much worse outside the EU . As we approach the Budget and the Government considers what stance to take in relation to our European partners , it is vitally important that we do n't make the same mistakes that the Bank and the Treasury made in their thinking about the impact of a vote for Brexit . Reflecting forecasts from the Office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) , in the coming Budget the Treasury will doubtless again be spreading gloom and doom . Yet - and it is difficult to put this politely - their forecasting record hardly inspires confidence , let alone blind acceptance . Indeed , tomorrow a group called Economists for Free Trade ( EFT ) , of which I am a member , will publish an alternative view of our future which includes a substantial fiscal dividend created by the economic expansion made possible by our exit from the EU , which the Chancellor Philip Hammond can spend on a mixture of debt reduction , higher government expenditure and tax cuts . I have always said that Brexit is not a magic wand . But , to mix my metaphors , nor is it a poisoned chalice . It presents a challenge and an opportunity . To meet the challenge and seize the opportunity the UK must embrace competition and free trade . The notion that the Chancellor is boxed in by the gloomy post-Brexit economic prospects is a delusion . Exactly how things turn out depends a good deal on what the Chancellor does . So he absolutely should not use supposed Brexit constraints as an excuse for doing nothing . Largely because of current political turmoil , I do not expect the UK to have a comfortable ride over the coming months . Indeed , things may well get very bumpy . Yet , if only the Government could get enough of a grip to secure a proper escape from this ill-fated Union , I am convinced that in years to come people will look back upon this troubled time and wonder why so many people ever doubted that it was right to leave . Roger Bootle is chairman of Capital Economics . His latest book , Making a Success of Brexit and Reforming the EU , is published by Nicholas Brealey . roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com 'You could be forgiven for thinking that the UK is in a parlous state . In fact , the economy is doing pretty well '
Stop giving mixed messages on Brexit BODY : In precisely one week , Theresa May will travel to the European Council summit in Brussels , where it will be decided whether `` sufficient progress '' has been made in Brexit talks to allow both sides to move on to discussing a future trade deal . This is already problematic enough , for it is clear that the very arbiters of this `` progress '' ( the EU 's leaders ) are themselves the cause of the talks stalling . As Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , made clear yesterday before the Commons Treasury select committee , Britain has `` made the running '' in negotiations . `` People in this country , '' he suggested , `` are finding it increasingly difficult to understand why we ca n't start talking about the substance of our future relationship . '' He noted , rightly , that the result of any stalling was `` a shared problem '' , as a `` no deal '' scenario would have a significant impact on Continental exporters , too . Why , then , are the leaders of France and Germany behaving so mulishly , so irrationally ? Perhaps the answer can be found closer to home . Here , in the space of 24 hours , the Deputy Prime Minister , Damian Green , declared that he would vote Remain if the referendum were held today , Mr Hammond insisted that he will not yet allocate money for the `` no deal '' scenario he suggests is increasingly likely , and Theresa May herself , in an uncomfortable radio interview , refused to say whether she would now vote for Brexit , having supported Remain last June . So some 16 months after the referendum , Britain 's three most senior political figures either publicly disavow Brexit , or appear not to have decided what they want to do with it . Faced with this , the apparently irrational strategy of Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron begins to make sense . When your opponent appears in disarray , you do not let up the attack . Instead , you press for maximum advantage . In Berlin and Paris , Brexit negotiators look out across the Channel and think they see a trinity of timidity . They must be proved wrong . One way forward may be for the Prime Minister to take some reinforcements to next week 's crucial summit . David Cameron happily faced the sceptical faces of European leaders bolstered by the wisdom of William Hague or the tactical mischief of George Osborne . Why should the Prime Minister not take a willing ally of her own , one who has no problems advocating Brexit and the benefits it can bring this country ? After all , it 's not unusual for foreign secretaries to attend foreign summits .
EU 's chief exit negotiator on £72,000 more than UK 's Davis
THE European Union 's chief Brexit negotiator is earning up to £72,000 a year more than David Davis , his UK counterpart , The Daily Telegraph has learnt , sparking anger among politicians . Michel Barnier is employed as an official by the European Commission . He has the status of director general in the EU 's civil service , which qualifies for an `` AD15-AD16 '' pay grade of between ( EURO ) 15,994.36 and ( EURO ) 19,587.99 ( about £18,000 ) a month . The top wage , which Mr Barnier , as a former commission vice-president , would be expected to earn , translates to a gross salary of £213,772.80 a year . As a Cabinet minister , Mr Davis earns £141,505 a year , just under £12,000 a month and £72,267.80 less than Mr Barnier . Mr Barnier 's wages also dwarf the £149,440 paid to Theresa May . Unlike Mr Davis , Mr Barnier is not elected but appointed . The revelations sparked concern as the EU and UK began tense talks over the so-called `` Brexit bill '' in Brussels yesterday . The European Commission would not confirm Mr Barnier 's exact salary , stating privacy concerns , only his pay grade . If Mr Barnier was still a commission vice-president he would be paid slightly more than now , ( EURO ) 22,122.10 a month . Mr Davis and Mr Barnier met on Monday in Brussels for a press conference to begin four days of Brexit negotiations . Mr Barnier heaped pressure on Britain to publish a position paper on the `` Brexit bill '' and warned the EU would not talk trade until it did so . His comments were branded `` ill-judged and unhelpful '' by British sources . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , said : `` Unless our government calls the Brexit bill bluff , the British taxpayer will be subsidising these ridiculously bloated wages for years to come . The situation is simply unacceptable . '' Meanwhile , more than 70 per cent of voters find a Brexit `` exit bill '' of £30billion or more unacceptable , a poll says . The survey of 1,972 adults by ICM Unlimited found that while 41 per cent thought an exit fee of up to £10billion `` as a one-off or in instalments , as the UK 's contribution to spending commitments made by the EU when the UK was a member '' was acceptable , 65 per cent felt £20billion was unacceptable , rising to 72 per cent for £30billion and 75 per cent for £40billion . £213,772.80 The annual gross salary earned by Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator . David Davis 's annual pay is £141,505
Left 's election illusion ; established 1855 BODY : It turns out the general election was a Brexit contest after all . Theresa May called the poll to strengthen her hand in the negotiations with the EU , yet the subject itself featured little in the campaign . And the Lib Dems , the only party committed to staying in the EU , were trounced , suggesting the 16 million or so Remain supporters at the referendum reverted to traditional voting patterns . But now the British Election Study has found that Brexit was far and away the issue uppermost in the minds of voters on June 8 . When asked to identify their biggest concern , one in three said Brexit or the EU , compared to fewer than one in 10 who mentioned the NHS . What seems to have happened is that voters who favour a `` soft '' Brexit but who would not normally support Labour thought Jeremy Corbyn was more likely to deliver it than Theresa May . The Tories won a higher percentage of the vote than at any election for 30 years , picking up a majority of the collapsed Ukip support . But Labour , too , increased its vote by 10 per cent . By denying the Conservatives a majority and effectively ending the prospect of a `` hard '' Brexit , the Remainers who voted Labour seem to have got their way - at least in influencing how we leave , if not whether . Yet they may be none the wiser now about Labour 's Brexit intentions , after a succession of contradictory statements from the party leadership about future membership of the single market and the customs union . Mr Corbyn will also have to square this with those Labour voters who want a crackdown on immigration . Above all , it is clear the Left 's triumphalist belief that the election reflected a national move towards the socialist agenda offered by Mr Corbyn is a mirage .
Hard Brexit will protect this liberal nation ; Britain has led the charge on LGBT and women 's rights , not an essentially conservative Europe
It has become fashionable among some of the young and the habitués of Islington wine bars to convince themselves that enthusiasts for Brexit ( with the exception , perhaps , of Jeremy Corbyn ) are both illiberal and reactionary . I was proud to be included recently in a list of only 12 MPs of all parties in the House of Commons who voted positively in seven crucial votes on LGBT issues and women 's rights , including those on abortion . Nobody doubts my socially liberal credentials . But I do believe in Brexit too , and a solid one at that - which means having to leave the Single Market . This , sadly , conflicts with my heroine , the Leader of the Scottish Conservatives , Ruth Davidson . Her triumph in Scotland and her stance on LGBT and other progressive issues resonate with my own beliefs and those of modern Britain . Yet her stated desire for a 'soft ' watered-down Brexit reflects the myth that has been constructed by some Remainers that social liberalism , which has flourished in this country , is somehow antithetical to leaving the EU . Far from it . The arguments against remaining part of the EU were based on sovereignty , economics and border control . The idea that leaving a union of 28 European nations , many of whom are far less progressive than the UK , will somehow undo the social progress of the last few decades is preposterous . Brexit will instead embolden our liberal traditions by giving our courts the freedom to uphold these values . Ms Davidson has been a passionate advocate for social liberalism and has criticised the Democratic Unionist Party , with whom Conservatives are entering a partnership , for their traditional and antediluvian values . She is right to do so , but it is equally fair to observe that we have cooperated with the DUP over the last seven years , and they in no way hindered David Cameron and his legalisation of same-sex marriage . Now Ruth is one of the Conservative Party 's biggest assets . But I could not disagree with her more when she pushes for a soft Brexit , which would require Britain to stay in the Single Market . Britain is a naturally liberal country . Our continued membership of the failing EU risks stoking a rebellion , not just against the established economic order of free markets , but also against social liberalism . Progressive rights such as gay marriage , abortion and maternity leave have come to be wrapped up with the European project . This could not be further from the truth . Britain was way ahead of the European curve when it introduced same-sex marriage in 2014 . Even today , only 11 of the EU 's 28 member states allow gay marriage . It is a complete misunderstanding of European politics to argue that the EU brought same-sex marriage and women 's rights to the UK . Instead , we introduced these reforms despite the traditional , conservative , and often deeply religious , views of the majority in the European Union . By leaving the EU and retaining our cherished liberalism , we are demonstrating that these values stem not from officials in Brussels , but rather from the British people themselves . Single Market membership or not , tolerant liberalism is in the very DNA of our country - it is not something granted to us by politicians and can not be taken away easily . For I believe Brexit , like pregnancy , is binary : either we have it or we do not . If we remain in the Single Market , the supreme court will remain in Strasbourg not London , Brussels will still control our immigration policy , and we will not be free to negotiate our own trade agreements . This is not what the British people voted for in the referendum , and this would immediately reignite divisions in the Conservative Party . It would also revive Ukip , whose social views are certainly not at all in line with modern Britain and , in some cases , are virulently anti-gay . The social liberalism that underpins this country is not going anywhere , with or without Brexit . Indeed , a truly independent judiciary - free of the European Court of Justice in Strasbourg - is part of our great liberal tradition and has defended us from fascism while continental Europe was riven apart by it . If Brexit is weakened , only bigots will benefit and our nation 's long history of tolerance will be undermined . Follow Michael Fabricant on Twitter @ Mike_Fabricant ; read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
EY report says post-Brexit finance sector will do fine
THE UK 's financial services sector will be just fine after Brexit , if the string of surveys published in the days before the Government triggers Article 50 are to be believed . The accounting giant EY and the law firm Herbert Smith Freehills have sent out reassuring reports in the days leading up to the UK 's official EU exit date on March 29 , both suggesting the City will cope well in the aftermath of Brexit despite it being on the worry lists of most banks . The economic forecasting group EY Item Club said personal and business lending growth will slow this year and next but will pick up again in 2019 , with lending to businesses expected to climb 6pc from 2016 to £430bn in 2020 . Total assets in the banking sector will rise 4.2pc from 2016 to £7.3bn , it said ; the wealth and asset management sector is predicted to grow despite the slowing economy , with assets under management expected to climb 12pc to £1.2 trillion in 2020 . Confident consumers in particular are expected to borrow an extra £7bn this year , and £16bn more by 2020 . `` This is a key time for the UK 's financial services industry , just days from the triggering of Article 50 , '' said Omar Ali , EY 's UK financial services managing partner . `` Brexit and wider geopolitics have injected a level of uncertainty and volatility we have not seen for some years , but the fundamentals of the UK financial services industry remain strong . '' Herbert Smith Freehills published an equally upbeat report based on interviews with finance executives at 70 listed corporates during February and March . The law firm found that nine out of 10 respondents did not think their spending plans would change as a result of Brexit , with the same number saying that the banks they use to raise capital have not suggested that treasury products will change as a result of Brexit . The reports come after a survey from the CBI and PwC showing that financial services firms are increasingly confident in the economic outlook for their industry , for the first time since 2015 . £430bn Prediction for total UK business lending in the UK in 2020 made by the economic forecasting group EY Item Club
Ashtead retreats from Brexit fears as profits climb 28pc in quarter
ASHTEAD 'S chief executive Geoff Drabble admitted his fears about the Brexit vote had subsidised yesterday as the equipment hire group reported a 28pc rise in its third-quarter profits . `` It 's not time to get out the bunting and have a tea party yet , but things are not as bad as we thought , '' Mr Drabble said of the effect the referendum has had on the UK construction industry . Mr Drabble , who has led the FTSE 100 company for a decade , said he had feared the worst after the Brexit vote , but most of his worries had been unfounded . `` I 'm still watchful , and there is a chance of drag , '' he said . `` But things have not dried up to the extent I thought . `` The real acid test for the industry was whether Brexit fears would be so great that projects scheduled to start this spring would n't . They did start , and the question now is whether there is enough new stuff in the pipeline for 2018 . It 's early , but I 'm hearing slightly warmer views than previously expressed . '' He made the comments as Ashtead reported a 31pc rise in sales in the third quarter to £804.5m , and pre-tax profits of £171.2m , up 28pc on the same period a year earlier . The quarterly figures to the end of January benefited from the weak pound . Excluding exchange rate movements , sales increased 13pc , while profits were 8pc higher . Ashtead 's US and UK divisions performed strongly , underpinned by continuing growth in the equipment hire sector . Equipment hire took off in the aftermath of the financial crisis , as firms looked to unburden their balance sheets . Mr Drabble said companies have now become comfortable with renting , while the industry itself has matured and become more reliable . `` It 's a virtuous cycle , the more we invest and the bigger we get , the more people feel they can rely on renting and do n't need to own , '' he said . Mr Drabble sees big potential in Ashtead 's North America market , which is five times bigger than the UK , very fragmented and with a lower prevalence of equipment hire . If the White House makes progress with any of its pledges to cut corporation tax , invest in infrastructure and boost military spending , Ashtead stands to benefit . The company expects sales growth in the double digits next year and to open 60 new locations , with the majority in the US . Ashtead shares , which have gained 91pc in the past year , closed down 2pc at £17.10 yesterday . Meanwhile , shares in Aggreko tumbled 12.9pc to 921p yesterday after the company said profits this financial year would be lower than last year , thanks to pricing issues in Argentina . Aggreko , which hires out power equipment to large energy users , has been hurt by a slowdown in oil and gas markets and had difficulty negotiating contracts in South America . Sales in the year to the end of December fell 3pc to £1.52bn , while pretax profits slumped by nearly a quarter to £172m . It booked a £30m impairment charge related to a slowdown in the North American oil and gas sector , as well as £19m in exceptional costs related to restructuring . Ben Marlow : Page 2
Scotland May hints at Single Market exit as she denies Brexit muddle
THERESA MAY has indicated that Britain will leave the Single Market to control immigration after Brexit and build a `` really good ambitious trade deal '' with the EU . In her first interview of 2017 , the Prime Minister told Sky News 's Sophy Ridge on Sunday : `` Often people talk in terms as if somehow we are leaving the EU but we still want to kind of keep bits of membership of the EU . We are leaving . So the question is what is the right relationship for the UK to have with the European Union when we are outside ? `` We will be able to have control of our borders , control of our laws . `` This is what people were voting for on June 23 . `` But of course we still want the best possible deal for us , companies to be able to trade , UK companies to be able to trade in and operate within the European Union and also European companies to be able to trade with the UK and operate within the UK . '' Mrs May will give more detail about her vision for Brexit in a speech which could be as early as next week , before triggering Article 50 and formally beginning negotiations by March 31 . Her comments follow last week 's resignation of Sir Ivan Rogers , Britain 's former EU ambassador , who urged his fellow civil servants to challenge `` illfounded arguments and muddled thinking '' about Brexit . Yesterday , it emerged that Sir Ivan secretly met David Cameron before Christmas to warn him that Britain risked a `` disorderly '' exit from the EU . He warned Mrs May it was unlikely that the EU would agree a new trading arrangement within the two years of the Article 50 exit talks and has told Downing Street that Britain could crash out of the EU without any deal at all . Mrs May rejected Sir Ivan 's analysis , saying : `` Our thinking on this is not muddled at all . Yes we have been taking our time . It was important for us to take our time and look at the issues . `` It 's wrong to look at this as just a binary issue as to either you have control of immigration or you have a good trade deal . '' Meanwhile , Michael Gove , a prominent Eurosceptic , said that Britain needed to pull out of both the Single Market and the Customs Union . Writing on the BrexitCentral website , the former justice secretary , said : `` We need to deliver a full Brexit , not settle for fake Brexit . Once Article 50 is triggered , we should be very clear about our simple , straightforward , generous approach to leaving . `` We do n't want or need to be in the single market - outside we can control our own borders , laws and taxes . Inside we 're trapped . `` We do n't want to be bound by being members of the customs union . Outside we can negotiate new trade deals with emerging economies . Inside we 're trapped . ''
We can strike post-Brexit trade deals now ; It is plain wrong to assume the UK must wait to leave the EU before lining up new business partners
Britain is leaving the EU . One of the claimed advantages of doing so is that we will find it easier to negotiate new trade agreements with non-EU countries , such as the US , Japan or Australia , because we will not need to satisfy the interests of 28 separate member states to get a deal . When can we start to take advantage of this ? Well , obviously no new trade agreement could come into force until after Brexit . But could we negotiate and ratify new deals so they started to apply on the day we leave the EU ? Philip Hammond seems to think not . Returning from China in July , the Chancellor said the informal discussions about investment he had with his Chinese colleagues were `` about as far as we can go while we are members of the European Union '' . We even seem to be advising our potential trading partners of the same view . According to Steven Ciobo , the Australian trade minister , `` the UK is not able to negotiate or sign an agreement prior to a formal exit of the EU '' . New Zealand 's trade minister Todd McClay said something similar recently : `` We have signalled our interest in a free trade agreement with [ the UK ] when they are in a position to negotiate one independently of the European Union . '' It matters very much whether this is right , for two reasons . First , if the UK can not even commence trade negotiations with other countries until after it leaves the EU , that means ( given such negotiations take at least a few years to conclude and ratify ) that after it leaves , Britain will have no trade agreements other than its post-Brexit EU deal . Secondly , trade negotiations tend to turn out better for whichever country has stronger `` outside options '' , so the UK 's deal with the EU is likely to be better for us if we have credible deals with non-EU countries in the pipeline . Fortunately , the answer is that Hammond , Ciobo and the rest are wrong . They are wrong legally , in terms of what the treaties demand . And they are wrong in terms of pragmatic politics . Let 's see why . The main bar to the UK negotiating its own pre-Brexit agreements with non-EU countries is that , while the UK is a member of the EU , it has to stick to the rules and let the EU negotiate its trade deals . But the EU 's pre-eminence in trade negotiations flows from treaties giving it competence over the `` common commercial policy '' of member states . Of course , the UK 's post-Brexit trade policy is not part of the common commercial policy of the EU . So the EU has no more competence over it than it does over the trade policy of Brazil or Russia . Moreover , it is a general principle that there can not be a competence when there is not a power . Since the EU does not have the power to make new trade deals for the UK after Brexit , it can not claim competence over the making of them . Even if striking our own deals was not narrowly legal under the treaties , the UK is withdrawing from them , and repealing the European Communities Act 1972 , which is the mechanism by which they have legal effect in the UK . Once we have done that , whether we abide by the treaties in every detail is a matter of politeness and realpolitik , not law . Why would we want to accept the principle that we should have no post-Brexit trade deals ? It should be obvious that this is unacceptable and we shall not accept it . Indeed , the 27 member states who will remain in the EU after we leave rightly expect that the UK will not use its current , notional voting rights to interfere with EU plans that will come into effect only after the UK leaves the EU . For example , a few days ago German defence minister Ursula von der Leyen warned the UK against interfering with plans for an EU army . Quite right . Why should we get to stop the EU doing things that will come into effect after we leave ? The obvious pragmatic quid pro quo is that the EU can not expect to stop the UK doing our deals for after we leave . The UK should not accept that we can not negotiate such agreements until after we have left the EU . We can and should negotiate and ratify these deals , starting now . Until we get that straight in our own minds , we will never make the best of the opportunities such deals will offer . Andrew Lilico is chairman of the consultancy Europe Economics READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Every EU migrant could stay after Brexit ; All 3.6 million will have residency rights or be given amnesty by 2019 , says Home Office
ALL EU nationals currently living in Britain will be allowed to stay following Brexit , after the Home Office discovered that five in six could not legally be deported . There are around 3.6 million EU citizens living in the UK , more than 80 per cent of whom will have permanent residency rights by the time Britain leaves the union in early 2019 , official research has concluded . The remainder - more than 600,000 people - will be offered an amnesty , with several Cabinet ministers telling The Daily Telegraph that those citizens will be offered the right to stay permanently , in a policy that may prove controversial . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , has refused to guarantee the rights of EU citizens currently living in the UK , saying she believes that the Government must not `` reveal its hand '' ahead of Brexit negotiations , which will begin when she triggers Article 50 next year . Once an EU citizen has been in the UK for more than five years , they are given permanent residency rights . Home Office research has concluded that when Britain leaves the EU , just over 80 per cent of EU citizens in the UK will qualify for residency , sources said . `` The remaining people will , of course , be allowed to stay in the UK , '' a senior source said . `` That 's a given . We just need to work out exactly how we do it . '' Another Cabinet source said : `` They will be allowed to remain in Britain . But it is important that reciprocal agreements are made with the EU to ensure that British people abroad get the same rights . '' Although Cabinet ministers are privately giving assurances that they will all be allowed to stay in the country after Brexit , the Home Office is still working on a way to identify the exact number of Europeans living in the UK and establish how long they have been here . The amnesty plan is in its infancy and will raise fears that EU migrants could begin travelling to the UK in large numbers before Brexit . Some officials believe the Government will , therefore , have to announce a cut-off date for new arrivals after which the amnesty would not apply . The health department is also conducting a major study on arrangements with Spain to allow British expats to get free medical treatment abroad . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , was criticised this week after saying that the status of EU nationals living in Britain is `` one of our main cards '' in the Brexit negotiations and can not be guaranteed . He said : `` The Prime Minister has made it very clear - we would like to be able to give a reassurance to EU nationals in the United Kingdom , but that depends on reciprocation by other countries . `` I think we would all hope that what we get is a totally open , reciprocal agreement where UK citizens in other European countries are free and welcome to stay there , as would those who have already settled in the UK . `` But again , as the Prime Minister said , to give that away before we get into the negotiation would be to hand over one of our main cards in that negotiation and does n't necessarily make sense at this point . '' As many as 1.6 million EU citizens resident in the UK come from the socalled EU14 , those nations that were part of the EU before 2004 , followed by 1.5 million from the eight Eastern European nations that joined 12 years ago . Jean-Claude Juncker : Page 18 Charles Moore : Page 20 'The remaining people will be allowed to stay in the UK . We just need to work out exactly how we do it '
MPs must not thwart Brexit , since 544 of them voted for the referendum ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - You note in your leading article ( August 27 ) that `` No 10 has decided that Parliament should not be permitted to stop the triggering of Article 50 , and thus block Brexit '' . But whatever the Prime Minister - or indeed the Leader of the Opposition - might wish , Parliament is sovereign in our representative democracy , so a vote of no confidence in the Government over Article 50 could , at the very least , delay the process by triggering a general election . I would have some sympathy with any MP who felt , in all conscience , that leaving the EU was not in the interests of the country , or Europe as a whole , and voted accordingly . However , I doubt that there would be many MPs prepared to vote this way , given that the vast majority ( 544-53 ) voted for the referendum on June 9 2015 , and consequently `` the die is cast '' . Nigel Currie Bristol SIR - It seems that many of the 544 MPs who voted for an EU referendum , now seek to put barriers in the way of Brexit . They show the same contempt for democracy as the EU President , who said of the French referendum : `` If it 's a Yes , we will say 'On we go ' , and if it 's a No , we will say 'We continue ' . '' Those MPs should surely make way for others who are ready to uphold the will of the people . Such MPs in areas with the highest pro-Brexit votes should be the first to stand down . Roger J Arthur Pulborough , West Sussex SIR - As a lifelong Tory voter I can not believe that Theresa May will proceed with Brexit without the agreement of Parliament , against the wishes of the majority of elected MPs . We may be frustrated by Brussels and its bureaucracy , but such a course can be seen as an even greater threat to our democracy . Graham King Sutton Coldfield SIR - It appears that Theresa May has received advice from government lawyers that she can invoke Article 50 under the royal prerogative . Given the recent history of `` advice '' to PMs , and her new-found belief in popular democracy that sidelines Parliament , she should publish this advice , with information on who provided it and what question was asked , in order that hoi polloi ( such as me ) can understand the basis for this monumental step . Nigel Bowker Banchory , Aberdeenshire SIR - On June 23 , the people spoke , indicating clearly they wanted out of the EU . Can we therefore ask MPs to get on with it ? B E Norton Royal Wootton Bassett , Wiltshire SIR - What is disturbing about Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , is that she has shown no recognition of ( let alone remorse for ) having effectively driven Britain out of Europe by her insane immigration policy . Dr Andrew Norman Poole , Dorset
Rural grants paralysed by second-guessing of Brexit by British officials ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - I am secretary of a charity that runs Pewsey Heritage Centre , a little village museum in Wiltshire . We wanted to convert a building into a village research centre and an education facility for local schools , using local voluntary labour . In March we initiated an application for a grant of £7,500 from the Leader programme , a rural funding initiative funded by the European Union , controlled by Defra , monitored by the Rural Payments Agency and staffed by Wiltshire council . Hoops were successfully jumped through , reams of paper forms filled in , and the grant application was submitted to the reviewing board at their meeting of June 24 . ( The date is significant . ) We understand that decisions were made and grant funding may or may not have been awarded . But we have now been told that an embargo has been put on the results by the Rural Payments Agency , shellshocked by the Brexit decision , and unsure whether the EU funding to Britain will be available . I was under the impression that until Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty was invoked , relations between Britain and the rest of the EU should continue as they are . They obviously are not . Based on the performance of the Rural Payments Agency , it is not European bureaucracy that we should be afraid of in any Brexit negotiations , it is our own dear Civil Service . Frightened of its own shadow , it seems completely unable to make constructive and beneficial decisions . May the Lord help our negotiators . Michael J A Asbury Pewsey , Wiltshire SIR - The glee with which Nick Clegg warns that the appointment of Michel Barnier to represent the European Commission at Brexit talks will `` set alarm bells ringing across the City '' ( report , July 28 ) is truly nauseating . The former deputy prime minister should accept that he lost the argument and the referendum vote , and he should start sticking up for Britain rather than behaving like a spoilt child . Michael Stanford London SE23 SIR - We are inundated with ministers and business leaders hiding behind the Brexit vote as an opportunity to divest themselves of their bad news . Bruce Pearson Godalming , Surrey SIR - Jeremy Smith ( Letters , July 28 ) asks that , as a goal of Brexit , inappropriate EU laws should be removed . Here are three I can think of . 1 ) Allow the use of sodium chlorate as a weedkiller again . It lingers longer than the kind approved by Brussels . 2 ) Change signs that indicate the steepness of hills back to 1 in 8 or 1 in 12 . I 've no idea what 12 per cent or 8 per cent look like . 3 ) Bring back filament lamps . Cheap and instant light , and a bonus of warmth on cold days . Andrew Baxter Banbury , Oxfordshire
Momentum swing for Brexit gives market the jitters
A POTENT cocktail of Brexit fears , weak factory data from China and a slide in commodity prices , injected a fresh bout of jitters into London 's benchmark index on the first day of the new month . In just two days , more than £20bn has been wiped off the value of Britain 's biggest companies as investors fled to the sidelines following Brexit polls which showed the Leave camp is gaining momentum in the EU referendum debate . Meanwhile , the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development slashed its view on UK growth from 2.1pc to 1.7pc and warned on Brexit risks . Mike van Dulken , of Accendo Markets , said the `` revival of geopolitical risk and a raft of mixed data from across the globe '' was to blame for the shaky start to June . `` A more prominent bearish sentiment is now overpowering the hitherto bullish dominance that had ushered us to recent highs , '' added Mr van Dulken . As a result , the FTSE 100 dropped 38.86 points , or 0.62pc , to 6,191.93 . Mining stocks were among the biggest casualties on the blue-chip index , as iron ore futures in China tanked to a three-month low amid weaker demand and copper skidded to a one-week low , of $ 4,577.50-a-tonne , as concerns about the health of the world 's second largest economy resurfaced . Meanwhile , oil prices swung between gains and losses as the market placed bets on whether or not Opec would consider a new oil output ceiling at its meeting in Vienna today . However , some analysts in the City suggested that the focus of the meeting is likely to be on defending market share rather than curbing production . Such volatility added to the mining sector 's woes , dragging shares in Rio Tinto down 3.8pc to £18.68 , Antofagasta 3.1pc lower to 415.7p , BHP Billiton off by 1.9pc to 807.1p and Glencore 1.7pc in the red at 128.9p . Away from commodity-related stocks , housebuilders also began the month on shaky foundations as fears of a UK exit from the European Union and slowing house price growth caused industry confidence to waver . According to the latest Nationwide survey , house prices rose by slowerthan-forecast rate , at 0.2pc in May . In its wake , shares in Barratt Development shed 3.1pc to 573½p , Berkeley Group tumbled 2.9pc to £31.80 , Bellway slid 3.2pc to £26.45 , Galliford Try dropped 3.2pc to £13.43 and Persimmon fell 3pc to £20.38 . Even Telford Homes was feeling the pain despite posting a record revenues and profits for the 12 months to the end of March . Revenue rose 42pc to £246m and pre-tax profits grew by 28pc to £32.2m . Shares finished 1.4pc lower at 366p . However , investors proved to be more optimistic when it came to the brick industry . Citigroup and Deutsche Bank began covering brick producer Forterra with `` buy '' ratings , following its recent admission to London 's main market two months ago , prompting shares to rise 3.2pc to 179.3p . Citigroup analyst Ami Galla thinks Forterra is `` well placed to benefit from the positive trends in the UK housing market '' , given its leading position in bricks and blocks . Meanwhile , Deutsche Bank reckons the British brick industry will `` attract increasing investor interest '' following the public listing of the two largest players , Forterra and Ibstock . The bank has forecast a steady increase in new home volumes in the coming years to address the country 's mounting housing deficit . As a result , it believes Forterra is `` too cheap to ignore '' . Elsewhere , Wolseley suffered its worst day in eight months after it said like-for-like revenue growth slowed from 2.8pc to 1pc in the third quarter . The FTSE 100 heating and plumbing products supplier plunged 5.5pc to £38.28 . On the other side , the tumultuous trading session prompted investors to pile into safe-haven stocks . Gold miners Fresnillo and Randgold Resources made gains of 2.3pc and 0.8pc , respectively . Precious metals miner Centamin also climbed 2.6pc to 98.9p . The FTSE 250 group also announced that its chairman Josef el-Raghy offloaded almost 12.6m shares at 0.95p a piece . Unilever edged up 1pc to £31.78 after it revealed it would sell its AdeS soy-based beverage unit for $ 575m . Pharma stock Shire was also among the top performers following a bullish note from Credit Suisse . The investment bank reiterated its `` outperform '' rating ahead of its acquisition of Baxalta , which is expected to close tomorrow . The FTSE 100 stock enjoyed a boost of 2.8pc to £43.80 . Meanwhile , supermarkets had a mixed trading session on the back of industry data from Kantar Worldpanel , which showed sales at Sainsbury 's slipped 1.2pc in the 12 weeks to May 24 , compared with a 1pc drop at Tesco . In its wake , shares in Sainsbury 's posted a loss of 4.3pc to 256.9p , while Tesco bounced 1.1pc to 167p . Staying with retail , Halfords plummeted 7.3pc to 406.9p after it cautioned that its pre-tax profits would be flat due to adverse foreign exchange rate movements . However , excluding the FX impact , analysts at UBS said the retailer enjoyed a small earnings beat . On the mid-cap index , UBM eked out a gain of 0.3pc to 590½p following an announcement that it had acquired Content Marketing Institute for $ 17.6m . Finally , as widely anticipated , Inmarsat was booted out of the FTSE 100 in the latest quarterly shake up of index constituents to make way for Hikma Pharmaceuticals .
Cameron 's cowardice over EU television debates is an insult to voters ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - The Prime Minister 's refusal to debate Brexit with senior figures from the official Leave campaign ( report , May 12 ) is not only cowardly but disrespectful of the British people . His excuse - that he does n't want `` blue on blue '' attacks - would have carried more weight had he not been the first to attack Cabinet members backing Leave . Phil Coutie Exeter , Devon SIR - David Cameron has claimed that I want to `` obliterate '' manufacturing . This is an absurd misrepresentation . What I have said is that Brexit would optimise free trade by abolishing the EU 's protective trade barriers . Over time , the economy would shift from highly protected sectors towards previously unprotected ones . This would imply more competition for manufacturing from low-wage countries . It is already the case that , since 1970 , UK manufacturing has fallen from 35 per cent of employment to 8 per cent . However , the substantial part of UK manufacturing that is specialist and hi-tech in nature would remain and flourish after Brexit . Outside the EU , the UK would attract more investment in these areas . Other parts of industry could be protected , using a fraction of our net contribution to the EU budget . This is what happens in the United States - there is a 267 per cent duty on steel . After Brexit , voters would have this choice ; inside the EU they pay higher prices for a regime that is damaging to their interests . Professor Patrick Minford Co-chairman , Economists for Brexit Cardiff SIR - Maj Gen Julian Thompson ( Comment , May 12 ) is wrong to assert that `` the common [ EU ] foreign and security policy is coming whatever ministers say '' . Certainly , the language of the 1992 Maastricht Treaty - which speaks of an `` eventual framing of a common defence policy , which might lead in time to a common defence '' - should never have been let through by the UK . As political director of the Foreign Office at the time , I advised strongly against it - and was overruled . However , the later Lisbon Treaty ( 2007 ) , which forms the constitutional base for the EU , states clearly that moves to a common defence would require a unanimous decision by the European Council , as well as approval by all member states through their own constitutional procedures . John Weston Richmond , Surrey SIR - Sir Nicholas Soames ( Letters , May 12 ) says we will never join an EU army . Margaret Thatcher negotiated a rebate . Tony Blair , wishing to be communautaire , subsequently gave much of it away . Can Sir Nicholas ensure that a future government will not change our army commitment ? I think not , unless we are not a member of the EU . G P Brown Norwich
Free movement 'ends on day of Brexit '
THERESA MAY has promised that freedom of movement for EU citizens coming to Britain will end on the day Britain leaves the EU in March 2019 . Brussels has insisted free movement must continue to the last day of any transition period , meaning EU citizens would be free to settle in Britain until at least the end of 2020 . But the Prime Minister made it clear that changing the rules on migration as soon as Britain leaves the EU is a must for her in negotiations over the transition period , which begin next week . Speaking in China on the first day of a three-day trade visit , she said people `` did not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU '' . She said that the issue of citizens ' rights had been agreed in December when the EU agreed to move on to trade talks after `` sufficient progress '' had been reached in phase one of talks . Last night there was a further leak of the report to Buzzfeed , which claimed that the cost to the economy from cutting migration from the EU would be significantly greater than the benefits brought by a US trade deal . However Robin Walker , a Brexit minister , said that the gloomy report could be redacted and that the study would only be made available to MPs on a confidential basis . It came as Downing Street rebuked Philip Lee , a junior justice minister , for suggesting that the study could put the legitimacy of Brexit in question . He said : `` If these figures turn out to be anywhere near right , there would be a serious question over whether a government could legitimately lead a country along a path that the evidence and rational consideration indicate would be damaging . '' A Downing Street spokesman said that Mr Lee had been told by the Chief Whip to keep his views private in future . Earlier this week , Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , said Britain must accept free movement as part of a status quo implementation period . Eurosceptics raged against the EU 's position , saying Brussels wanted to delay Brexit . Mrs May said : `` When we agreed the citizens ' rights deal in December , we did so on the basis that people who had come to the UK when we were a member of the EU had certain expectations . `` They made a life choice and it was right that we made an agreement that ensured they could continue their life in the way they had wanted to . For those who come after March 2019 that will be different because they will be coming to a UK that they know will be outside the EU . '' Brexiteers in the Conservative Party fear a transition deal that would turn Britain into a `` vassal state '' by forcing the UK to accept new EU rules and regulations with no power to block them . The Prime Minister said that business welcomed the transition period because it gives them stability at the point when Britain leaves the EU . She also denied that British officials were `` secretly '' negotiating for a threeyear implementation period , saying : `` We are not talking about something that is going to go on and on . '' Mrs May yesterday repeatedly refused to say she believed that Gavin Williamson , the Defence Secretary , had told the truth about his departure from a previous job after an office fling . Mr Williamson has come under pressure to clarify his account of the end of his career at fireplace manufacturer Elgin & Hall after former colleagues disputed his version of events . The minister told a newspaper he decided he could no longer work at the company because it would mean he came into daily contact with the married woman with whom he had a romance while he , too , was married . Allister Heath : Page 18 Nick Timothy : Page 19 'The British people did not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU '
China is Mrs May 's chance to shine ; established 1855 BODY : Embattled prime ministers have often sought refuge overseas , and Theresa May will doubtless enjoy the break from domestic turmoil as she begins a three-day visit to China today . But this trip also offers her the chance to give what her critics say is currently lacking - a positive exposition of the UK 's post-Brexit future . Where better to do so than in China , whose rapid growth exemplifies how the world 's centre of economic gravity has shifted away from Europe ? Some 90 per cent of future global growth will be outside the EU bloc . The opportunities for the UK in such a world are legion , not that this is apparent from the juvenile political hoopla surrounding a leaked , half-baked Treasury forecast of what the post-Brexit economy might look like in 15 years ' time . Since the number-crunchers rarely get any predictions right for one year ahead , let alone 15 , this report can hardly be taken seriously . Inevitably , however , it was seized on by Labour and Remain-supporting Conservatives and relentlessly promoted by the BBC as a warning against leaving the EU ; but as the Opposition and most Tory MPs are signed up to Brexit , are they now saying the referendum result should be reversed ? Our politicians would serve the national interest better if , having agreed to Brexit , they emphasised the best possible outlook , not the worst . This is where Mrs May can show leadership . When David Cameron and George Osborne travelled to Beijing , it was to hail a new `` golden era '' of cooperation between the two countries . The Prime Minister needs to build on those foundations . Of course , we can not be naive : China , as Donald Trump said in Davos , operates an unfair trade policy in many areas . But it is also a massive market , with a growing middle-class crying out for competitively priced British goods and www.services.UK exports to China have increased by 60 per cent since 2010 but still only make up around 4 per cent of the total . The scope for expansion is considerable , especially in pharmaceuticals and agriculture , but most of all in financial services . As China 's ambassador to the UK , Liu Xiaoming , wrote on these pages on Monday , this visit is an opportunity to shift the relationship into a higher gear , with the prize of a free-trade agreement available further down the track . Above all , Mrs May does not travel to Beijing to hector or as a supplicant but as the leader of a proud nation , confident of its future .
Break in trade talks deadlock still months away , warns EU
THE European Union yesterday warned Britain it was still `` months '' away from being able to open Brexit trade negotiations as it emerged major divisions remained between the UK and EU over the so-called Brexit bill . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , insisted that Britain would have to pay its full share of spending earmarked for the EU after Brexit , as the bloc 's own auditors criticised the EU for running up spending commitments of some £210billion - an `` all time high '' . At the end of four days of talks in Brussels , Mr Barnier said : `` We have had a constructive week , yes , but we are not yet there , '' he said , later adding : `` It will take weeks , maybe even months before we are able to say there has been sufficient progress . '' Both sides said they had made progress on citizens ' rights and the Northern Irish border , but Mr Barnier said the EU still wanted the European Court of Justice to play `` an indispensable role '' in ensuring the EU citizens ' rights guaranteed in the agreement were observed . `` This is a stumbling block for the EU , '' he said . Last night Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator , claimed that a majority of people in the UK no longer want to leave the EU . He said : `` While this [ backing Brexit ] is true for most British politicians , and for most English newspapers , this is not the case for what seems to be today a majority of British citizens . '' He joked that Mrs May chose to make her keynote speech in Florence , a city renowned for `` back-stabbing and betrayal '' , because it felt familiar for her . Meanwhile , back at Westminster , the Delegated Powers Committee in the Lords issued a damning report on the Government 's Brexit legislation , the EU Withdrawal Bill , warning that powers granted to ministers to change legislation were `` wholly unacceptable '' .
Brexit delayed to 2021 [ ... ] ; Two-year transition with free movement and £9bn a year to EU May speaks of 'new era ' with Europe in Florence speech Eurosceptics attack PM for leaving Britain 'bound ' to Brussels May 's Brexit speech Eurosceptics dismayed over five-year wait to open world markets
BREXIT was last night effectively delayed until 2021 after Theresa May announced a two-year transition period during which Britain 's relationship with the EU will remain virtually unchanged . It means freedom of movement will continue for another four years , with Britain paying its full contribution to Brussels of around £9billion per year in that period . In her long-awaited speech in Florence , the Prime Minister set out plans for a status quo implementation phase with the UK and EU maintaining access to each other 's markets `` on current terms '' and under `` the existing structure of EU rules and regulations '' . The 35-minute speech was aimed at a European audience and Mrs May stressed repeatedly that she wanted to build a constructive and deep relationship with the EU after Brexit . However , she faced an immediate backlash from Tory Eurosceptics who said Britain would not be able to reap the benefits of quitting the EU for fully five years after voters chose to leave . Jeremy Corbyn claimed that Mrs May had adopted Labour 's policy . In the speech , the Prime Minister said : `` The strength of feeling that the British people have about this need for control and the direct accountability of their politicians is one reason why , throughout its membership , the United Kingdom has never totally felt at home being in the European Union . `` And perhaps because of our history and geography , the European Union never felt to us like an integral part of our national story in the way it does to so many elsewhere in Europe . '' But she added that after Brexit she hoped to usher in a `` new era '' of co-operation . She said : `` As we meet here today , in this city of creativity and rebirth , let us open our minds to the possible . To a new era of cooperation and partnership between the United Kingdom and the European Union . And to a stronger , fairer , more prosperous future for us all . '' Downing Street hopes that the optimistic vision of the relationship - and the offer of a large financial payment - will help kickstart the stalled EU talks in Brussels which will start again next week . The EU reacted positively to the speech , although it represents a major gamble for the Prime Minister as millions of Leave voters are likely to be angered by the decision to abandon a clean Brexit until five years after the referendum . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , said talks could now `` move forward '' as he gave a guarded welcome to the speech 's `` constructive spirit '' . Allies of senior Cabinet ministers , including Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , stressed that the speech was far more positive than previous drafts . The centrepiece of the address was the formal announcement of a transition period of `` around '' two years . Mrs May said the final length of it `` should be determined simply by how long it will take to prepare and implement the new processes and new systems that will underpin that future partnership '' . There were signs of friction with the Conservatives ' parliamentary voting partners , the DUP , whose leader Arlene Foster insisted that the transition period should be kept to an `` absolute minimum '' . The former Tory Cabinet minister Owen Paterson said the terms of the transition period meant , `` we 're still bound in by European rules and we ca n't get cracking and open up markets around the world '' . Mr Johnson claimed victory after Mrs May ruled out a Norwegian-style arrangement with the EU . He tweeted : `` PM speech was positive , optimistic & dynamic - and rightly disposes of the Norway option ! '' There were accusations that Mrs May gave away her strongest bargaining chip - access to Britain 's security and intelligence might - by saying the UK was `` unconditionally committed to maintaining Europe 's security '' . She also said that when there was uncertainty around underlying EU law , `` I want the UK courts to be able to take into account the judgments of the European Court of Justice with a view to ensuring consistent interpretation '' . The phrase rang alarm bells for some Leave campaigners who felt it put the supremacy of Britain 's courts in doubt . Britain will now be free to start negotiating trade deals in earnest with third-party countries , but they will not be able to come into force until 2021 at the earliest .
Pharma firms told to plan for 'hardest of Brexits '
THE UK pharmaceuticals sector has been told to prepare for a `` crisis '' Brexit scenario of drastically reduced access to European markets and hundreds of millions of pounds of restructuring costs unless a swift regulatory deal can be struck with Brussels . Trade body the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry ( ABPI ) , which lobbies for the 60,000-strong sector , told The Daily Telegraph new regulatory guidance published by the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) this week posed a risk to UK pharma jobs and to public health on both sides of the Channel . The EMA - one of the two EU regulatory bodies based in the UK that is expected to move to the continent - issued a paper detailing how firms should prepare for Brexit . It advised UK-based firms to move hundreds of roles and functions to an EU member state ahead of Brexit to maintain their rights to sell medicines in the common market . The paper also warned that the UK faced a sharp hike in regulation and stringent checks on medicine exports from March 30 , 2019 . Dr Virginia Acha , executive director of research , medical and innovation at ABPI , estimated the costs of taking up the EMA 's guidance would run to `` hundreds of millions of pounds '' . But she cautioned that the EMA document outlined only one scenario , `` the hardest of hard Brexits '' , and highlighted the `` critical importance '' of politicians , regulators and companies working to strike a compromise deal . The EMA is currently based in London 's Docklands and employs around 900 people .
The EU should accept reality over Brexit ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : As a symbol of globalisation , the freight train that pulled into a siding at Barking in east London yesterday would take some beating . Fourteen days ago it left Yiwu , a city 200 miles south of Shanghai , loaded with Chinese goods . It crossed seven countries with varying rail gauges , requiring several changes of rolling stock , before travelling through the Channel Tunnel to reach its final destination in Britain . There is no trade agreement between China and Europe ; nor is China in a customs union with the EU or a member of the single market . Yet 15 European cities are on the so-called new Silk Route , and those who are concerned that Theresa May 's willingness to walk away from the UK 's Brexit negotiations with no deal should keep that train in mind : the goods will find their market , regardless of what politicians in Brussels may do or say . This is as it should be . In her Lancaster House speech , the Prime Minister sought to engineer an emollient Brexit , as opposed to a hard or a soft variety . The UK has exercised its democratic right to leave the EU and this parting of the ways can be achieved in a mutually beneficial fashion . However , that optimum outcome necessarily relies upon the readiness of EU leaders to concede that a Brexit deal may be to Britain 's advantage as well as their own . What they need to avoid , for their own sake as well as ours , is ganging up on the UK , trying to punish us for having the temerity to leave and to discourage others from doing the same . Some EU leaders , unfortunately , do not see it that way . President François Hollande of France , who will take no part in the negotiations because he will be out of office , has said Britain must pay a price for Brexit . This attitude led Boris Johnson into a characteristically colourful riposte in which he said , at a conference in India , that we would not be subject to `` punishment beatings '' in the manner of `` some World War Two movie '' . Inevitably the roof fell in , with one Belgian MEP calling the comment `` abhorrent '' and Labour and Lib Dem politicians queuing up to denounce him . Perhaps with the Prime Minister seeking to mollify our EU partners , the Foreign Secretary might have chosen his allusions more carefully . But this is a phoney controversy , peripheral to the real issues at stake . Unexpectedly , it took Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the EU Commission , to strike the right note , saying there should be a `` fair and balanced deal '' . That is all we ask for , and in a global economy , it is what the EU needs , too .
'I 'd better leave now ' : May given silent treatment at EU summit
THERESA MAY told EU leaders `` I think I 'd better leave now '' after they responded to a short speech about her Brexit ambitions with silence . Towards the end of a summit she made a brief intervention in which she said she wanted an early deal to guarantee the rights of EU citizens living in the UK and of Britons in Europe . Other leaders declined to respond and Mrs May subsequently had to leave the room so that the other nations could discuss their Brexit strategy . The EU is refusing to enter into discussions about Brexit until Mrs May formally starts the process by triggering Article 50 , which is due to take place by the end of March . Meanwhile , Philip Hammond was criticised by Eurosceptic Tory MPs after suggesting that the Government was unlikely to resort to a hard Brexit . The Chancellor said during a trip to South Korea that the UK was unlikely to fall back on its membership of the World Trade Organisation for access to European markets , saying it would not be `` the most favoured outcome '' . He said that he hoped that the UK could instead agree `` tariff-free '' access . Some leading Eurosceptics have said that Britain should be open to leaving the EU without a trade deal and relying on WTO rules in the short term while negotiating new deals . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Cabinet minister , said : `` There is nothing wrong with the World Trade Organisation ... people should stop trying to whip up some idea that it is disastrous . '' Enda Kenny , the Irish prime minister , who was at the summit on Thursday , said talks on migration and Syria overran for more than three hours before Mrs May appealed for a quick decision on expat rights . Mr Kenny said : `` She said she would like to have the question of UK citizens living in Europe , and European citizens living in the UK , dealt with in the early part of discussions that take place . There was no response . '' With her RAF plane waiting to take off , Mrs May spoke briefly about Brexit and was then expected to leave the room so other EU leaders could hold a 20-minute discussion about their plans for Brexit negotiations . One leader 's aide told The Times : `` It was a difficult moment for diplomatic etiquette . 'I think I 'd better leave now , ' she said . She was very polite but it was a bit embarrassing . '' Some MPs want Mrs May to be legally bound to trigger Article 50 by the end of March . Peter Bone , a Tory backbencher , has proposed legislation that he believes will make next month 's Supreme Court ruling `` irrelevant '' .
Remainers are clutching at straws ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : It would be a big mistake for Remainers to think that they have regained the initiative in the battle over Brexit . The Lib Dem victory in Richmond Park is good news for that party but it signifies very little when it comes to the wider war over Europe . Zac Goldsmith 's mistake is that he allowed the by-election to become a mini-referendum on Brexit in one of the most pro-Remain constituencies in the UK ; in such circumstances the fact that the anti-Brexit party only just won suggests the strength of the nascent Remain alliance is overstated . There are far bigger issues ahead that will have a larger impact at home and abroad . By the end of this weekend , Italy will have held a constitutional referendum and Austria will have rerun the second round of its presidential election . Matteo Renzi may have resigned as the Italian prime minister ; the Austrian head of state might be a man accused of being a fascist . Meanwhile , President François Hollande has declined to enter the French socialist primary , throwing his country 's 2017 elections into further chaos . In this context , Brexit looks increasingly like jumping off a sinking ship . In Britain the big story is the Supreme Court appeal battle , opening next week , over whether or not Theresa May has to consult Parliament before invoking Article 50 . If the Government 's case prevails , it will proceed as planned . If it loses , it will doubtless rush a bill through Parliament - and a few Remain MPs and peers might imagine that the Richmond result gives them the moral and political authority to impede its progress . Their electoral maths are wrong , however . If Richmond does represent a realignment of politics along Remain v Leave lines , then , yes , the Tories stand to lose a few seats at the next election . But they would gain many , many more and Ukip would presumably do well in the north . The important political question is not whether Brexit is popular : the referendum proved that beyond doubt . It is how the Government makes the most of the court case , steers Brexit through , gets a good deal from the EU and exploits the incoming US administration 's desire for a free trade initiative . Some Tories would like Mrs May to call the Remainers ' bluff and hold an election , to give her a strong majority before the hard work really begins . That is one way forward . Whatever Mrs May does , she should not be distracted by one by-election . Militant Remainers are clutching at straws . Britain is leaving the EU .
UK could pay for single market access
BRITAIN could pay the European Union for access to the single market after Brexit , Philip Hammond and David Davis said yesterday as the Chancellor warned that the UK would have to make `` concessions '' during exit negotiations . Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , confirmed in the Commons that Britain could continue to pay money into the EU if it meant `` getting the best deal '' for goods and services . Any decision to pay for privileged access to the single market after Brexit would benefit the City but could cost the Government billions of pounds a year . The Chancellor then backed those comments and said `` we might want to contribute in some way '' even after leaving the EU . He warned that the Government would not be able to achieve `` every single objective '' . Eurosceptic Conservatives reacted furiously to the comments , saying that voters who backed Brexit would be `` outraged '' if their taxes were used to contribute to the EU after Britain leaves . It has been predicted Britain could be forced to pay some £10 billion to Brussels annually to access the single market . Mr Davis 's disclosure came in answer to a question by Wayne David , a Labour MP , who asked : `` Will the Government consider making any contribution in any shape or form for access to the single market ? '' Mr Davis replied : `` The major criterion here is that we get the best possible access for goods and services to the European market - and if that is included in what you are talking about , then of course we will consider it . '' In comments made at a CBI dinner in Wales last night , Mr Davis said that the Government would end `` freedom of movement as it has operated before '' , but it would not be done in a way `` that is contrary to the national economic interest '' . `` No one wants to see labour shortages in key sectors , '' he added . On a visit to Scotland , Mr Hammond supported Mr Davis , saying : `` We need to go into these negotiations with as many tools in our toolbox as possible and as flexible an approach as we can . `` We 've got a clear idea of what we 're seeking to achieve out of these negotiations but this is a negotiation and our counterparts on the other side will also have their agendas , their objectives . We need to be flexible in responding to those . '' Pressed on whether Tory Eurosceptics would be furious at giving the EU billions when it exported more to the UK than the other way round , he said : `` You ca n't go into any negotiation expecting to get every single objective that you set out with and concede nothing on the way . David Davis is absolutely right not to rule out the possibility that we might want to contribute in some way to some form of mechanism . '' Peter Bone , the Conservative MP for Wellingborough , told the BBC : `` People will be absolutely outraged if we came out of the EU and then carried on paying them £15 billion a year , £20 billion a year , whatever the figure is - no I do n't think it 's going to happen . In that very hypothetical case , people will be exceptionally upset about it . ''
Brussels ' Brexit hardliner quits - and poses a threat to Merkel 's hold on the Chancellery
ONE of Britain 's harshest European critics over Brexit is set to become German foreign minister and could challenge Angela Merkel for the chancellorship after he quit Brussels to return to national politics . Martin Schulz announced yesterday he would not seek re-election as president of the European parliament . While that will remove one of Brexit 's toughest opponents from the Brussels hierarchy , he is likely to have even more influence on negotiations from Berlin . He is widely expected to be named German foreign minister early next year and it is thought he may seek his Social Democrat Party ( SPD ) nomination to take on Mrs Merkel as chancellor in next year 's elections . His decision to step down from the European parliament will trigger a major shake-up in Brussels and could threaten the position of Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president . Mr Schulz said yesterday : `` My commitment to the European project is unwavering . From now on I will be fighting for this project from the national level , but my values do not change . '' Proponents of a soft Brexit have been hopeful that Germany will take a pragmatic line under Mrs Merkel . But if Mr Schulz , 60 , is appointed foreign minister that could change . He has called for harsh terms for the UK 's withdrawal in order to discourage other members from leaving , warning that Britain can not expect to cherrypick EU benefits such as the single market . He wants Brexit by 2019 . Mr Schulz 's decision to stand down at the European parliament was unexpected . He had been trying to secure a third term as the parliament 's president , but had run into opposition . His departure could cause ructions at the European parliament . The presidency should pass from the centre-Left bloc to the centre-Right , but that would leave the centre-Right with all the EU 's major offices . It could call into question the roles of Mr Juncker and Donald Tusk , the president of the European council , who are both centre-Right . Mr Schulz 's decision to quit may have been fuelled by ambition . He was already being spoken of as a foreign minister - under the terms of her coalition agreement , Mrs Merkel is obliged to offer the portfolio to the SPD . But there is an even bigger prize . While the SPD are Mrs Merkel 's junior coalition partner , they are the main challengers to her Christian Democrat party in next year 's elections . The current SDP leader is unpopular and polls have shown Mr Schulz could do better against Mrs Merkel . 'I will be fighting for the European project from the national level , but my values do not change '
The Daily Telegraph ( London ) November 8 , 2016 Tuesday Trump calls on white working class to hand him a US-style Brexit ; America decides ; US elections ; Republican challenger ends vitriolic campaign with swipe at 'corrupt Washington establishment '
DONALD TRUMP , the Republican presidential nominee , yesterday hoped to exploit the same anti-establishment anger that led to the Brexit vote , as he made a last-ditch appeal to working class Americans . In the final hours of one of the most tumultuous White House election campaigns in memory , Mr Trump depicted a country divided in which he was the `` last chance '' for radical change . `` It 's gon na be Brexit plus plus plus ! '' he shouted to his supporters . When asked last night why Mr Trump kept using the Brexit analogy , Kellyanne Conway , his campaign manager , said it was because the Remain camp had seemed `` pretty robust '' in the final days before the referendum but that Leave won when it counted . The Leave camp `` were able to turn out people and ... pollsters were undercounting them '' . With polls showing Hillary Clinton edging ahead , Mr Trump embarked on a mad dash across America , holding six rallies in five states . `` I want the entire corrupt Washington establishment to hear the words we are all about to say : when we win tomorrow , we are going to drain the swamp , '' he told cheering supporters at his first event in Sarasota , Florida , before heading to North Carolina , Pennsylvania and New Hampshire . Later Mr Trump said that if he loses today , he `` will consider [ his campaign ] the single greatest waste of time , energy and money '' . With Hispanics and other minority communities helping Mrs Clinton solidify her grasp on states such as Nevada and Colorado , Mr Trump 's clearest path to victory runs though toss-ups like Florida , North Carolina and Ohio as well as at least one Democrat-leaning state , probably in the Midwest . Mr Trump , Mrs Clinton and President Barack Obama all focused their campaigning efforts yesterday in Michigan , which has been a Democrat-leaning state since 1992 . Mr Trump hopes that his white working class appeal , fortified by his protectionist message on trade , will erode Mrs Clinton 's five-point lead in this industrial state . He has lambasted the likes of Ford for moving jobs to Mexico , and promised a heavy penalty for US companies that manufacture goods elsewhere . Robby Mook , Mrs Clinton 's everoptimistic campaign manager , conceded that the race in Michigan had `` tightened '' considerably . `` In his 70 years on earth The Donald has never cared about working folk . He does n't care about working people , '' Mr Obama said in Michigan , attempting to counter the Republican 's message . He added : `` If your closest advisers do n't trust you to tweet how can we trust you with the nuclear codes ? `` , referring to reports that Mr Trump 's campaign had `` finally wrested away '' control of his Twitter account , something denied by his campaign manager . As she boarded her campaign plane for the day 's first rally in Pennsylvania , Mrs Clinton acknowledged the deep divisions in the country . `` I really do want to be the president for everybody - people who vote for me , people who vote against me , '' she told reporters . She aimed to nail down a narrow lead with stops in three battleground states , before joining the Obamas at a star-studded finale in Philadelphia . Both CNN 's poll of polls and the ABC News/Washington Post tracking poll had Mrs Clinton four percentage points ahead yesterday . A RealClearPolitics average of polls had it closer at 2.6 points . The election monitoring website FiveThirtyEight estimated she would take 295 votes , putting her well over the 270 margin for victory . Last night Mrs Clinton was given about a 90 per cent chance of defeating Mr Trump , according to the final Reuters/Ipsos States of the Nation project released last night . But analysts warned that Mr Trump 's chances of staging an upset might well be higher than the data suggested . Both campaigns were predicting that the margin of victory in Florida could come down to as little as one per cent . Moreover , some 13 per cent of Americans , even at this late stage , are uncertain of how to vote or have decided to choose a third party candidate.Analysts also estimate that there are some 100 million voting age Americans who tend not to vote , and that many of those are white working class . `` Fault lines have emerged between the older , white , constituency who remember the heyday of the 1950s , and a diverse electorate that is looking for change , '' said David Damore , a professor at the University of Nevada . Daniel McCarthy : Page 16 ; Editorial Comment , Gavin Esler : Page 17 'It 's time to reject a media and political elite that 's bled our country dry '
Towns voted Brexit after rapid rise in immigration
THE proportion of migrants in parts of Britain has increased by nearly 400 per cent in the past decade , according to a new analysis . The Resolution Foundation , a think tank , found that all areas which experienced a significant increase in the proportion of migrants voted for Brexit . They include Mansfield in Nottinghamshire , where the proportion of migrants in the local population rose from 2.2 per cent to 10.8 per cent - equivalent to a rise of 391 per cent . North West Leicestershire , West Lancashire , Maidstone in Kent , and Boston in Lincolnshire , were also among the 15 other areas which voted to leave the EU after the proportion of migrants rose by more 200 per cent . Stephen Clarke , a research and policy analyst at the Resolution Foundation , said : `` While the overall share of the population in a given area born outside the UK does not have a significant effect on the Leave vote , the pace of change in the decade after 2004 does . '' The Resolution Foundation also suggested that low paid and some skilled British workers would receive a pay rise if ministers cut net migration to tens of thousands after Brexit . It found that immigration has `` dragged on earnings in some occupations such as skilled trades and basic cleaning , sales and security jobs '' . The Foundation argued that reducing immigration to tens of thousands could boost the wages of British workers by between 0.2 per cent and 0.6 per cent . However it said that any increase in wages is likely to be `` dwarfed '' by overall weaker growth caused by the uncertainty of Brexit . The Bank of England has suggested that Brexit could reduce average wage growth by up to 2 per cent this year . Mr Clarke said : `` The impact that recent widespread migration has had on British-born workers is hotly disputed . `` While there has been no effect on wages overall , increased migration has caused a slight drag on wages for some low-paid British workers . `` However , those expecting a wage boost off the back of a post-Brexit fall in migration are likely to be disappointed . Any such gains will be dwarfed by the losses caused by the post-referendum slowdown in the economy . ''
Fight to control climate change goes on despite Brexit decision
BREXIT will make it harder for the UK to tackle climate change but its commitment to do so is undiminished by the EU referendum result , Amber Rudd , the Energy Secretary , has said . Ms Rudd , a leading voice in the Remain campaign , also insisted that the proposed Hinkley Point nuclear plant would not be affected by Brexit , saying the project was still `` full tilt '' , despite speculation by some that it could be derailed . `` While I think the UK 's role in dealing with a warming planet may have been made harder by the decision last Thursday , our commitment to dealing with it has not gone away , '' she told the Business and Climate summit in London . `` However we choose to leave the EU , let me be clear : we remain committed to dealing with climate change . '' Ms Rudd said that she would confirm the Government 's `` fifth carbon budget '' tomorrow , the target covering steep emissions reductions required in the period 2028-2032 . Experts have warned that investment in new power plants in the UK could be hit by Brexit , while Ms Rudd herself warned during the campaign that the costs of electricity could rise if Britain was excluded from the EU 's single energy market . Companies such as National Grid and SSE are calling for the UK to remain part of that market but Ms Rudd offered no guarantees this would happen , admitting : `` We do n't have the answers yet . Having a close relationship with the European Union , with other countries that can help us address issues of security , and interconnectors , is going to be critical going forward . '' Ms Rudd said she had spoken with EDF Energy , the French company planning to build a new £18bn power plant at Hinkley Point in Somerset , and it remained `` absolutely committed '' to the project . Both EDF and Government had reassured each other that there was `` no impact at all '' from Brexit on the process to take a decision on the project , they said , and she hoped for a decision '' very soon '' . Emmanuel Macron , the French economy minister , and Jean-Bernard Levy , EDF group chief executive , have already said that Hinkley will proceed despite Brexit .
'House of a thousand Lords will back Brexit '
THERESA MAY should create as many as 200 new peers to force the Brexit Bill through the House of Lords , says Jacob Rees-Mogg . The MP , who has just become chairman of the European Reform Group , said the Prime Minister should ensure pro-Brexit peers outnumbered Remainers , as the House of Lords would not want the label `` peers against the people '' - as the people would always win . The chamber is to begin debating the EU Withdrawal Bill after it cleared its final stages in the House of Com-mons . Mrs May is expected to appoint 10 more Tory peers soon , but Mr Rees-Mogg said she should go much further . He told Chopper 's Brexit Podcast , available on The Daily Telegraph 's website : `` She should keep up her sleeve the ability to appoint enough peers to get business through . If the House wo n't play by the constitutional rule book , then the PM has to use the extra measures available to her ... it could be a couple of hundred . There is no point in going off half-cock . '' He added : `` They are not there to challenge the democratic will . '' The chamber already has about 800 members .
Wizz Air and Thomas Cook seek licences as Brexit hedge ; Hungarian airline expects UK subsidiary to start flying in March , as Thomas Cook sets up in Majorca
LOW-COST Eastern European carrier Wizz Air is applying for a UK registration as a hedge ahead of Brexit as tour operator Thomas Cook moved to secure a new Spanish licence for its airline . The Hungary-based airline said its UK subsidiary had applied for an air operator 's certificate , known as an AOC , as well as an operating licence from the Civil Aviation Authority . It said it expected Wizz Air UK to start flying in March 2018 with several UK-registered aircraft . The move comes shortly after the Hungarian division of the wider group opened a formal base at Luton airport . Thomas Cook has also launched a new base on the Spanish island of Majorca and also applied for an AOC there for its new Thomas Cook Airlines Balearics division , which will also begin scheduling flights from early 2018 . There has been growing concern among airlines that a new aviation deal between the UK and EU , which would replicate current arrangements allowing flights between all EU states , might not be replicated before the UK leaves the union . But if an aviation agreement is struck , having a UK AOC could be useful for Wizz if such a licence was granted parity with existing EU versions . Wizz does not have any intra-UK routes , something which could have been a motivation for getting a UK AOC if it had domestic flights . But it does fly to non-EU destinations from Luton , including Tel Aviv in Israel , which a UK licence could be useful for post Brexit . While goods exports would automatically fall under World Trade Organisation rules in the event of the UK failing to strike a trade deal , there is no such fallback for the aviation industry , raising the prospect that flights could be grounded as highlighted by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , this month . Rival EASYJET made a similar move this year by applying for an Austrian AOC . This would enable the carrier to continue its intra-European flights regardless of whether there is a post-Brexit aviation deal . On today 's announcement , József Váradi , the Wizz chief executive , said the Luton base would become the home of its UK subsidiary and employ more than 100 staff including managers , pilots and cabin crew by the end of next year . He added the move would not negatively impact its route network , with any routes not taken up by the UK subsidiary still set to be flown by its Hungarian division . A Thomas Cook spokesman said the main motivation for applying for its Spanish AOC was that it would be easier for its Balearic division to loan planes to other Thomas Cook subsidiaries than was the case currently . It had chosen Majorca as the base for the subsidiary , which will start with three Airbus A320 aircraft , because of the large amount of infrastructure it already has there thanks to the more than 1m passengers it jets to the Majorcan capital Palma every year . But he also acknowledged having a mainland Europe AOC could be beneficial in the bleakest of Brexit outcomes whereby no aviation deal is struck with the bloc . `` In the worst-case Brexit scenario it could be beneficial to have an additional AOC in Europe because it gives us extra rights in Spain , which represents 45pc of our holidays . '' Thomas Cook technically already has a mainland European AOC through its ownership of German airline Condor . But it clearly views it as advantageous to have one linked directly to the Thomas Cook name alongside its UK and Scandinavian AOCs given applying for one is a relatively inexpensive process that could prove extremely useful following the Brexit negotiations . 'In the worst-case Brexit scenario it could be beneficial to have an additional AOC in Europe '
Labour grandee accuses party of 'guerrilla ' tactics over Brexit Bill
A LABOUR grandee has accused his colleagues and Tory rebels of engaging in `` guerrilla warfare '' for attempting to block the Brexit Bill . Frank Field is proposing a new bill to help the Government get on with leaving the EU . He said that MPs who tabled amendments to change the legislation were betraying their constituents . Writing in The Daily Telegraph , the former minister said Labour was `` in turmoil '' over the EU after seven MPs defied Jeremy Corbyn 's demand to block the Brexit Bill on Monday night , including veteran left-winger Dennis Skinner who was branded a `` scab '' by Mr Corbyn 's supporters . After the narrow win Theresa May is facing a rebellion , as MPs , including her own , attempt to tie her hands by demanding a series of votes on the final Brexit deal and a fixed timetable for transition . Swathes of Tories supported the Prime Minister in a crunch vote on the EU Withdrawal Bill but only on the basis that significant changes will be made at a later stage . They rushed to table amendments demanding ministerial powers be watered down and MPs be given the right to veto a final Brexit deal . Labour members added to the 157 suggested changes with a demand to stay in the single market and customs union for a fixed term after March 2019 , and a call for more time to debate . One senior Labour remainer said a number of the measures would win cross-party support , adding that the Tory demand for a final vote could allow the House of Commons to overturn Brexit and force a second referendum . While a Conservative Remain supporter added : `` There is no way the party is going to be railroaded on this , we all want to get on with it , but it has to be right . '' Both sides have vowed to join forces to block aspects of the Bill they are unhappy with . Mr Field writes : `` The Bill is huge , and therefore gives a massive opportunity to those who say they accept the referendum decision but whose aim is to mess it up big time . `` The bill that I propose will allow the Government to get on with the business of negotiating properly and stymie the guerrilla warfare campaign against implementing the wish of the British people to leave Europe . '' The raft of changes proposed by Tories including former ministers Kenneth Clarke , Dominic Grieve , Nicky Morgan and Anna Soubry serves notice on Mrs May that she faces a rough ride in the remaining stages of the Bill 's passage through Parliament in October . One of the most potentially damaging amendments , tabled by Dominic Grieve , calls for MPs to be given the power to sign off the final Brexit deal . It has the support of another eight Tories MPs and if passed could allow politicians to vote down the agreement , which Labour sources believe could lead to a motion of no confidence and a second EU referendum or even another election . Editorial Comment : Page 16 Frank Field : Page 16 'The Bill is huge , so gives a massive opportunity to those whose aim is to mess up the referendum decision '
Britain and the EU can have a great free trade future
The Prime Minister was well aware that repeating `` Brexit means Brexit '' was not going to suffice for long so when she made her speech outlining the Government 's strategy for Brexit negotiations she was also aware she 'd need to outline specific plans with some clarity . The White Paper on the United Kingdom 's exit from and new partnership with the European Union confirms and elaborates on what she said . On the issue of membership of the single market she could not have been clearer or indeed more emphatic . The UK will not be a member of the single market after Brexit . But there are also questions about the Government 's position on the customs union . Here the answer Theresa May gave , and the position in the White Paper , is a little more ambiguous . What the Prime Minister essentially said about no longer being bound by the common external tariff and having our own schedules at the WTO means that the UK will no longer be part of the customs union . However , she went on to signal a clear desire to put some form of agreement in place to preserve frictionless trade with EU member states . This is a sensible response to what must be done in the negotiations . Detailed research by the Legatum Institute 's Special Trade Commission sets out how tariff and non-tariff barriers that might apply outside of the customs union can be managed or indeed avoided altogether . Ideally a comprehensive Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) will be agreed and ready to come into force on the day after Brexit , under which the UK and the EU decide not to apply tariffs or quotas to imports from each other . This is n't the end of the story . A customs union is an arrangement where two or more countries agree to apply the same tariffs and customs controls on goods coming into their territories . They can then eliminate tariffs and customs controls on goods . FTAs include provisions reducing and eliminating tariffs on goods traded between the parties , but do not control the parties ' trade policies with other countries . So under an FTA goods must still be subject to customs controls for various reasons , including to ensure that only goods that actually originate in one of the countries benefit from preferential tariffs . If one of the parties had lower or no tariffs on a particular product than another , exporters could circumvent one country 's tariffs by shipping their goods through the other . So this is where the rules of origin come in - a mechanism to determine what country an item originates from and in what circumstances it can therefore benefit from the FTA . The complexity comes where products comprise parts or ingredients from several sources . If tariff-free trade is agreed with the EU all exporters will need time to assess the make-up of their products . This is not the system whilst Britain is a member of the customs union and moving away from that may mean a phased introduction of rules of origin will be necessary . As described in our paper , one way of doing this would be for us to commit to keeping the same tariffs and quotas as the EU as against the rest of the world for a short period of adjustment , say , a year . Both sides could then waive requirements to prove the origin of goods we import from each other during that transition period . Agreeing a full FTA is a challenging goal in the time allowed by Article 50 , but it is possible , and permissible under WTO rules , to agree zero tariffs and quotas between the two sides for a limited period of time , in anticipation of an eventual FTA . Even if the EU will not agree to this , there are ways to mitigate the impact of tariffs . The fall in the pound will allow many manufacturers to absorb the import duties , and integrated supply chains will be protected by the availability of inward and outward processing reliefs , which mean that duties are not payable on parts that cross borders as part of a supply chain until they are imported as a product for sale on the market . If the EU imposes tariffs on our imports , Britain would have the right to impose the same tariffs on imports from the EU , but while this could deliver significant revenue for the Treasury it would increase prices , especially food prices , for ordinary consumers . The Government could choose to keep EU imports tariff free - a huge step with repercussions for UK farmers and manufacturers . It would also mean that other countries might have less incentive to reduce their tariffs on imports from the UK , so while consumers would benefit from lower prices and more competition , the longer-term gains from FTAs with established and emerging markets could be threatened . This may look risky , but our report describes how a balance could be struck by selectively reducing and eliminating tariffs on goods that the UK does not produce or compete with , or where the tariffs are very low . This would shield consumers from price rises , while maintaining our negotiation position with supplier countries . Ultimately , being outside the customs unions will allow the UK to reduce and eliminate tariffs and quotas as part of a global free trade agenda . The commercial interests on both sides strongly point towards these interim measures being agreed in time for the kind of phased implementation envisaged by Mrs May . To paraphrase Mrs May , it would indeed be an extraordinary act of self-harm for the European Union not to deliver the minimal level of cooperation to realise first the necessary interim measures , and then the final comprehensive FTA . Shanker A. Singham , chairman , Legatum Institute Special Trade Commission , and Victoria Hewson , senior counsel 'Being outside the customs unions will allow the UK to reduce tariffs as part of a global free trade agenda '
Major is 'dismissing democracy ' over Brexit says IDS ; Duncan Smith lashed out after former PM said there was a credible case for a second referendum
SIR JOHN MAJOR has been accused by Iain Duncan Smith of an `` absolute dismissal of democracy '' after the former prime minister said there was a `` perfectly credible '' case for a second referendum . In his first intervention since the vote in June , Sir John said at a private dinner in Westminster that Brexit must not be dictated by the `` tyranny of the majority '' . He said he `` could not accept '' that those who have voted remain should have `` no say '' on the terms of Brexit , adding that Parliament rather than Government should have the final say on any deal . Mr Duncan Smith , who was one of the Maastricht rebels described as `` bastards '' by Sir John when he was in office , hit out at the former Tory leader 's comments . He suggested that Sir John and Tony Blair may work together in future to try to make the case for a second referendum . Sir John 's intervention emerged on the same day that Mr Blair suggested in an interview that Brexit could be halted . The Prime Minister 's official spokesman said yesterday that Theresa May has been clear that there will be no second referendum . He said : `` I think even Sir John has accepted that we are going to be leaving the European Union . `` The Government intends to fulfil that demand in a way that meets all our obligations . '' It came as Tom Watson , Labour 's deputy leader , distanced himself and the party from Mr Blair and said `` we are not in denial about Brexit '' . He said : `` We 're never going to apologise for holding the Government 's feet to the fire . But nor we will ignore the democratic will of the British people . '' Mr Duncan Smith said : `` You ca n't claim democracy when you want it and reject it when you do n't . We had a vote , that vote now has to be acted on , that 's all . The idea we delay everything just simply because they disagree with the original result does seem to me an absolute dismissal of democracy . And that 's what I thought John Major 's comments were today . The tyranny of the majority ? What 's the tyranny ? '' While Sir John was said to have accepted the UK would not remain in EU , he expressed the hope it would stay as close as possible to the other 27 member states , adding that there was a `` perfectly credible case '' for a second referendum . Enda Kenny , the Irish Taoiseach , told Sky News that leaving the EU would throw up `` more detailed and unforeseen issues than people might have imagined '' and the process would take longer than two years set down in the EU 's rules . A spokesman for Mr Blair said that there had been no contact with Sir John , his predecessor in Downing Street , about future interventions . Editorial Comment : Page 27
Scotland May promises a Brexit tsar ; May promises a pro-Brexit MP will head EU talks
THERESA MAY will today promise to put a pro-Brexit MP in charge of a department tasked with taking Britain out of the EU as she attempts to win the support of Eurosceptic backbenchers in the Tory leadership contest . Launching her leadership campaign , the Home Secretary will say that there is no turning back on Brexit and that quitting the EU will not be `` brief or straightforward '' . In what will be seen as a tacit criticism of David Cameron , Mrs May will also use a speech to say that Britain now needs a `` vision of a country that works not for a privileged few but for every one of us '' . Her comments about a new government department for Brexit will be seen as an attempt to win over Eurosceptic MPs who are concerned about her decision to back Mr Cameron 's Remain campaign before the referendum . She will pledge that the secretary of state of the new department to take Continued on Page 5 Continued from page 1 Britain out of the EU will be an MP who campaigned for Leave . Mrs May 's allies are concerned that Boris Johnson 's campaign team will argue that only someone who backed the Brexit campaign can be the next Prime Minister . Mrs May will use her speech to say that taking Britain out of the EU will require `` significant expertise and a consistent approach '' . `` I will therefore create a new government department responsible for conducting Britain 's negotiation with the EU and for supporting the rest of Whitehall in its European work , '' she will say . `` That department will be led by a senior secretary of state - and I will make sure that the position is taken by a member of Parliament who campaigned for Britain to leave the EU . '' She will add : `` The job now is about uniting the Party , uniting the country and negotiating the best possible deal for Britain . '' Although her launch will attempt to unify the party under a positive campaign message , Mrs May 's allies are already preparing for a bruising contest against Mr Johnson . One friend of Mrs May 's told The Daily Telegraph that Mr Johnson is `` the most divisive person in British politics '' and is not `` credible '' enough to run the country in the wake of the Brexit vote . `` Some people say it has to be a Brexit person , '' the source said . `` My view is that it has to be the best person for the country . She 's the only one who can steady the ship at a critical time . `` Outside the Westminster bubble there 's carnage . Currency is going down , prices will go up . It 's pretty grim . `` Boris has moved from being the Heineken politician to the Marmite politician . He is no longer a force for excitement . He is the most divisive person in British politics . As the pain bites people are going to blame him . '' Mrs May yesterday vowed that there would be `` no deals '' with Mr Johnson in order to have a quick coronation of a new leader . A spokesman for the Home Secretary said that she would `` rather lose '' the leadership contest than do a bargain with Mr Johnson , who she has regularly clashed with in the past . Mrs May received a boost yesterday after Justine Greening , the International Development Secretary , said she would back the Home Secretary . Ms Greening , who also backed Remain , told the Evening Standard : `` She has the professionalism and steeliness required to look those bureaucrats in the eye and get the deal we need . `` Everyone knows the competence and experience she has shown as the longest serving Home Secretary in over 100 years . `` It is the toughest job in government after that of prime minister and she has dealt with its challenges with immense professionalism . '' John Hayes , the security minister in Mrs May 's department , will today announce his support for Mr Johnson and say that the next Conservative leader must be from the `` people who delivered the Brexit victory '' . Other candidates who will declare for the Conservative Party leadership include Stephen Crabb , the Work and Pensions Secretary , and Liam Fox , the former defence secretary . Andrea Leadsom , the Eurosceptic energy minister , Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , and Nicky Morgan , the Education Secretary , are also considering launching rival leadership bids .
Pound hits seven-year low on fears over Brexit ; European referendum ; Citibank raises probability of UK leaving the EU , as two credit-rating agencies warn of long-term risks ; Mayor 's adviser insists 'panicky forecasts ' on EU are not helpful
CONCERNS that Britain could leave the European Union saw the pound plummet to a seven-year low yesterday - after Boris Johnson added his name to a growing list of MPs who will campaign to leave the bloc . Sterling fell by as much as 2.42pc - or 3.5 cents - against the dollar to $ 1.4058 as the London Mayor 's decision triggered a string of warnings about the consequences of a Brexit . While the pound recovered some of the losses in late trading , the intra-day fall sent sterling to its lowest level since March 2009 . It also fell by as much as 1.5pc to ( EURO ) 1.2750 against the euro and hit a two-year low against Japan 's yen . Mr Johnson dismissed the idea that Britain could not thrive outside the EU as `` absolute cobblers '' as he joined half a dozen cabinet ministers , including Iain Duncan Smith and Michael Gove , who will vote to leave . It came as Citibank raised the probability of a Brexit to between 30pc and 40pc following Mr Johnson 's decision , from a previous forecast of between 20pc and 30pc . Two main credit rating agencies also warned of `` significant '' long-term risks if the UK opted to leave the EU in the June 23 referendum . Moody 's said it would put Britain on `` negative watch '' , which indicates a one-in-three chance the UK 's credit rating could be cut . Fitch said lengthy negotiations in the event of a Brexit `` would weigh on confidence and delay investment decisions '' . While Britain 's benchmark FTSE 100 index was lifted by rising oil prices , property stocks fell sharply . Analysts at Morgan Stanley said a Brexit meant London 's `` status as a leading financial centre could be questioned '' . Economists at ING said the pound was likely to fall further in the run-up to the referendum . Goldman Sachs has warned the pound could crash to $ 1.15 if Britain votes to quit , while Morgan Stanley believes sterling will drop to $ 1.30 in the event of a Brexit . Jacob Nell , an economist at the bank , said the trauma would knock 1.7pc off UK GDP and `` push the economy close to recession '' . However , Gerard Lyons , the London Mayor 's chief economic adviser , said it was important to put the `` panicky '' Continued on Page 5 Continued from Page 1 forecasts about a UK exit against a backdrop of slower Chinese growth and risk surrounding forthcoming US and eurozone elections . `` It would be wrong to start making panicky forecasts about Brexit given the volatility you 've seen on the financial markets since last August which have been fuelled by many different factors , '' he said . Mr Lyons , who was in contact with the Mayor before his announcement on Sunday , said being inside the EU no longer worked in Britain 's favour . `` When one looks at the EU , the tail is almost wagging the dog in that the eurozone is dictating the outcome and outlook of the European Union . This is why so many countries are unwilling to reform , which is why Prime Minister David Cameron faced such an uphill battle in Brussels . '' Mr Lyons insisted Britain could thrive outside the EU if it `` repositioned itself in a changing global economy '' . Analysts at Morgan Stanley believe there is a 35pc chance that Britain will leave the EU . Mr Nell said this could go up to `` 40pc '' if Mr Johnson played an active role in the `` Out '' campaign . Britain 's borrowing costs remained steady on Monday . Ten-year gilt yields edged down slightly . Speaking last week before the Brussels deal was struck , Robert Stheeman , the chief executive of Britain 's Debt Management Office , said he did was `` very conscious '' that 26pc of the DMO 's investor base were located overseas . `` For the moment , I do not sense that Brexit is a concern but clearly I 'm very conscious of the fact that we have an important part of our investor base is overseas , '' he said . `` I do n't like the idea of investor con-fidence being undermined . That is not to say a Brexit would cause this to occur or would not . But in the case of Scotland , where there was little volatility , investors felt people would vote to stay . Had the vote gone the other way , who knows . ''
Brexit will be in peril if Theresa May is toppled ; Most voters want the Prime Minister to carry on . Now her Tory rivals should let her finish the job
Why wo n't Theresa May get on with it , and set out her vision for Brexit ? Why wo n't she get radical , and reform our economy and public services ? If only life were that simple . Maybe if Whitehall had prepared for a Leave vote before the referendum , we would be better placed . Maybe if the Tories had a majority the Prime Minister would have more political capital . Maybe , if there was agreement in the Cabinet and Parliament about the precise relationship we should want with Europe , things would be straightforward . Frustration among some Conservative MPs that things are not straightforward is understandable . They know the country wants change , they worry about Labour 's extremism , and they want the Tories to feel optimistic again . But a change of leadership - as some MPs secretly advocate - can not deliver a better Brexit and would not mean a radical policy agenda . In fact , a change could destroy the Brexit negotiations , destabilise the Conservative Party , and delay - perhaps render impossible - serious reform . Whoever is prime minister , the political facts of life will not change . There will be a minority government . The Conservatives will be divided on Europe . And Whitehall will be swamped as it handles the complexity of our departure from the EU . On Brexit , Theresa May has taken her party a long way . Some Tory Remainers did not immediately accept the referendum result yet now concede we will leave the single market and customs union . Some Tory Leavers wanted to depart with no new deal in place , but now accept an exit payment , an implementation period during which little will change , and future regulatory cooperation - in some form at least - with the EU . It has taken time , and Theresa May 's patient diplomacy , to get us this far . The next key decision - on the extent to which Britain aligns its regulations with the EU 's , or instead chooses to diverge - requires a similar approach . Nobody should want her to make an extreme move in either direction . Tight alignment with little freedom to diverge would be incompatible with the referendum result . Refusing any form of regulatory cooperation would make it difficult for British companies to provide services in Europe . A middle way - as Mrs May proposed in her Florence speech - is sensible . But it is also a complex undertaking , requiring detailed legal and regulatory www.analysis.No prime minister could make this complexity disappear . The logistics of changing prime minister while Brexit is negotiated are also problematic . With no obvious successor and little agreement in the party on the way forward , there could be no coronation for a single candidate . There would be a protracted leadership election , during which the candidates would inevitably propose alternative negotiating positions . The clock would continue to tick , and Brussels would probably cancel the talks . The public want the Prime Minister to have the space to get the job done . According to YouGov research commissioned by the Westminster Policy Institute , a majority of voters - and an overwhelming majority of Tory voters - want her to carry www.on.No other potential leader would persuade more people to vote Conservative . So there should be no change . But three things must be done . First , with limited room for action , Downing Street needs to prioritise . It has reportedly chosen housing , education and the environment as its most important issues . I disagree with the focus on the environment , but having set these priorities , the Government must be bold and deliver . Secondly , if it is difficult for ministers to deliver domestic reform for the next two years , that time should not be wasted . The Prime Minister should establish powerful party policy commissions , so MPs and others can debate the party 's future and establish a programme for after Brexit . Thirdly , when the Cabinet agrees its approach on regulatory cooperation and divergence , the Prime Minister can articulate an optimistic vision of life after Brexit . Instead of leaving people to believe dubious , leaked , interim impact assessments , she can paint a positive picture of our future . She can describe how we will trade with Europe . She can explain how we will control immigration . How our security services can be freed of impediments imposed by the European Court of Justice . How we can spend our money on our own priorities , like the NHS . How we can establish our own structural funds , to support the communities that need them most . How , when we can diverge from EU rules , we can help sectors like tech and life sciences to innovate , creating the products and services - and jobs - of the future . The Prime Minister will always put her country and party before her own interests , and the time for her to step down will one day come . But right now the interests of the country and the Conservative Party are best served by letting her get on with the job . Tory MPs - who feted her in December for the deal she struck in Brussels - must know that the alternative is chaos . follow Nick Timothy on Twitter @ NICKJTIMOTHY ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Wanted : leaders who can read the uplifting writing on the Brexit wall ; Negative Hammond and nervous May have not risen to the occasion like Trump and Macron have
Like most people in late middle age , I increasingly regret any unkind things I have said over the years . In the case of our Chancellor of the Exchequer , however , I wish I had been ruder earlier . I first met Philip Hammond when he entered Parliament in 1997 . I admired his clear mind and financial grasp . I thought he would make a classic chief secretary to the Treasury , carefully inspecting and frequently refusing the outrageous bids for public money made by each government department . So when he was instead made defence secretary , and later foreign secretary , and the top brass of both departments told me how ghastly he was , I gave him the benefit of the doubt . Perhaps he was being tough with arrogant ministries that are used to taming their ministers too easily . When Mr Hammond got his present post , I thought that he was , at last , well placed . I now realise , however , that although he is indeed an intelligent man who knows a lot about money , he is absolutely unsuited for the role . At the top of politics , you must have an instinctive answer to the question with which a taxi driver once floored the philosopher Bertrand Russell : `` What 's it all about , then ? '' Mr Hammond showed no sense , at the MoD , of what the defence of the realm involves , and none , at the Foreign Office , about the role of Britain in the world . At the Treasury , he knows how to count the spoons but not how to grasp an opportunity . It was not dishonourable to support Remain , as Mr Hammond did , but he became Chancellor after that cause had been lost . It is his job to shape all Brexit 's economic aspects , yet at each turn he has been , in the precise meaning of the term , defeatist . He backed the side which was defeated , and , because he has a strong sense that he is always right ( and also because Mrs May woundingly indicated she wanted to relieve him of his job after the election but kept him in place ) , he wants his gloomy predictions fulfilled . He displays whatever is the opposite of the animal spirits which , famously , drive economic growth . He is relentlessly negative . If there is any purpose in ministers attending the World Economic Forum at Davos , it is surely to excite their audience with the prospect of change and thereby improve their country 's international standing . That is what Donald Trump and Emmanuel Macron did this week . Obviously Mr Hammond is at a lower pay grade , but since his country is about to recover control of its trade , borders and laws , effecting the biggest change for nearly half a century , he should surely make the most of this . Yet on Monday , the CBI , with Treasury encouragement , refloated the idea of staying in the customs union , which is explicitly against government policy . On Thursday , the Chancellor followed this up in Davos by saying that the changes in Britain 's economic relationship with the European Union after Brexit would be `` very modest '' . To which , the natural question is : `` What 's the point of making them , then ? '' Mr Hammond 's answer , if he said what he actually thinks , would be `` None '' . The EU understands that it can put such a half -- hearted government over a barrel . Now Mr Hammond complains that his remarks were `` taken out of context '' . Actually , it was their context - a refusal to explore new trading opportunities - which made them so depressing . After the Chancellor uttered his words , Theresa May `` rebuked '' him . Have you noticed how that word is always applied to her ? She has rebuked Mr Trump for his tweets and the Presidents Club for its allegedly orgiastic dinner and Sir Michael Fallon for possibly touching someone 's knee and Boris for any number of things . At Davos , she rebuked social media for `` unacceptable content '' . The Prime Minister is a very rebuking sort of person . Sometimes , as in Mr Hammond 's case , the rebuke is merited . Indeed , if she had not issued it , her Brexit Minister , Steve Baker , would have resigned . But if only she would show her Cabinet and the world which way she wishes to lead , fewer rebukes would surely be necessary . Her recent , bungled reshuffle did the opposite . If people are well led , they usually follow . Meanwhile , at Churcher 's College , a school founded in the 18th century with the admirable aim of training boys `` in the arts of arithmetic , writing , mathematics and navigation so that they could be apprenticed to masters of ships sailing to the East Indies '' , Jacob Rees -- Mogg conjured up a scene even more depraved than the Presidents Club dinner . At Belshazzar 's feast , as described in the Book of Daniel , the king and a thousand lords and his wives and concubines all `` drank wine , and praised the gods of gold '' . But , as the mighty Mogg reminded his young audience , all the fun of this proto -- Davos was spoilt when the hand of the Lord wrote upon the wall `` Mene , Mene , Tekel , Upharsin '' . This was translated by the proto -- Brexiteer , Daniel , as `` Thou art weighed in the balance , and art found wanting '' . If Brexit 's opportunities are taken off the table , Mr Rees -- Mogg warned , `` then Brexit becomes only a damage- limitation exercise ... if we are timid and cowering and terrified of the future then our children and theirs will judge us '' : their verdict will make Belshazzar 's feast look like a vicarage tea -- party , he indicated . Earlier in the week , the Brexit Secretary , David Davis , was reduced to laughing immoderately when Mr Rees -- Mogg accused him of permitting a two -- year transition period during which Britain would still be bound by all EU rules but have no part in making them . We would become a `` vassal state '' , he prophesied . Mr Davis could not deny this : hence his elongated `` Ha , ha , ha 's '' . Indeed , he had to admit it in his speech in Middlesbrough yesterday . Because the Government is , as the Mogg fears , engaged only in damage- limitation , Mr Davis has been sidelined . The business of Brexit is passing from the hands of the merely elected and is now being directed by the relevant official , Olly Robbins , and the Cabinet Office . This failure to take opportunities seems particularly woeful when , slowly and grudgingly , Brexit 's opponents are shifting their ground . This week , David Cameron , Mark Carney and Lord O'Neill all conceded that things are probably not as bad as they had earlier led us to believe . Differences opened up even at Davos , with some EU leaders taking the heretical view that it might be quite stupid to punish Britain for leaving . It becomes ever harder to believe that Brexit will not happen , and therefore ever less logical to try to fudge it . Although their discontent with Mrs May is currently rising - hence Mr Rees -- Mogg turning up the volume - Tory Eurosceptics still believe , just , that she will be better than any obvious alternative at seeing Brexit through . But it is immensely frustrating that she feels she can not seize the political chance . Once I bought a Victorian painting depicting a dear little baby lying on a doorstep . It has been abandoned by its mother and in its swaddling bands is tucked a note , presumably begging whoever finds the child to look after it . Politically , Brexit is just such a foundling , and the note records 17.4 million votes . Conventional political society tries to cast it out . This is odd , because the political rewards will accrue to the first leader to adopt it with love and commitment . read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
EU expects May to sign deal today ; Brussels sources say Brexit agreement is 'close ' to completion with Irish border issues ironed out
THERESA MAY was last night understood to be finalising a Brexit deal with the European Union that will unlock talks on trade and Britain 's future relationship with Europe , sources in Brussels told The Daily Telegraph . The Prime Minister was working into the night to get final sign-offs from Belfast , Dublin and Brussels on the new text of a `` divorce agreement '' after talks broke down on Monday . Three separate Brussels sources said last night that they were hopeful that , barring any last-minute slip-ups , Mrs May would arrive in Belgium as early as this morning to finalise the deal . Margaritis Schinas , a spokesman for Jean-Claude Juncker , confirmed last night that the European Commission president had spoken to both Mrs May and Leo Varadkar , the Irish prime minister , and that an `` early morning meeting [ is ] possible '' . Donald Tusk , the European Council president , announced that he would make a statement on Brexit at 6.50am today , before the financial markets open , prompting speculation that he could announce a deal has been done . A previously unscheduled meeting of the European Parliament Brexit working group was arranged for 7.30am today . Late last night Democratic Unionist Party sources in Belfast said there was still `` work to do tomorrow '' . However , the DUP 's Westminster team was said to have agreed to the wording , after Nigel Dodds , the party 's Westminster leader , spent the day in talks with Government officials A senior EU diplomatic source said that the deal was `` close but not confirmed '' , while an Irish official told Reuters that events were `` moving quickly '' and that a deal was just `` hours away '' . Mrs May was understood to be preparing to seek a final sign-off on the new text from Mr Varadkar and Arlene Foster , the leader of the DUP who exercised a veto on the previous deal on Monday . The contours of the new deal emerged three days after Mrs May was forced to cancel a previous agreement at the 11th hour in Brussels . The Telegraph understands that a new `` agreed text '' was communicated to Mr Tusk by Mrs May late yesterday afternoon . A Whitehall source said a text was being circulated and was `` being amended all the time '' . British officials urged caution , mindful of the sensitivity of an issue that has soured relations between London and Dublin and threatened to create an impasse in the negotiations . Yesterday afternoon EU sources told The Telegraph the deal was `` done '' and that Mrs May was expected to arrive in Brussels first thing this morning in order to seal the deal . British officials denied any immediate travel plans , saying the Prime Minister would only travel to Brussels if there was a rock-solid agreement . The text was being kept a secret after leaks of the previous compromise language offering to ensure regulatory `` alignment '' between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland unravelled the agreement . The Telegraph understands the text will concentrate on offering additional assurances to the DUP that will help to reduce concerns that Northern Ireland will be forced to adopt a `` special status '' compared with the rest of the UK . Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , used the phrase `` regulatory equivalence '' to describe the Irish border deal , providing a clue to the wording that could replace the contested phrase of `` regulatory alignment '' . He told the BBC the UK could have laws that had a similar goal and effect as EU laws , without being forced to mirror them exactly , or become a rule-taker from the EU - a key demand of Brexiteers who want to preserve the UK 's options to conduct an independent trade policy . Reports : Pages 8-9 Jeremy Warner and Editorial Comment : Page 21
Goldman Sachs may opt for EU hubs in both Paris and Frankfurt
GOLDMAN Sachs boss Lloyd Blankfein has warned uncertainty over Brexit will lead to the US investment bank moving jobs from London to Paris and Frankfurt . In an interview with French newspaper Le Figaro , Mr Blankfein said Brexit was forcing the bank to `` decentralise '' its European operations . `` We will have more staff on the continent , '' he said . `` Some , if they want , will come from London , we will recruit others . '' Mr Blankfein also joined calls for swift clarity on the terms of the UK 's withdrawal from the European Union , saying : `` Everyone needs a script , and fast . '' Unlike many finance bosses , the Goldman Sachs chief executive has not been backward in coming forwards with his opinions about Brexit . Mr Blankfein has made Brexit digs on Twitter four times , most recently championing the idea of a second referendum . He has also suggested the bank 's new European headquarters , which are being built in central London , may have to lie partially empty . Goldman Sachs employs 6,000 staff in the UK . Mr Blankfein did not clarify what roles could move . The Wall Street bank recently signed a lease for space in Marienturm tower in Frankfurt 's financial district with space for up to 1,000 staff . It has 200 workers in the city at present .
'Mutineers ' warn May : enshrining Brexit date in law risks harming Britain 's interests
A GROUP of 15 pro-European Tory MP rebels have insisted they are not trying to frustrate Brexit but warned that Theresa May 's plans to enshrine a leaving date in law risks `` harming our country 's interests '' . In a letter to The Daily Telegraph , they warn that the Prime Minister 's plan to fix a date when Britain leaves the EU in law is `` too rigid '' and say more time may be needed to negotiate . It comes amid growing fears among ministers that the scale of the rebellion , which is now thought to have risen to more than 20 Tory MPs and includes several former ministers , means they will have to withdraw the amendment . The group , labelled the `` Brexit mutineers '' , have told senior party figures that they will join forces with Labour to block measures to enshrine the date of Brexit in law . Mrs May told MPs yesterday that the Government was `` listening carefully '' , adding that it was `` right and proper '' to have a `` lively '' debate . The letter says : `` We do not seek to delay or thwart Britain 's exit from the EU however much we may regret it ... What looks at first blush an uncontroversial proposal , could accidentally harm our country 's interest . Putting a date in law is too rigid . As negotiations reach their close , the Government may need a small amount of additional time to conclude , for example , the best transitional deal . '' Letters , Nick Timothy & Editorial Comment : Page 21
City consultant Alpha to list on Aim as appetite for IPOs returns
PRIVATE equity house Dunedin will float the City consultant Alpha on the London stock market next month , making it the latest financial services firm to plan a listing as the UK initial public offering market splutters back to life . Alpha , which advises fund houses including that of well-known fund manager Neil Woodford , is looking to raise £115m on London 's junior market next month after testing investor appetite for an IPO earlier this year . It is the latest financial firm looking to list , with Compare the Market owner BGL Group , London & Country Mortgages , and Old Mutual Wealth among those eager to float in the next year following a hiatus of activity after the EU referendum . Pensions firm Xafinity and Allied Irish Banks have already gone public this year . Market jitters following the Brexit vote froze the market in 2016 , but City lawyers now expect to see a wave of listings in London as businesses try to float before the UK formally leaves the European Union in March 2019 . Euan Fraser , Alpha 's chief executive , said that consultants were actually benefiting from Brexit in the short term as companies scramble for advice . Financial institutions in particular need to be well prepared for the forthcoming changes . `` Brexit is unknown and may well remain unknown for quite some time , quite frankly , '' he said . `` Whatever your political opinion on Brexit , change is typically good for consultants . '' Despite political turmoil and continued uncertainty surrounding Brexit , there were 58 UK IPOs for the year to Sept 12 compared to 45 listings during the same period last year and 53 the year before , according to figures from Dealogic . However , Craig Coben , the global head of equity capital markets at Bank of America Merrill Lynch , warned that the UK was still being `` perceived by some investors as a riskier place to invest in '' . Mr Coben added that the current appetite among investors for financial services IPOs was dependent `` on the underlying story and , in part , on the broader economic and political environment '' . Alpha , which has over 250 consultants and reported revenues of £43.6m for the year to March 31 , is currently expected to have a market capitalisation of around £150m when it lists on the market . Dunedin invested £80m into the group early last year , from mid-market rival Baird . £115m The sum Alpha intends to raise in an initial public offering next month , with the group due to list on London 's junior market
'Bad boy of Brexit ' plots £100m bet on property outside London
ONE of the founders of the `` Leave Means Leave '' campaign for a clean Brexit is plotting a £100m return to the stock market as he sets up an investment trust focused on commercial property outside London . Property entrepreneur Richard Tice - who with Nigel Farage is part of the self-proclaimed `` bad boys of Brexit '' group leading the push to get Britain out of the EU - hopes to raise up to £100m to invest in regional office space , where he claims occupier demand has grown since last summer 's European referendum . The fundraising marks a return to the stock market for the ardent Brexiteer , who left FTSE 250 property investment group CLS Holdings in 2014 . `` Yes I would have done [ this raise ] had Brexit not happened , but for all the doomsayers who think the world is going to end I think the opportunities are growing , '' he said . The aim is for Quidnet Capital , the Mayfair-based investment group which Mr Tice runs , to become the asset manager for the European Real Estate Investment Trust [ REIT ] , which would be rebranded under the Quidnet name . Unlike many property investors , Mr Tice is turning his back on London - where there has been record activity in the real estate market so far this year - instead placing his bets on soaring rents outside of the capital . `` Outside the M25 there 's been very little property development since the crash , '' he said , adding that rents on small office spaces will see the `` highest rental growth '' in the years to come as demand rises . Supply in the regions is low , he says , because there has been a dearth of development outside of the big cities as well as a shift from the high street to online , meaning companies are opting to work from cheap industrial units and offices are being converted into homes . The real estate investment trust , which Quidnet estimates will pay out a dividend of more than 6pc per year , will focus on offices and industrial property worth between £2m and 10m - a size Mr Tice believes will be less competitive . However , recent data from the upmarket property agent Savills shows that foreign investors made up nearly a third of all commercial property investment in UK regions last year as London prices soar , meaning he might well have more competition than he currently expects . As the co-chairman of Leave Means Leave , a pressure group urging the UK not to be a member of the European single market or the customs union , Mr Tice said his return to the stock market proves his confidence in the UK economy .
Scotland Anger at prospect of Ulster joining EU if Ireland were united ; Election 2017
BRUSSELS has been accused of an `` outrageous '' attempt to threaten the future of the Union by using Northern Ireland as a bargaining chip in Brexit negotiations . European leaders are expected to agree today that Ulster would automatically join the EU if it became part of a united Ireland - raising the spectre of a break-up of the UK after Brexit . Separately , Donald Tusk , the European Council president , has told member states that the question of Ireland 's border with Northern Ireland must be settled before trade talks can begin . The controversy comes weeks after Mr Tusk stoked a row over Gibraltar 's sovereignty by saying any Brexit deal could only apply to Gibraltar with Spain 's permission . Theresa May , who yesterday met Shinzo Abe , the Japanese prime minister , will today tell voters on a visit to Scotland that every vote for her will `` strengthen the Union '' as well as fortifying her hand in the Brexit negotiations . Unionists said it was `` irresponsible '' of European leaders to `` meddle '' in Northern Ireland 's sovereignty , while one Conservative MP said Brussels had indulged in a `` ludicrous attempt to stir up trouble '' . It came as Europe expanded its demands for Britain 's `` divorce bill '' to include `` political '' commitments , such as the UK 's share of a £2.5billion fund to help refugees in Turkey . Today 's meeting of the 27 EU leaders in Brussels - to discuss their Brexit negotiating position - will include a statement on Irish reunification at the request of the Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny . Sources said it would amount to a `` factual legal statement '' that Northern Ireland would join the EU automatically if it voted to become part of a united Ireland . The 1998 Good Friday Agreement allows for a referendum on reunification if there is reason to believe a majority are in favour . A day after Angela Merkel warned Britain to have `` no illusions '' about Brexit , Mr Tusk again struck a hard line in a letter to EU leaders . He said the issue of Ulster 's border with Ireland - the EU 's only land border with the UK - had to be settled before substantive talks on a trade deal could start . Ministers are yet to decide how border controls would be enforced . Mr Tusk said : `` I would like us to unite around this key principle during the upcoming summit , so that it is clear that progress on people , money and Ireland must come first . '' Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader , said : `` This is the European Union playing their usual games . They are attempting to bully the UK and threaten the Union . This is a deliberate and outrageous attempt to meddle in the affairs of a nation state , just like they did in Gibraltar . '' A government source said : `` Northern Ireland 's constitutional position as part of the UK is based firmly and clearly on the freely given consent of its people . '' Editorial Comment : Page 19
The EU has never helped Britain to project its influence in the world ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Lord Heseltine is right to say that Germany will dominate the EU after Brexit ( report , March 25 ) - but then it does so already . The euro has benefited the German economy , which has thrived with an undervalued exchange rate , and nothing we say will influence the European Central Bank . As EU members outside the euro bloc , we have no influence on the future direction of the intended federation . We will be in a much stronger position outside the EU , which has strictly controlled our freedom . It is time for Lord Heseltine to get behind his country . George Burne Woldingham , Surrey sir - On Wednesday the Prime Minister will formally write to the European Commission and invoke Article 50 , thereby triggering Brexit negotiations . One of the first items to be raised , or so we are led to believe , is the so-called divorce settlement of £50 billion . I suggest that our initial response should be to say that we will discuss this when audited accounts are available for the past 40 years , so that all sides are working from verified and confirmed figures . Ray Seymour Bedford sir - The more one reads of the punitive attitude of EU leaders towards Brexit , the more one feels they are displaying the characteristics of a cult , rather than a political organisation . The real agenda for the EU project was hidden when Britain joined the European Economic Community in 1973 , so we entered with optimism . However , the reality of membership has now become clear , and we want to leave . The response has been to issue threats to intimidate us and warn other members against leaving . Like leaving a real cult , the process will be traumatic but , in the long term , completely liberating . Larry Oster Southsea , Hampshire sir - Petitions , legal challenges and marches have all failed to stop the Brexit juggernaut . The mechanism is being operated largely by MPs who have stifled their doubts , and by civil servants ordered to perform a task they could not have expected and for which they have had little time to prepare . They are driven by the exultation of long-term Brexiteers , who feel that they are at last entering the promised land . However , long negotiations are expected . Even two years is a long period of instability . It would therefore be unwise for the Brexiteers to rejoice too enthusiastically when Article 50 is invoked . If Brexit turns out to be a disappointment or disaster , what will they say ? Most important of all , if Brexit fails , who will pick up the pieces and draft a policy of recovery ? It seems that nobody dares contemplate failure . This omission must be rectified and contingency planning instituted . Margaret Brown Burslem , Staffordshire
Hundreds of Goldman Sachs staff to leave London before Brexit
GOLDMAN Sachs has fired the starting gun on its Brexit contingency plans , confirming that jobs will be moved out of London while `` hundreds '' of roles will be added across Europe . Richard Gnodde , the chief executive of Goldman Sachs International , said the bank is to start executing contingency plans as it ca n't predict whether a transitional trade deal will be agreed . `` The big question will obviously come down to transitionals : will there be transitionals or wo n't there ... Here , we ca n't bank on them , so we have to have contingency plans , and we 're going to start to execute on those . '' The plans include moving some staff out of London and expanding in Europe , Mr Gnodde told CNBC , adding the number involved will be in the hundreds `` for this first period '' . While banks and financial services have been pushing for a transitional deal that would avoid a cliff edge once negotiations end in 2019 , Mr Gnodde said it was time to take action . `` What our eventual footprint will look like will depend on the outcome of those [ Brexit ] negotiations , and what we are obliged to do because of them , '' he said . His comments come a day after the UK confirmed to the EU Brexit will be triggered on March 29 . A spokesman for the bank did not comment further . Morgan Stanley president Colm Kelleher yesterday said `` certainly '' some of the bank 's 5,000 London staff would move out of the capital before the twoyear Brexit negotiation period ends .
Scotland Major : Leaving EU is an historic mistake ; Britain will suffer as low-tax haven , warns Major
SIR JOHN MAJOR has made an extraordinary attack on Theresa May 's Government over Brexit and warned that leaving the EU could mean cutting the NHS and welfare state . In his first intervention since the referendum , the former prime minister said Brexit was an `` historic mistake '' and warned Mrs May that she must not create `` unreal and over-optimistic '' expectations about leaving the EU . Sir John also warned a hard Brexit would fuel the likelihood of a second referendum on Scottish independence . Nicola Sturgeon , the First Minister , has repeatedly warned that taking Scotland out of the EU single market means a new vote on breaking-up Britain is `` highly likely '' amid predictions she could name the date of a new referendum next month . He also criticised Donald Trump , describing the US president as `` less predictable , less reliable and less attuned to our free market and socially liberal instincts than any of his predecessors '' . Sir John 's warning followed that of Continued on Page 6 Editorial Comment : Page 19 Continued from Page 1 Tony Blair - alongside whom he campaigned during the EU referendum - who urged voters to `` rise up '' against Brexit and said that voters have the `` right to change their minds '' . Sir John 's speech at Chatham House in London last night infuriated Eurosceptic MPs , who accused him of making `` bitter , angry '' remarks . Ministers warned that it could embolden peers trying to frustrate Brexit . A Downing Street source said : `` The Government is determined to make a success of our departure from the European Union . '' In a direct message to Mrs May , Sir John said that there would be a `` price to be paid '' if Britain decided to become a low-tax economy . He said : `` It has worrying implications for public services such as the NHS - and for the vulnerable who , I 'm delighted to say , the Government has pledged to help . `` So there is a choice to be made , a price to be paid ; we can not move to a radical enterprise economy without moving away from a welfare state . '' He said that Brexit-supporting MPs who assumed that Europe would `` concede all we wish for '' were `` extraordinarily naive '' . Sir John continued : `` The referendum was one of the most divisive votes in British history . I have watched with growing concern as the British people have been led to expect a future that seems to be unreal and optimistic . Obstacles are brushed aside as of no consequence , whilst opportunities are inflated beyond any reasonable expectation of delivery . '' In contrast to Mr Blair , however , Sir John suggested that a second referendum on Britain 's membership of the EU is a `` long way away '' and added : `` We can not turn back the clock '' . Asked if he believed Mrs May would have to `` face down her own b -- -- -- - '' , as he once did over Maastricht , Sir John said : `` You might say that , I could n't possibly comment . ''
Scotland Davis : Britain 's border controls are not up for negotiation with the EU
BRITAIN 's border controls are not up for negotiation in EU talks , David Davis has told MPs . The Brexit Secretary made it clear that the Government will decide how its immigration system will look before presenting the option to European leaders . And Mr Davis dealt another blow to Scotland 's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon 's hopes of a special deal for Scotland after he said Spain would `` probably not '' want `` differential treatment '' for any part of the UK . Michael Gove , the former Education Secretary and a committee member , pointed out Spain has resisted internal pressure from the Catalans and the Basque Country for `` separate arrangement . '' Mr Davis 's comment came after a senior Spanish MEP , who is a member of the ruling party , told the Daily Telegraph his government would oppose any preferential deal for Scotland and rejected Ms Sturgeon 's plan to stay in the single market if the rest of the UK comes out . Mr Davis 's comments on borders , a sign that Britain intends to leave the EU 's freedom of movement for workers system , come as Theresa May today travels to Brussels for tense negotiations with her European counterparts . Mrs May will warn EU leaders that they risk losing public confidence if they allow hundreds of thousands of economic migrants into Europe . EU leaders will then hold a dinner without Mrs May in a snub to Britain . Speaking to MPs on the Brexit select committee , Mr Davis said that Brussels will have no say over the UK 's immigration system after its EU exit . `` The example I will point you to is the Swiss example , '' he said . `` They thought they had control over their own migration via an emergency brake system . `` When they tried to exercise it they were unable to because it was tied into so many other treaties . `` What we have to bear in mind is we have to pay respect to the outcome of the referendum , there has got to be clear control by this Parliament . '' He added : `` My job is to bring the decision back here , not exercise the decision . '' Asked by MPs if that would be part of the negotiations , Mr Davis said : `` No I do n't . I think that the operation of that decision after we have left the EU will be in the national interest and that will affect all of us . `` The judgment the Government comes to as to what is necessary for universities , what is necessary for business and what is necessary for fruit picking . '' Mr Davis said he is ready to accept a transitional arrangement to implement the terms of Britain 's withdrawal from the EU `` if it 's necessary , and only if it 's necessary '' . And he indicated that the Government is working on possible outcomes from the Brexit talks in relation to the European Customs Union . Brexit means ... OED comes up with the answer Theresa May famously declared that `` Brexit means Brexit '' , but now the Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ) has come up with its own definition . Six months after the Prime Minister delivered the elusive explanation , lexicographers have clarified that `` Brexit '' is `` the ( proposed ) withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union , and the political process associated with it '' . The definition adds that the term is sometimes used specifically to refer to the referendum held on June 23 . The word was added to the dictionary this month , with the OED noting the `` impressive '' speed with which it became widely used . Grexit - `` the ( potential ) withdrawal of Greece from the eurozone monetary union '' - was also added .
Co-op takes the lead in 'followship ' ; The veteran company 's chairman says good communication skills will be vital post-Brexit , reports Jenny Hirschkorn
Allan Leighton knows a thing or two about leadership . The 63-year-old former chief executive of Asda is not only chairman of a clutch of high-profile companies - the Co-op , Entertainment One and Pandora - he has also penned a book on the subject . What is less known , however , is that he is an ardent champion of `` followship '' , a concept he describes as the flipside of leadership , and in his keynote speech kicking off the 2016 Telegraph Festival of Business , Mr Leighton told delegates that understanding the term and taking its message on board was `` probably the most important thing for any organisation of any size , going forward '' . Put yourself in the shoes of employees , customers and peers , he said . Anyone aspiring to become a leader needs to think about being the type of leader that they would like to follow . He said : `` In my mind , the thing that is at the cutting edge of the greatest companies is their ability to understand that followship is as important as leadership . '' With Brexit top of the agenda at this year 's event , much of the discussion turned to the result and its meaning for businesses . However , Mr Leighton cautioned that without taking heed of the message of the vote to leave , leaders both in business and politics risked danger . `` I think Brexit is fantastic because it is going to refresh the way we have to think about things , '' he said . `` We can all say : 'What 's going to happen ? ' and 'We have all this uncertainty ' or 'It is really difficult ' . All of those things are true . But when has business ever been easy ? `` Brexit was a revolution but it was a democratic revolution with people saying : 'I have got my own thoughts . I do n't want to be talked at . I want to be listened to . I want to be treated with respect . I do n't want stuff put down my throat . ' `` If businesses were going to turn the outcome into an opportunity to gain competitive advantage , he said , we must recognise that what we learnt from Brexit is how 'not ' to communicate . `` Communication is about two things , '' he said . `` The first thing it is about is listening , and there are two ways of doing it . There is the one that most of us now adopt - listening to respond - so when people start to talk , in our heads we are thinking about what is our response . `` And the other , where you are sucking in what people are trying to say . When you listen to hear somebody , they feel much better than when you are listening to respond . And more importantly , you get more from that . '' It 's a message that chimes with much of what the Co-op represents . One of the world 's oldest and most successful partnerships , the business knows better than most the importance of engaging with its employees and customers and communicating clearly ( particularly in the scandal-hit recent years through which Mr Leighton has helped steer the business ) . `` Most of us talk at people , '' he said . `` People do n't want to be talked at . They want to be talked with . '' To do that effectively means embracing diversity , particularly of gender and race . `` Fifty per cent of brains are female and brains have no colour , '' he said . Ensuring that brainpower triumphs over head count was a lesson he learnt during his 18 years at Mars , which taught him what an interesting experience it can be if you go into a meeting and start counting the different brains rather than the people ( who were often simply repeats of their neighbour ) . Shock results such as the UK 's decision to leave the EU and the election of Donald Trump in the United States suggest that until recently , leaders in business and politics have been unable or unwilling to recognise that what people wanted did not match the options they have been given to date . The resultant waves these decisions have made are still being felt , but as the world settles back down there is a clear opportunity for businesses to step up and be the kind of leaders they feel their industries and their customers deserve . The question for those who will listen , says Mr Leighton , is : `` How are we going to turn this to a competitive advantage for us , because we are thinking about it differently from all those who are focusing on the uncertainty ? `` The certainty is that it is done . But we can turn this into a catalyst whereby the process of followship becomes the most important thing . '' We need to think about being the type of leader people want to follow Allan Leighton
Letters to the Editor Brexit and the law BODY : SIR - Charles Moore ( Comment , November 19 ) suggests that judges who oppose Brexit , or whose family members oppose Brexit , are too biased to rule on the Article 50 case . Yet the High Court judgment in no way turns on the question of whether Brexit is a good or bad idea . Its focus is entirely on whether the Government can act by executive fiat to overturn individual rights created through an Act of Parliament , in this case the 1972 European Communities Act . All sides agree that this point of constitutional law is eminently justiciable . Based on centuries of historical precedent , the judges ruled that to remove such rights requires a fresh Act of Parliament John Peet London SW1 SIR - Where is Brexit , and is Nigel Farage its president-elect ? Ranulph Bacon ( aged seven ) Harleston , Norfolk
Brexit should be good for Africa , and Africa could be good for Brexit , too
Just a few months after being elected Conservative Party leader , David Cameron flew to Rwanda . It was a highprofile trip so he could see first-hand the development of one of Africa 's fastest-growing economies and launch his party 's review on globalisation and global poverty . On his first day , he visited a textile factory in Kigali , the country 's capital . Above the hum of the silk reels , he chatted to some of the workers and admired the quality of the patterned fabrics . Before he left , the factory owner , Raj Rejendran , asked for a word . Growing the business , he explained , required expanding into overseas markets . He knew there was demand in the UK for his silk fabrics , but he faced heavy import duties . Might the new party leader look into the issue ? David Cameron promised to do what he could . Since becoming leader he had made tackling global poverty a personal priority . He had even put Africa 's interests above those of his own constituents , heading to Rwanda when thousands of homes in his Oxfordshire constituency were under floodwater . But there was little help the Tory leader could offer Mr Rejendran or any other African entrepreneur who wanted to reach British customers . That 's because the UK 's import duties are set in Brussels , not London . For decades EU policies have held back and distorted African economic growth . Take coffee as just one example . Calestous Juma , at the Harvard Kennedy School , calculates that in 2014 Africa earned nearly $ 2.4bn ( £1.9bn ) from coffee grown in rich African soil and picked by African workers . By contrast , Germany 's coffee processing industry makes $ 3.8bn from roasting imported raw beans and then re-exporting them . Surely , you would think , African countries would roast their own crop before exporting it to Europe so they could reap the extra value . The EU , however , slaps a 7.5pc charge on roasted coffee imports . The tariff perfectly protects German coffee processors while stunting African manufacturing . The EU has tried to address the worst iniquities of its trade policies in recent years but the Common Agricultural Policy contains a complex system of subsidies which harms African agricultural competitiveness . With more than 60pc of Africa 's economically active population working in agriculture , it takes a toll on the livelihoods of millions of Africans . Brexit - whether you welcome it or not - provides a game-changing opportunity for Africa and the UK . Outside the customs union , the new Government could fundamentally change its relationships with the countries of the continent to the advantage of both Africa and the UK . These benefits have been identified in a report from a committee of distinguished African and British politicians and business leaders . Their inquiry into the UK 's efforts to boost trade in Africa through the Africa Free Trade Initiative gathered evidence from more than 60 experts over six months . The report , published a fortnight ago , does not shy away from the significant short-term challenges to trade posed by Brexit . But these are eclipsed by what Ali Mufuruki , the Tanzanian entrepreneur who cochaired the inquiry , describes as the `` big prize '' . Brexit , the inquiry concludes , provides `` an opportunity for the UK to lead the world in structuring a pro-development trade policy with Africa '' . The example of the US shows what could be achieved . Through the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act ( AGOA ) , almost all products from the continent now have duty-free entry into the US . This has been coupled with a package of trade-boosting summits , missions , business councils and regional trade hubs . The impact for both Africa and US businesses has been dramatic . The Act is credited since 2000 with creating more than a million jobs in Africa and generating more than $ 26bn in dutyfree exports to the US . At the same time US exports to sub-Saharan Africa have quadrupled . It all points to what the UK could do . Some critics of Brexit accept that the UK will now have the freedom to alter trade policy in favour of supporting African development but doubt the institutional bandwidth exists to develop a set of enlightened trade policies . They believe all our efforts will be expended instead on trying to agree trade deals with the world 's big economies . But if British policymakers require motivation , then they should take a sideward glance at Turkey . Ankara has developed a strategic partnership with Africa , establishing trade agreements with 38 African countries and growing its network of embassies from just 12 in 2009 to 39 today . As a result , bilateral trade volumes have enjoyed a threefold increase since 2003 . All this while sharing a 500-mile border with Syria . Brexit gives the UK a chance to strike a bold and ambitious deal with African countries , focusing on trade as the route out of poverty . Taking the best from AGOA , it should combine easy access to the UK for African exporters , more investment from the aid budget to build Africa 's trade capacity , and world-beating infrastructure on the ground to get deals flowing . The Africa Prosperity Partnership , as it could be called , would then be the gold standard of trade and development policy the world over . It would be a powerful motor for employment and prosperity across Africa . Importantly too , it would offer the best possible proof that Britain outside the EU is a force for good internationally and provide a sharp riposte to those who believe Brexit means our retreat from the world . Brexit should not only be good for Africa , but Africa could be good for Brexit too . Toby Orr is a senior partner at Portland and a director of Trade Out of Poverty 'If British policymakers require motivation , then they should take a sideward glance at Turkey '
Scotland Gove : we will make Britain safter after vote to leave EU ; Gove sets out vision for Brexit
BRITAIN 'S borders and national security laws must be immediately strengthened in the event of Brexit , the Justice Secretary warns today . In an interview with The Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove says that better protection of the country is the most urgent priority of the Leave campaign . Mr Gove backs David Cameron to remain as Prime Minister in the event of a Brexit . But he says that the Prime Minister would have to `` instantly '' enact laws to stop the influence of `` rogue '' European courts . The powers being demanded in the wake of a Brexit vote include freeing intelligence agencies from European law , allowing foreign criminals and terrorists to be deported without hindrance and freeing the Armed Forces from Brussels diktats . It had been thought that the process of Britain freeing itself from Brussels Continued on Page 4 Interview : Page 20 Continued from Page 1 control s take years , but Mr Gove says today that it should begin immediately with a series of interim laws . The Leave group will today effectively begin the main campaign for the referendum with a series of high-pro-file interventions from Mr Gove and Boris Johnson . George Osborne will tomorrow give a major television interview on the EU and the Prime Minister will make a speech on Monday . In today 's interview , his most outspoken since coming out in favour of Brexit , Mr Gove also warns that Britain 's NHS and schools will not be able to cope with the further influx of immigrants that will come to the UK if the country stays in the EU . And he rules out ever standing for the leadership of the Conservative Party , saying : `` I do n't want to do it and there are people who are far better equipped than me to do it . ''
Brexit : what it means for your portfolio ; POLITICS AND YOUR MONEY ; There is now a real possibility that Britain will quit the EU . Amid lurid predictions from both sides , Kyle Caldwell asks people who actually manage money what they are doing
The starting gun has been fired . On June 23 , a once-in-ageneration event will take place : a referendum on Britain 's membership of the European Union ( EU ) . The run-up to the vote will bring political , economic and financial uncertainty . And uncertainty is the one thing that stock markets hate more than anything . As a result , many investors are worried about the effect of the EU referendum on their portfolio . Telegraph Money runs through the various scenarios . Ahead of the vote - prepare for sterling to fall Sterling , which dipped to a sevenyear low against the US dollar of $ 1.41 earlier this week , will continue to weaken over the next couple of months , analysts say . Uncertainty over the outcome of the vote will make the pound less resilient as investors lose confidence and move to reduce their exposure to sterlingdenominated assets . Nicholas Laser-Ebisch , an analyst at Caxton FX , the foreign exchange business , said : `` As the referendum draws closer , the pound will only continue to weaken . `` Confidence is everything when deciding where to invest , and as the future of the Britain 's relationship to the EU is called into question , this will be extremely detrimental to sterling strength . '' The short-term impact of a vote to leave The short-term impact of a `` Brexit '' vote is expected to be negative for Britain 's stock market , as well as the pound . Morgan Stanley has predicted a 5pc fall in sterling in the immediate aftermath of a vote for Brexit , with weakness persisting into the indefinite future . Citigroup and Goldman Sachs both forecast a 15pc to 20pc hit . Jason Hollands , of Tilney Bestinvest , the advisory firm , said uncertainty would reign for several months in the event of a Brexit vote , a view shared by most analysts . `` It is an oft-repeated mantra that markets hate uncertainty , so this period of debate in the run-up to the vote , and then a potential phase of 'divorce negotiations ' in the aftermath of a vote to leave , undeniably represents a period of significant risk for the British economy as investment decisions by businesses and foreign investors are put on hold , '' Mr Hollands said . Some fund managers already have plans to insulate their portfolios . Steve Davies , manager of the Jupiter UK Growth fund , said he would consider `` hedging a Brexit '' ahead of the vote if the opinion polls suggest that the leave campaign has the upper hand . Mr Davies said this would involve raising cash and buying US dollars instead of sterling , in order to offer some protection against volatility . To raise cash , Mr Davies said he would sell shares that were more geared to Britain 's economy and had less of an international focus . `` As a fund manager , I can not live in an ivory tower outside politics . If I feel I need to put the hedging strategy in place , I will , because the likelihood is that sterling will fall further and stock markets will react negatively , '' he said . Cyclical shares , those that are more closely aligned with the economy , will also be in the firing line . Housebuilders , for instance , would suffer directly from a slowing economy . Of course , a weaker pound is not wholly negative . Some large companies could even benefit because their products and services would become cheaper to foreign buyers . The longer-term impact Whether investors should brace themselves for a sustained period of market turbulence over the next couple of years is less clear , because at this early stage it is a guessing game about whether the economy will be better or worse off . Credit Suisse predicts `` an immediate and simultaneous economic and financial shock '' . Capital Economics , on the other hand , does not think a Brexit would prove an economic disaster . `` We doubt that Britain 's long-term economic outlook hinges on [ Brexit ] , '' the consultancy said . Before rushing to the exits it is worth remembering that Britain 's stock market and economy are not one and the same thing . Larger companies in the FTSE 100 are tipped to cope better with the uncertainty generated by the referendum because 70pc of their earnings come from overseas . Hugh Yarrow , manager of the Evenlode Income fund , who focuses on buying shares that have big brands and secure , market-leading positions in their respective industries , said he would resist the temptation to tinker because he was confident that the businesses in which he invests would be able to adapt . He said : `` I am in the 'do nothing ' camp . The businesses I invest in have their headquarters here in Britain , but they are global businesses and sell their products and services all around the world . Businesses are run by clever people - if there is a Brexit , they will be able to act accordingly in the best interest of shareholders . '' Share prices are influenced by various factors . But over the long term corporate profits and dividends are the most important . Mr Yarrow 's argument is that the international bias of these businesses will enable British-listed firms to cope with whatever storms a Brexit might cause . Neil Woodford , the veteran investor , is also not concerned . He has called the outcome a `` nil-sum game '' . Tom Stevenson , of Fidelity Personal Investing , the fund shop , said : `` For many companies a fall in sterling would be unequivocally good news . For UK-based investors dependent on dividends from blue chips , the dollar denomination of those payouts means they are more likely to be maintained or increased . '' 'For many companies a fall in sterling would be good news '
UK shipping 'on course for Brexit boost '
BREXIT could provide a boost for the UK shipping industry as it will allow the Government to impose a more competitive tax regime than its European neighbours , industry leaders have said . David Dingle , the chairman of Maritime UK , said it was vital that the Government used Brexit as an opportunity to reform its tonnage tax , which allows ship owners to pay rates based on tonnage capacity rather than operating profits . He said that EU state aid rules have made member states such as Greece `` less globally competitive '' in the shipping sector . `` Brussels has taken a very strong line on the level playing field of state aid , '' Mr Dingle told a press briefing yesterday . `` If Brussels does n't move with tonnage tax rules , we might want to in this country post Brexit . '' He suggested the UK could emulate the success of Singapore if it offered more flexibility and competitive rates on tonnage tax than those imposed by the EU . Shipping firms in the UK are allowed to pay tonnage tax if they meet certain conditions , such as agreeing to train seafarers . Though the tax is a piece of UK legislation , it currently must conform to guidelines on state aid set out by the European Commission . It comes as Greece faces pressure from the commission to increase its rate of tonnage tax as it breaches EU rules on state aid . This has reportedly pushed a number of Greek shipping firms to consider moving their business to the UK . Around 90pc of global trade is carried by the international shipping industry , which in the UK contributes £22.2bn to GDP and supports half a million jobs .
Fracking fears have eased after Brexit vote , says Ineos
COMMUNITY opposition to fracking has softened because of concerns linked to Brexit , according to an Ineos director . Tom Pickering , operations director at the firm 's shale unit , said unease about the UK 's energy security once Britain leaves the European Union was casting the nascent industry in a more positive light . While opposition and anxiety remain , he said the change in perspective following the Brexit vote had tightened the focus on the economic benefits of fracking . Mr Pickering has been holding public meetings to allay fears about the industry after the company snapped up shale gas licences across swathes of Yorkshire , the East Midlands and Cheshire . Ineos Shale is investing $ 1bn ( £779m ) into shale gas exploration in the hope of starting extraction in two years ' time . Speaking to the Press Association , Mr Pickering said : `` I have seen a shift in the tone after the Brexit vote . People are saying that 'you just need to be getting on with this ' . ''
EU Brexit team goes hi-tech to outfox spies
THE European Commission has installed Mission Impossible-style fingerprint scanners to protect its Brexit team - as it fears British spy agencies might be eavesdropping . Michel Barnier and his hand-picked team of seasoned negotiators are on a restricted list of officials with clearance to enter the offices of Taskforce 50 , the department charged with securing the best possible deal for the EU from the ongoing Article 50 negotiations . The offices , on the fifth floor of the commission 's Berlaymont HQ in Brussels , require both a badge and fingerprint identification , and it are guarded by G4S , a private security firm . The extra security is evidence of the sensitivity around the Brexit negotiations , with EU officials confiding to The Daily Telegraph their fears that Britain may use MI6 and GCHQ to spy on the European side . The UK is part of the `` Anglo-Saxon '' Five Eyes intelligence sharing community - also comprising the US , Canada , Australia and New Zealand - which is treated with some suspicion in Europe , particularly since it emerged that the US was tapping the phone of Angela Merkel , the German chancellor . `` Everyone is paranoid that the British are spying on us , although no one knows what to do about it if they are - but everyone is aware of the risks , '' a Brussels-based source said . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , is to meet Mr Barnier in Brussels today for the fourth and final day of talks , which have been cloaked by a gentlemen 's agreement of secrecy and radio silence . The two men will discuss the progress made on the financial settlement , citizens rights and Ireland before an expected , carefully choreographed press conference . Fears of spying are not confined to the EU side . Mr Davis carries his Brexit documents in a briefcase fitted with a Faraday cage , which protects it from spies by blocking all wireless , cellular , GPS and Wi-Fi signals .
Ukip has to be a radical party or it is nothing ; Major internal reforms and a tougher line on immigration are needed after the Stoke defeat
There is little comfort to be found for Ukip from the result of the Stoke by-election . This was an election that we really should have won and many will use this result to argue that Ukip 's role is now over and the party is finished . I 've heard it all before . Ukip can have a big future , but it is going to need some radical internal reform . As the Liberal Democrats have shown in years gone by , for an outsider to win a by-election it is vital to get the tactical vote from either Labour or the Tories . Perhaps Ukip 's biggest failure was not to get Tory voters to come across to the party in significant numbers to stop Corbyn 's Labour from winning . Why is this ? In many ways , the party 's election machine is less sophisticated than it was two years ago . But as we can see from opinion polls and the extraordinary win in Copeland , there is currently a bedrock of support for Theresa May , the Prime Minister . Although she backed Remain in the referendum campaign , she has now taken up the mantle of Brexit and made some very strong speeches . Many in the country believe that when Mrs May says Brexit means Brexit , she really does mean it . There is even some speculation that perhaps Ukip could do a deal with the Tories to defeat Labour as we now have a similar agenda on the key issue of leaving the European Union . I fully reject this as I believe that voters may well be disappointed with what they get . Already we have seen that there is no desire from the Government to reclaim our territorial fishing waters , and I was shocked when David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , said that free movement of people may continue for many years . I believe that Ukip needs to bide its time as there will be many Eurosceptics who , by the end of the year , will be asking themselves why this is all taking so long . I still believe that unless this Government is challenged on Brexit every step of the way , we are likely to see a significant watering down of what people believe they voted for on June 23 last year . I must confess that I got the result of this election wrong and thought that Paul Nuttall would win . However , I did have some grave reservations about the campaign itself , all of which I explained to Paul some weeks ago . It seems to me that we have taken a step backwards . Simply sending out armies of keen volunteers to knock on every door was not a tactic that I believed could work . Why would you bother speaking to people that did n't even vote in the historic referendum ? I feel we wasted too many of our manhours . The atmosphere in the campaign office was much too much like the Ukip of old ; we have to target the electorate in a more scientific and mathematical way . Paul is going to have a tough job on his hands to move aside people who have been in position for years and are simply not up to what a modern political party needs to do to win . In many ways , the hardest part of leading Ukip is the internal management . That said , Paul will have many strong friends and donors around him to carry out this vital task . There are those inside the party that believe Ukip needs to become more mainstream in its policy statements . Douglas Carswell and those around him feel awkward and embarrassed at the subject of immigration and think we should soft pedal on this issue . Indeed our platform in Stoke was not particularly strong on control of our borders . My view is that Ukip is a radical party , or it is nothing . As this week 's immigration statistics show , a staggering 74,000 people came into Britain from Romania and Bulgaria alone last year . This figure is higher than anyone would have suggested back in 2014 . Attitudes are hardening across the United Kingdom and the rest of the European Union , too . It is the issue in British politics that Ukip needs to own , because once Article 50 is triggered , I fear there may be a flood of people rushing to get into our country before - as they see it - the door closes . Despite my criticisms of the campaign and my disappointment with the result , there are still millions of Ukip voters out there . They are happy and pleased that by switching their vote to Ukip they were able to get an EU referendum and ultimately get historic change in our country . With Jeremy Corbyn remaining as Labour leader , I am confident that we can push harder still into the old Labour vote . I am also confident that Paul Nuttall is still the right man to do this and he has my full support . There are inevitably highs and lows leading any political party and this will have been a very bruising experience for our leader . As I said before , what he must do now is bide his time and wait for opportunities that will come again . He must own the immigration issue in a way that no other party can , and he needs to make radical internal reforms . I have known Paul for many years . He is a good man who is fiercely patriotic and wants to do the right thing . There are many that will help him achieve what this party is capable of . And for those who are pleased by our disappointment in Stoke , I say this : You 've not heard the last of Ukip yet . FOLLOW Nigel Farage on Twitter @ Nigel_Farage ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
History is made as MPs finally back Brexit ; Victory for May over the Remainers as Commons passes Article 50 Bill with huge majority
THERESA MAY secured a historic Brexit victory last night as her plan to take Britain out of the European Union received overwhelming backing from MPs . They voted by more than four to one in favour of triggering Article 50 in a vote the Government had initially attempted to avoid , until compelled to by the Supreme Court . The legislation will now pass to the House of Lords without a single amendment , which ministers said would make it `` almost impossible '' for pro-European peers to block Brexit . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , said : `` We 've seen a historic vote tonight - a big majority for getting on with negotiating our exit from the EU and a strong new partnership with its member states . `` It has been a serious debate , a healthy debate , with contributions from MPs representing all parts of the UK , and I respect the strong views on all sides . `` The decision on EU membership has been made by the people we serve . It is now time for everyone , whichever way they voted in the referendum , to unite to make a success of the important task at hand for our country . '' `` Sir Bill Cash , chairman of the European Union scrutiny committee , said : `` This is a historic moment . Britain is now leaving the European Union after four decades . '' `` Dominic Raab , a former minister , added that the result sent out a `` clear message to the Lords '' . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , said : `` I never thought I 'd see the day where the House of Commons overwhelmingly voted for Britain to leave the European Union . '' The Government now needs the approval of the Lords , where the Conservatives do not have a majority . There has been suggestion that an alliance of pro-European Tory , Labour and Liberal Democrat peers are plotting to join forces in a bid to frustrate Brexit . But ministers said that the 372-strong Commons majority sent a `` clear message '' to the Lords and warned peers that it would provoke a `` constitutional crisis '' if they tried to block Brexit . A Government source told The Daily Telegraph : `` It would signal a massive blow and could trigger a lot of debate about the end of the Lords if they try to block . The MPs who were elected and sent by the people have voted emphatically in favour of Brexit . '' Mrs May successfully saw off a series of rebellions by Conservative MPs which had threatened to impede the progress of the legislation . Conservative peers have been banned from leaving the country at the end of the month as a part of an attempt to prevent Brexit stalling in the Lords . While the Government is confident the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill will pass its second reading , there are concerns that hostile amendments could be passed . High-profile Tory peers such as Baroness Brady , Lord Lloyd-Webber and Lord Fellowes are likely to be called on to cast their ballots . One Westminster insider said the Government whips had ordered `` everyone who is not dead , lame or senile '' to come to the Lords to vote on the Bill in sittings between Feb 20 and March 7 . Two former Tory chancellors warned that peers would be threatening their own existence if they frustrated the Government 's attempt to start talks about Britain 's exit from the EU . Lord Lamont of Lerwick said : `` I think it would be very difficult for the public to understand how an unelected house could thwart the will of the electorate . '' Lord Lawson of Blaby added : `` The constitutional position is clear and they should not go against it . '' Editorial Comment : Page 19
Staying in single market 'will bring 12m EU migrants ' ; Research group warns that open borders with EU will push schools , services and housing to breaking point
A WAVE of migrants , larger than the combined populations of Bulgaria , Latvia and Lithuania , will come to Britain if the UK stays in the single market after Brexit , a think-tank has warned . An analysis by Migration Watch , a research group that describes itself as independent and non-political , found that unless free movement is curbed after Brexit , more than 12 million people will come to Britain in the next 25 years , putting an increasing strain on public services . It warned that the scope for `` a significant reduction '' in the rate of immigration was `` extremely limited '' if Britain remained within the single market and had to retain acceptance of the European Union 's free movement rules . The group 's analysis adds to mounting pressure on Theresa May , the Prime Minister , to formally rule out remaining in the single market and adopt the so-called `` hard Brexit '' . Earlier this week , Lord King , a former head of the Bank of England , said the Government should stop `` pretending '' Britain would remain in the market after Brexit . Migration Watch UK vice chairman Alp Mehmet said : `` This research spells out the very serious consequences for our society of net migration continuing at its present scale with membership of the single market resulting in a relentless increase in our population . `` An increase of anything like 12 million in just 25 years is , quite simply , unacceptable to the British public and certainly not what they voted for in the referendum , '' he warned . The most recent official figures show that the estimated total international net migration - the difference between the number of people arriving and leaving the UK - was at a near-record 335,000 in the 12 months to July . Migration Watch suggests that net immigration of both EU and non-EU people is likely to remain at more than 300,000 per year in the medium to long term unless Britain quits the single market . Net migration from the EU alone will stay at around 155,000 as workers are drawn by the prospect of higher UK wages and more jobs . The report said the UK 's minimum wage remains three times higher than that of Poland , five times higher than in Romania and six times higher than in Bulgaria , while migrants would also continue to be attracted to Britain because of high youth unemployment rates in southern Europe . `` At a time when the UK government is seeking to close the budget deficit it is hard to see where the money will come from to provide the additional schools , GP surgeries , hospitals and housing , not to speak of how the country 's road and rail networks will cope with such rapid growth , '' the report said . And it warned that the current housing crisis would worsen , adding : `` We would have to build a new home every four and a half minutes just to house the new migrants and their families . '' Migration Watch has urged Mrs May to introduce a work permit system , saying EU citizens should have visa-free access , unless they wish to work . It said : `` We estimate that this would reduce net migration from the EU by about 100,000 a year . '' Some 97 people were arrested during a crackdown on alleged illegal working by immigrants in nail bars . The raids , part of Operation Magnify , took place between Nov 27 and Dec 3 . Immigration officers went to more than 280 businesses across the UK . The majority of those detained were Vietnamese nationals .
Scotland Holidaymakers face Brexit sterling 'rip off '
HOLIDAYMAKERS are being hit by `` disgraceful '' exchange rate profiteering amid Brexit uncertainty , experts warned after several airport outlets offered less than a euro to the pound . Consumer champion Martin Lewis , of www.MoneySupermarket.com , criticised financial companies for taking advantage as one leading airport bought at ( EURO ) 1.35 and sold at just 97 cents . The official rate closed at ( EURO ) 1.11 on Friday . Tweeting a picture of an exchange rate board that showed buy-sell spreads had edged to more than a third , Mr Lewis wrote : `` No wonder they shouted at me 'you 're not allowed to photograph that ' . Disgraceful exchange rate profiteering . '' David Buik , a markets commentator for leading stockbroker Panmure Gordon , said : `` The foreign exchange system is not down to Brexit alone ... But the pound is under pressure and we are back to the volatility days . It is somewhat inevitable that they will capitalise on vulnerable people . '' Holidaymakers were offered ( EURO ) 0.97 for a pound at several airports on Friday after a torrid day in the markets following the overnight `` flash crash '' . Investors were this morning braced for the pound to fall further , fearing continued volatility would result from the Government 's `` hard Brexit '' stance . The Bank of England has asked the Bank for International Settlements to study possible causes for Friday 's selloff when the pound lost 6.1 per cent against the US dollar to reach a 31-year low of $ 1.1841 in just two minutes . Sterling is under intense pressure after Theresa May last week gave her assessment of the forthcoming EU divorce .
Brexit unit 's legal bill exceeds £250,000 in two months
THE new department charged with handling Brexit has spent more than £250,000 on legal advice over the past two months . Government lawyers have been paid £33,000 a week to look into the legal implications for Britain leaving the EU , according to official figures . This does not cover the cost of any external legal advice , and the Government has revealed it is considering recruiting from outside the civil service . `` Detailed work is under way to establish the department 's future budget requirements , including for external recruitment , '' David Jones , the Brexit minister , told The Times . The department was created by Theresa May in July , after the Leave vote in June 's referendum . Officials are still assessing the figure required to cover the cost of legal advice over the next 12 months , during which Mrs May will trigger Article 50 , the formal mechanism to leave the EU . Nick Clegg , the former deputy prime minister , said : `` This huge taxpayer-funded Brexit bill shows how illprepared Whitehall is for what will be the biggest and most complex set of negotiations it has ever attempted . '' Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , revealed earlier this week that headhunters working with 46 offices around the world are hoping to recruit a `` Mark Carney-style '' figurehead as the department 's new permanent secretary , for a salary of £160,000 a year . Mr Carney , a Canadian , is governor of the Bank of England . The news comes as senior government sources privately complained that pro-EU civil servants who are jealous of the new department are trying to frustrate the work of Brexit ministers . £33,000 Weekly sum paid to government lawyers for examining the consequences of a British exit from Europe
Carney : Brexit could harm City of London ; Vote to leave the EU could mean an 'extended period of uncertainty likely to push down on demand '
THE City of London could lose its position as the world 's leading financial centre in the event of Brexit , Mark Carney , the Bank of England Governor , has warned . Speaking to the House of Lords economic affairs committee , Mr Carney said that the City 's strength would `` unlikely be enhanced '' by a withdrawal from the European Union . He added that Brexit would make `` it less likely that London would retain its position '' . He said that the strength of the British financial centre had been `` reinforced by the UK 's membership of the EU and ease of access to the euro area that it is afforded '' . However , the Canadian admitted that the City 's strength is `` not solely based on that '' . Mr Carney suggested that London would remain a financial centre after a vote for Brexit , but `` potentially to a different order of magnitude - in other words , smaller '' . It would `` retain a position of great importance , but I 'm not sure the adjective preeminent would necessarily apply '' . The Governor stressed that the City benefited from what he described as `` the greatest pool of human capital , in my opinion , in financial services '' , referring to the substantial skills and experience of those in the sector . He added : `` There are tremendous advantages to that . '' Mr Carney has previously said that a vote to leave the EU could result in the loss of some British banking jobs . He told MPs last month that `` certain firms would take a view in terms of relocation '' after a vote for Brexit , and that `` we would expect some activity to move . There would be a logic to that . '' The Governor also warned on Tuesday that the forthcoming EU referendum may already be hitting the wider British economy . He said it had `` the potential to reinforce existing vulnerabilities in relation to financial stability '' . The risks were emanating from the UK 's `` very high '' current account defi-cit , as well as from property and financial markets . `` Some elements of these risks may be beginning to manifest , '' he said . `` A vote to leave the EU might result in an extended period of uncertainty about the economic outlook , including about the prospects for export growth . This uncertainty would be likely to push down on demand in the short run . '' Mr Carney warned that Brexit could result in `` less growth '' as a result of the UK 's `` remarkably high '' current account deficit - the size of the gap between money flowing in and out of the economy . `` The likelihood is that it would become more expensive to fund that defi-cit , '' he said , adding that this would mean `` that there would be less activity in the economy , less growth '' . The Canadian chief rebuffed those who accuse the Bank of becoming too political , explaining that it was necessary to assess and report `` major risks '' . Matthew Elliott , chief executive of Vote Leave , said : `` We were told the City would be at risk if we did n't join the euro . Those claims were wrong then and they are wrong now . London is the financial capital of the world because of its global talent pool , its tax and legal system and the dynamic nature of our economy , not because of our EU membership . ''
Scotland Ukip targets Labour rebels who defied constituents
UKIP last night vowed to target the seats of MPs who voted in the Commons against the plan for leaving the European Union despite the majority of their constituents supporting Brexit . A total of seven MPs from such areas rebelled against Theresa May 's Brexit timetable on Wednesday , in a vote which supporters said gave the Prime Minister a `` blank cheque '' to take Britain out of the EU . The Government won a huge mandate for Brexit as 461 MPs backed triggering Article 50 , which begins formal exit negotiations , by the end of March . Labour MPs who voted against Mrs May included Graham Allen , whose Nottingham North constituency voted 63.8 per cent for Leave , and Angela Smith , whose Penistone and Stockbridge seat voted 61.3 per cent Leave . Paul Farrelly , the Labour MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme , serves in an area that voted 61.7 per cent for Brexit and has a slim majority of just 650 . Labour 's Barry Sheerman and Chris Evans also opposed the amendment , as did Plaid Cymru 's Jonathan Roberts and SNP 's Eilidh Whiteford . Gerard Batten , Ukip 's Brexit spokesman , told The Daily Telegraph : `` These MPs have just written their own political epitaphs . Their action is a clear invitation to Ukip to remove them . '' Iain Duncan-Smith , the former work and pensions secretary , said most Labour MPs have `` woken up to the fact that they themselves are in seats that voted to Leave '' , but that some have `` decided they do n't really care '' . `` Ukip have said they are going to target people , so I know that has had an effect on quite a lot of MPs who are worried about what they are going to do over the next couple of years if they are seen to be on the wrong side of this argument , '' he said . Mr Sheerman told Ukip to `` bring it on '' , adding that his vote was made with the `` long-term interests of my constituents '' in mind . Ms Smith said those who voted against the motion `` did not vote against Brexit or indeed against triggering Article 50 , but rather against an unrealistic timetable as far as Parliamentary scrutiny is concerned '' .
EU leaders ' belligerent rhetoric over Brexit will not benefit anyone ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - The rhetoric and manner of some EU leaders , including Jean-Claude Juncker , in the wake of the Brexit vote have had all the marks of frustrated imperialists . It is now time for the language of cooperation between friends . That way , the feelings and aspirations of the majority of citizens of all persuasions across Britain and Europe will be truly represented.Richard Manchester Sanderstead , Surrey SIR - What the Brexit agenda should mean is that all EU citizens currently in this country should be allowed to stay indefinitely . However , when we trigger Article 50 and start controlling immigration , then we should equally restrict arrivals from both Europe and the rest of the world , according to our needs . Peter H Ashcroft Huntingdon , Cambridgeshire SIR - Even in the modern world , exporting countries trade most with those nearby . This arrangement is not just because of transport costs ; it also reflects cultural familiarity and political influence . To sacrifice single market access in order to slow down immigration is economically illiterate , however much it may have been mandated.Ian Wood Bakewell , Derbyshire SIR - Why is Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , even considering a scheme which may require Britons to have a visa simply to visit the EU ( report , August 12 ) ? There is a clear distinction to be made between living and working in a country and holidaying there . Britons can currently travel to countries as diverse as Armenia and Nicaragua without a visa ; why should we need one to go to France or Spain ? I thought Brexit 's aim was to reduce unnecessary bureaucracy , not add another layer.Adrian Thomas Tadley , Hampshire SIR - I am confused by the outrage at the idea that we would have to apply for visas in order to travel to Europe once we have left the EU . Visas are standard practice for travel outside the EU already . An extended visa system would allow Britain to gain tighter control of our own borders , which is what many of those who backed Brexit wanted all along . Jennifer Anderson Oxford SIR - Those who hope for a return to the old-style , blue British passport after Brexit ( report , September 14 ) may be disappointed . First , the change in format which the passport underwent when it changed colour to burgundy was the result of an international agreement , and is unlikely to revert . Secondly , the old passport tended to be black , not blue . My British passport from 1964 is navy blue , but passports issued to me in 1987 and to my late mother in 1980 and 1990 are black . Joseph B Fox Redhill , Surrey
Brexit concerns shake the foundations for housebuilders
THE housebuilding sector became the main victim of Brexit fears on the FTSE 100 , after the chances of Britain leaving the European Union spiked . Investors became increasingly nervous after Citigroup estimated the chances of a Brexit had risen to between 30pc to 40pc , from between 20 to 30pc , after London Mayor Boris Johnson and Justice Secretary Michael Gove joined the 'out ' camp . It triggered a sell-off across propertyrelated stocks . Berkeley Group sank 160p , or 4.8pc , to £32.03 , Persimmon lost 4.3pc to close at £19.73 , Taylor Wimpey dropped 4.7pc to 175p , Barratt Developments slipped 4.2pc to 560p and British Land fell 3.1pc to 671p . On the mid-cap index , Bellway dipped 5.4pc to £25.02 and Zoopla Property was down 1.2pc at 217.3p . Despite lifting its rating on UK stocks to `` overweight '' , JPMorgan Cazenove cautioned : `` Domestic plays , such as homebuilders and retailers , could come under pressure in the case of a Brexit . '' In December , Berkeley said London would need fewer new houses if it bowed out of the EU . Around 40pc of Berkeley 's sales are to overseas investors in the London market , who perceive the capital city to be `` politically and economically stable '' , the investment bank said . Mislav Matejka , of JPMorgan Cazenove , warned : `` If that perception is impacted by Brexit , we could see an impact on demand and London pricing . '' The bank believes as long as the vote is `` pending '' , a degree of uncertainty will blight the sentiment across the housing sector . Separately , Bovis Homes reported a 20pc rise in pre-tax profits to £160m last year and predicted growth would continue , thanks to positive housing market conditions . Nonetheless , shares fell 4pc to 874.5p . On the wider market , Britain 's benchmarked index charged ahead as oil and miners rallied . The FTSE 100 climbed 87.5 points , or 1.47pc , to 6,037.73 . Jameel Ahmad , of ForexTime , said the blue chip index had behaved in `` an unusual way '' after the vote on European Union membership was set for June 23 . `` We are now looking at the increased threat that corporations might threaten to leave the UK if it were to exit the European Union , and there would be huge risks to the UK markets if preliminary polls show that the vote could be as close or is being underestimated as the Scottish Referendum was very famously in September 2014 . '' Mining stocks became the frontrunners after iron ore soared to a fourmonth high of $ 50 per tonne , while copper touched a two-week high amid hopes of a revival in demand for metals in China . Anglo American hit its highest level in four months - up 47.1p , or 10.8pc , to 483.8p . The possible sale of its De Beers headquarters in London also lifted the FTSE 100 stock . Separately , Jefferies hiked its price target from 215p to 275p for valuation reasons . However , in a note entitled 'an uphill battle ' , Christopher LaFemina , said if management successfully implemented its radical restructuring plans , the miner 's share price would `` likely have further upside '' . He added : `` In the near-term , we think Anglo 's share price depends on whether management can convince investors these plans are credible . '' Its peer Glencore leapt 11.8pc to 132.4p , while BHP Billiton advanced 8.5pc to 795p , Rio Tinto added 8.4pc to £20.51 and Antofagasta made gains of 7.7pc to close at 517.5p . However , Jasper Lawler , of CMC Markets , cautioned : `` Mining shares are still wallowing in a hangover from years of excessive production to meet the demands of booming industrial production and construction in China . '' Elsewhere , shares in Home Retail surged 19.9p , or 13pc , to 173.5p after South African furniture retailer Steinhoff made a rival bid for the Argos owner on Friday . Earlier this month , the FTSE 250 group agreed to be bought by Sainsbury 's . Home Retail said it was reviewing the proposal and urged shareholders to take `` no action '' . Clive Black , of Shore Capital , said : `` A counter bid does not come as a surprise to our minds as Sainsbury 's own bid , which was significantly equity based , effectively put the Argos business in-play . '' Shares in the Sainsbury 's edged 2.3pc lower to close at 255.2p . Meanwhile , disappointing fourthquarter earnings dented HSBC in early trade . The FTSE 100 banking stock slumped by as much as 5.4pc to the bottom of the blue chip index , before easing back to close down 4p , or 0.9pc , at 445.9p . Ian Gordon , of Investec , pointed to the $ 1.5bn bank levy charged in the final three months of 2015 , which he believes `` offers a reminder of why HSBC was mistaken in its decision last week to retain its UK domicile '' . Beaten-up oil majors were also among the top gainers , as Brent crude jumped by more than 5pc to $ 34.87 . The upwards came after the International Energy Agency forecast US shale production would fall this year and next . A decline in the number of active rigs in the US also boosted the price of oil , amid hopes it would lead to reduced output . BP was changing hands at 356.7p by close , up 3.9pc , while Royal Dutch Shell B shares rose 3.5pc to £16.15 . On the mid-cap index , Amec Foster Wheeler and Tullow Oil were up 4.6pc and 2.2pc , respectively . Finally , on Aim , shares Eden Research soared 25.5pc to 15.4p after its product 3AEY , an all-natural pesticide that tackles a destructive fungus called Botrytis in table and wine grapes , was granted approval in Spain . It will be sold by its partner Sipcam Iberia .
Trade union ideas on Brexit and Ireland ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - As trade union organisations with members in Britain , Northern Ireland and the Republic , we want a post-Brexit deal that protects their jobs through frictionless trade in goods and services . Our unions will have members both in and out of the European Union , often working for the same employer . They must continue to have equal guarantees of their basic rights at work . And this is not just on Brexit day , but in the aftermath , so that rights in Britain and Northern Ireland do n't fall behind the Republic and rest of the EU after Brexit . We are seriously concerned about the impact of this process on our members ' jobs , rights and livelihoods . Theresa May 's decision to rule out single market and customs union membership before the negotiations even began was an historic mistake . All options that facilitate frictionless trade in goods and services should be on the table when the UK and EU start negotiating their long-term relationship . Trade unions played a key role in the Good Friday Agreement . We have decades of experience of negotiations behind us , and we call on the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom to put party manoeuvring behind her . We need politicians from all sides , and each devolved administration , as well as business and unions , involved in negotiating our future . That 's the only way to prevent the return to a hard border , and ensure that workers do n't pay the price of Brexit . Frances O'Grady General Secretary , Trades Union Congress Patricia King General Secretary , Irish Congress of Trade Unions Owen Reidy Assistant General Secretary ( Northern Ireland ) , Irish Congress of Trade Unions
Scotland Ramsay : Ending the migrant influx will shake Britain out of its laziness ; Celebrity chef rejects bitter rival Jamie Oliver 's complaints over effect of Brexit on restaurant trade
BREXIT will shake Britain out of laziness and give homegrown talent a chance to shine , Gordon Ramsay has said . The chef said he was looking forward to an end to the `` influx '' of migrants after Britain leaves the European Union and claimed it would have a positive effect on the restaurant industry . His optimism contrasts with his rival Jamie Oliver , who campaigned for Remain and blamed the closure of six of his Italian restaurants on the uncertainty that followed the Brexit vote . A curb on migrant labour would create opportunities , Ramsay told Radio Times . `` That level of influx of multinational workers in this country has sort of confirmed how lazy as a nation we are - when individuals from across the seas are prepared to come and work twice as hard for less money , '' he said . `` If anything , it 's a big kick up the a -- -for the industry , and it 's going to get back to the modern-day apprenticeship . So not only do I welcome that kind of change , but I think it 's going to put a lot more emphasis on homegrown talent . '' There is no love lost between Ramsay and Oliver . `` It 's all very well to spout off now about sugar tax and supermarkets . None of that was spoken about when he was label-slapping with Sainsbury 's for 10 years , '' Ramsay said . He was referring to Oliver 's decade as the face of the supermarket chain , a job reported to have earned him £10million . `` Sadly , the only time he opens his mouth is when he 's got something to promote , '' Ramsay added . In August , asked about Ramsay making regular jibes at him , Oliver said : `` TIMES `` He 's got four kids and I 've got five kids and I do n't want to be slagging off some kids ' dad on telly . It 's not nice . '' It appeared to be an attempt to bury RADIO the hatchet , but Ramsay said the remark was hurtful because his wife , Tana , miscarried their fifth child last year . She was `` mortified '' by Oliver 's remark and Ramsay said he will never talk to Oliver again until he apologises . The Michelin-starred chef gave the interview to promote a new ITV documentary about the cocaine trade . He said teenagers should be taught about cocaine , explaining that he sat his children down and showed them how the drug is often cut with cement powder or battery acid . It `` scared the life out of them '' , he said . He added that children should be given drugs education in the same way that they receive sex education . Ramsay said cocaine is rife in the restaurant industry , recalling an occasion last Christmas when a customer asked for a side plate to be changed because he had used it to snort the class-A drug in the bathroom . A chef at a celebrity book launch pressed a foil wrap of cocaine into his palm during a handshake , Ramsay claimed . On another occasion , while cooking for a dinner party he was asked to dust the soufflés with cocaine mixed into the icing sugar . He declined . 'That level of influx of multinational workers has sort of confirmed how lazy as a nation we are '
Scotland Hammond 'contempt ' for Fox will wreck truce ; Ministers ' rapprochement over Brexit predicted to fail because of Chancellor 's 'superior ' attitude
THE Brexit truce between Philip Hammond and Liam Fox will `` inevitably fall apart '' because the Chancellor holds the International Trade Secretary in `` contempt '' , a Tory minister has claimed . Mr Hammond and Dr Fox appeared to settle their differences with a joint article in The Sunday Telegraph saying Britain will completely leave the Single Market and Customs Union after Brexit in 2019 . However , fellow ministers expressed scepticism and Eurosceptic Conservative MPs suggested that Mr Hammond had been forced to `` row back '' by Theresa May . The claim was strongly denied by Downing Street sources . One Tory minister told The Daily Telegraph : `` I do n't believe it . Hammond does not have a high regard for Fox , he holds him in contempt . He 's very superior . Inevitably this truce will fall apart . '' However a Whitehall official insisted that they are united . `` I 've seen them work very closely together , they both take their responsibilities seriously , I believe they do have a strong working relationship . '' After a summer of bitter Cabinet infighting , the Chancellor of the Exchequer and Dr Fox , the International Trade Secretary , appeared to bury the hatchet with a joint pledge that there will be a fixed transition period after leaving the EU . In an article written for The Sunday Telegraph , the ministers - representing the Remain and Leave wings of the Conservative Party - say this will be `` time limited '' and designed to avoid a `` cliff edge '' that could damage British business . Although they do not say how long this period will last , it will not represent an attempt to stay in the EU indefinitely , they say . However critics pointed out that there are still likely to be significant disagreements over the scale of the divorce bill and the length of the transition period . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , said : `` Nothing new www.here.No mention of time , cost or immigration . Just about party unity and not the country as usual . `` We voted to Leave the EU , not for a transition period after two years of talks . Government weak . '' It comes after Mr Hammond came under fire from Cabinet colleagues after he suggested in the Prime Minister 's absence on holiday that he wanted Britain to be able to trade freely with the EU for four years after Brexit . Dr Fox then hit back days later saying that any transition period would have to end before the next general election , which is due to take place in 2022 . It was also claimed that Dr Fox and Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , had been kept out of the loop on plans to allow EU citizens to continue to come to the UK after Brexit , which forced Number 10 to make clear that freedom of movement will end in March 2019 . David Jones , a former Brexit minister , said : `` It has got all the hallmarks of No 10 having had a serious conversation with Philip Hammond . `` Hammond has rowed back significantly from the position he stated three weeks ago - he is accepting we are leaving both the Customs Union and Single Market . `` The only thing that remains an issue is exactly how long this transition period will be . It 's a fairly clear assertion of authority by the Prime Minister . '' The claims of Cabinet splits emerged as David Miliband , a former Labour foreign secretary , called for a second referendum on Brexit and described it as an `` act of unparalleled economic self-harm '' .
Shipping is key to our post-Brexit success
Since the vote to leave the European Union , the future of British business has been the subject of extensive and heated debate . Peter Hargreaves , the billionaire donor to the Leave.EU campaign , was one of many leading business people to suggest that the best model for Britain , post Brexit , was that of Singapore , where there were few barriers to companies who wanted to move there and , in some cases , huge state incentives for those that did . But claims that in order to survive after Brexit the UK shipping sector will have to follow the Singaporean model by pandering to businesses can be readily dismissed . Unlike Singapore , the UK has numerous advantages that have allowed British shipping to flourish . In spite of the doom and gloom surrounding Brexit , the UK 's shipping will be the backbone of a truly `` global Britain '' once we eventually leave the European Union . This global Britain will be defined by new trade agreements and greater attention , in diplomatic and economic terms , paid to the Commonwealth and emerging markets . It will reprise Britain 's position as an international trading hub . And while it 's true that Singapore has grabbed a large market share of international shipping in recent years , it has not been a one-way street : over the past year , a number of shipping companies have moved operations away from it . The UK does n't have to share the same fate . It has more to offer than low financial barriers and less red tape , and the success of the sector must not be underestimated : it supports almost a million UK jobs and delivers 95pc of international trade . Britain , it bears remembering , has a rich seafaring history and continues to be an influential maritime power . The International Maritime Organisation , the regulator of global shipping , is based in London . English language and law are universally respected in global business . More than that , in fact : English law serves as the de facto law for the majority of global businesses . And when you consider Britain 's location geographically , its language and its time zone , it 's clear to see that it is almost uniquely placed to trade goods seamlessly around the globe . London remains a much soughtafter business and industrial centre , and contributes greatly to making British shipping profitable . The Menon report on Leading Maritime Capitals of the World 2017 placed London fifth . A cluster of financial , insurance and legal services in the City makes it an attractive base that allows companies to conduct all their affairs in one location . But the UK 's position as a world-leading shipping hub does n't just hinge on the prosperity of London . The country is home to many worldclass clusters of maritime services , strengthening its overall offering on the global stage . As an island nation , we are accessible and well-equipped to send and receive goods at several points along our vast shoreline - the longest of all EU member states . Ports including Felixstowe , Glasgow , Liverpool and Southampton all have enviable facilities for international shipping . Extensive infrastructure throughout the UK allows the swift delivery of international goods . Few countries in the world can boast of having the same logistical power that the UK has . Few countries , too , can compete with British tonnage tax : a versatile tax system that encourages enterprise in the shipping sector . In Britain , the tax levied on shipping companies depends on the total tonnage of the shipping fleet and not the company 's profits . It is n't unique to the UK , but British tonnage tax is hugely competitive , and represents a very attractive incentive . The UK also continues to have a strong voice within the international community . Just as its diplomatic , political and economic power remains undented by Brexit , so does the future of its growing shipping industry . We are told on an almost daily basis that our post-Brexit future looks bleak , and we are on a sure path to global insignificance . But far from facing a period of decline , the UK will thrive in the post-Brexit world . And what 's more , it is British shipping that will be the very foundation on which we build our post-Brexit success as a nation . Guy Platten is the chief executive of the UK Chamber of Shipping 'Britain has a rich seafaring history and remains a maritime power '
Davis fails to rule out Tory leadership bid
DAVID DAVIS has warned that a Tory leadership contest would be `` catastrophic '' for Brexit negotiations , but refused to rule out the possibility that he could challenge Theresa May while the talks are ongoing . Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary who is tipped for a potential leadership bid , also failed to rule herself out of the running in a series of interviews yesterday . Mrs May 's position is so precarious that MPs know she could be one more error from being forced to step down , with several rivals waiting in the wings should the opportunity arise . Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , are seen as the frontrunners to take over before the next election . But there are those within the Conservative Party who believe it is now time to skip a generation and look to the 2010 intake of MPs for the next leader , including , potentially , Ms Patel . Mr Johnson has already ruled out running to be Tory leader until after Brexit is delivered in 2019 and Mr Davis was invited to do the same yesterday . Appearing on BBC One 's The Andrew Marr Show , Mr Davis was asked : `` You could say , like Boris Johnson , you 're not going to stand against her until Brexit is done , probably not ever ? '' He passed up the opportunity , saying : `` No , look , I 'm not going to get into it . I really am - it 's self-indulgent . '' Asked if a Tory leadership contest would be `` catastrophic '' for Brexit talks , he said : `` Yes . Listen ... I happen to think we have got a very good prime minister . ''
Scotland SNP Brexit chief attacked for saying lack of deal could help independence
NICOLA STURGEON 'S Brexit minister was yesterday accused of `` willing '' Theresa May 's negotiations with Brussels to fail after he said there was a `` high '' chance of a breakdown that could lead to Scottish independence . Mike Russell admitted the odds of failure were less than 50 per cent but claimed it was more likely to happen near the start of the two-year negotiation period and the Scottish Government was working on contingency plans . He said the most likely issue to derail talks is the mooted £100billion `` divorce '' demand from the EU and predicted the UK will try to re-join in 20 years . But the Scottish Conservatives accused him of wanting the talks to fail after he predicted that even a `` moderate '' Brexit deal could lead to independence , and they urged him to get behind Britain 's negotiations . The row broke out as Ms Sturgeon yesterday accused the Tories of `` poisoning the well '' of the Brexit talks by refusing to unilaterally guarantee the rights of EU citizens in the UK . However , The Daily Telegraph disclosed earlier this month how the EU has been plotting for weeks to thwart the Prime Minister 's plans to secure a reciprocal deal for EU migrants and British expats in Europe . Mrs May has warned that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' as she set out her stall with EU leaders and Mr Russell said he thought `` the chances of the UK not sticking with the negotiations are high '' . He told Holyrood 's Europe committee : `` I do n't think they are necessarily 50 or 60 per cent but they 're high . It is in our mind that we would have to be prepared in those circumstances . '' The former education minister predicted the UK would try to return to the EU in 20 years but said `` it will have lost 20 years ' influence and 20 years of progress and 20 years of prosperity . '' Professor Adam Tomkins , the Scottish Tories ' constitution spokesman , said : `` Mike Russell 's hysterical outburst gave the impression that he 'd love nothing more than for the UK to fail in these talks . '' He said this was a `` disgrace '' for a minister .
Scotland Why Sturgeon 's grand tour of Europe was given a chilly reception ; Brexit : Scotland ; Despite intense diplomatic efforts by the SNP leader , there is little appetite in Brussels to complicate Brexit with a Scottish sideshow
WHEN Nicola Sturgeon claimed at her independence referendum press conference to have won `` incredible '' support for Scotland across Europe , she gave a clear indication that she expects the EU to grant single market access in double time after independence . Scotland 's First Minister has embarked on an extensive tour of European capitals and the power bases of Brussels since the Brexit vote , which have resulted in a flurry of photo opportunities and press releases . However , the reality behind the spin is far less impressive , with her officials attempting to hide the fact that she was forced to meet a German minister in a restaurant because he would not allow formal talks in a government building and her Brexit minister infuriating the Spanish government with misleading claims about non-existent talks between them . Even a photo opportunity with Scotland 's EU consuls and diplomats backfired when it emerged one man in the picture was a pest contoller from Paisley who was Estonia 's `` honorary consul '' . Although there is huge sympathy for Scotland 's predicament in the corridors of Brussels , after its healthy 62 per cent Remain vote , foreign MEPs say this is playing second fiddle to the `` realpolitik '' of maintaining good relations with the UK after Brexit . Asked in the Commons yesterday whether she had come across support for an independent Scotland joining the EU , Theresa May said : `` I did not detect any such support . '' Anders Vistisen , a Danish MEP , estimated it would take an independent Scotland between four and six years to get EU membership but only if it committed to the euro and cut its huge deficit , which is higher than Greece 's . `` Although there is a lot of sympathy , the problem is the interests of having good relations with England massively outweighs helping Scotland , '' he said . Although he predicted a few `` hardcore federalists '' would campaign for Scottish independence in a second referendum , he concluded that the vast majority will not want to antagonise Mrs May during the Brexit talks . The First Minister was quick out of the blocks after the vote last June , visiting Brussels the very next week for meetings with Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , Martin Schulz , the European Parliament president and Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian prime minister who is now one of the Commission 's lead Brexit negotiators . The photo opportunities of her shaking hands with such senior dignitaries was supposed to create an impression that Ms Sturgeon was carving out her own foreign policy but she was soon given a harsh lesson on where the real power lies in Europe . Speaking the same day not far away , following a European Council meeting in Brussels , François Hollande , the French president , ruled out any negotiations with Scotland and made it clear that talks would only take place with the UK . Mariano Rajoy , the Spanish prime minister no doubt mindful of the Basque or Catalan dimensions , went even further when he stated unequivocally that `` if the United Kingdom leaves ... Scotland leaves too '' . PA BARLOW/ Germany , Denmark and the Czech Republic also made it clear that they considered Scotland 's situation to be an `` internal '' British issue . JANE Ms Sturgeon then hosted a summit of EU consuls general at Bute House , her official residence in Edinburgh where she staged her referendum press conference on Monday . The Scottish Government issued a photograph of all the attendees posing together in the drawing room . But it later emerged that some of the attendees have honorary titles , with little power and no consular function . Iain Lawson , the honorary consul for Estonia , is a pest controller from Paisley whose link with the Baltic state began when he visited Tallinn with the Tartan Army in the 1990s . Other attendees included British lawyers and a physiotherapist . However , Ms Sturgeon appeared to have pulled off a diplomatic coup in August 2016 when the Scottish Government announced that she had met Michael Roth , then a junior minister in Angela Merkel 's cabinet , in Berlin . The meeting was not publicised to the Scottish press before the trip and a photograph was issued of the pair in the German foreign office . But it later emerged as a result of a Freedom of Information request that the meeting was actually held in a nearby restaurant , called Vau . Michael Russell , her Brexit Minister , then made a major mistake in November after he was caught making inaccurate claims to Brussels diplomats that five million Scots had voted Remain in the referendum and that the only MSPs to vote for Brexit were four Tories . More seriously , he also indicated that the Scottish government was in talks with the Spanish over a special Brexit deal , despite them being vigorously opposed to setting such a precedent given their own problems with separatist movements . His comments reached the ears of Alfonso Dastis , the Spanish Foreign Affairs Minister , and Esteban González Pons , who leads the Spanish delegation of MEPs in the European Parliament 's largest political grouping . Their retribution was swift and harsh . Mr González Pons agreed to an interview with this newspaper in which he made clear that Spain would reject any attempt by Ms Sturgeon to stay in the EU single market if the rest of the UK comes out . He said the Spanish government is planning to be the United Kingdom 's `` best friend '' during the Brexit negotia-tions and they share `` the same point of view about the Scottish question '' . In the same month , Alex Salmond held talks in Switzerland about Scotland becoming a member of the European Free Trade Association ( Efta ) , the four members of which also get access to the EU single market . Monica Maeland , Norway 's trade minister , told the meeting that Scottish membership was not possible because it is not a sovereign state and advised Scotland to `` talk to the government in the UK about these matters '' . But the Efta option , otherwise known as the Norway model , is the one that Ms Sturgeon is understood to be considering as her first step , after winning an independence referendum , rather than full EU membership . The fight for the Union Some big fish within the 'no ' campaign Keith Cochrane/ Sir Ian Wood Selection of a senior Scottish businessman for the Unionist side would highlight the economic argument . Mr Cochrane , a former CEO of Weir Group , and Sir Ian Wood , the oil tycoon , are among possible candidates amid a growing feeling that a non-political figure is best-placed to take on the SNP . Mr Cochran has said Brexit increased the need for the Union , adding that `` uncertainty is unhelpful '' . Sir Ian played a pivotal role in 2014 , warning SNP predictions for North Sea oil were too high . Lord Darling He ran the successful 2014 Better Together campaign and took on the SNP in head-to-head debates . He is unlikely to reprise the role but has shown he is ready to join the fight . He told BBC Radio 4 's Today : `` If Nicola Sturgeon 's argument is OK , the UK voted to leave but Scotland is different . What 's the deal between Scotland and Europe ? We simply do n't know ... I think it 's highly unlikely Spain for example , would allow a situation ... that somehow the UK can leave but Scotland can have its own carve-out . '' Gordon Brown The ex-PM made a passionate intervention in 2014 , but Labour will not campaign alongside anyone else in the wake of its decimation in Scotland at the general election . Mr Brown said : `` Scotland belongs to all of us ... what we have built together by sacrificing and sharing , let no narrow nationalism split asunder . '' Theresa May/ Ruth Davidson The PM will be central but will not lead . For the highly rated Ruth Davidson , the leader of the Scottish Tories , it would be nigh on impossible to lead a cross-party campaign for a `` no '' vote . However , she has already taken the fight to Ms Sturgeon , accusing her of going `` full Donald Trump '' over a series of tweets . JK Rowling The author is seen as a potential leader for the unionist campaign given her widespread appeal . She is seen as nonpartisan and an outspoken critic of Jeremy Corbyn . In the last independence campaign she directly took on nationalists who abused her on Twitter . It is thought unlikely she will lead but could make a series of interventions .
It 's time for the City to move on from the gloom
Oops : another good thing we were told had now become impossible has just happened . And another , and another . In fact , it sometimes feels as if we are seeing several impossible things every day before breakfast , and not just when it comes to global geopolitics . There has been an avalanche of positive business stories over the past few weeks , with company after company announcing a new investment or a fresh job-creating initiative . In most cases , these were the kind of projects we were told would no longer be possible after the Brexit vote . Take commercial property , the one sector that even I was worried about in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote . Yet the City of London has just given the green light to One Undershaft , which will become the Square Mile 's tallest building and London 's second-tallest after the Shard . It is backed by Singapore 's Aroland Holdings . Next door , the Pinnacle at 22 Bishopsgate , which had been dormant for years , seeming permanently stuck at the foundations , is now shooting up again : it will be the City 's second tallest building . The developer - French firm Axa - hesitated briefly before and after the referendum but has decided to press on . Further East , the Chinese are opening their pocketbooks : Greenland , a developer , is building Europe 's tallest residential tower , Spire London , in Canary Wharf , and another consortium wants to redevelop the still largely derelict Royal Albert Dock , just next to City Airport and the Excel centre . ABP London and Citic Group want to turn the area into a major new business hub : they want to erect low-rise blocks intended for Chinese firms seeking European or global headquarters , in what would be a major boost for UK-Asian trade ties . The developers have just signed up four major Chinese banks to finance the first stage of the £1.7bn plan and say that demand is high . In an interview with The Wharf , the local paper , ABP 's chief operating officer John Miu was asked whether he thought there had been any impact on the project from Brexit . His answer : `` The only issue is uncertainty . But I see in the long run it will be beneficial to the UK as a whole , economically and competitively . '' The Chinese are also pouring cash into the UK commercial property market in other ways , snapping up numerous buildings - including Societe Generale 's London headquarters and spending an estimated £4bn in this way in 2016 alone . In the immediate aftermath of the referendum , many property funds were hit by redemptions and forced to temporarily close , spreading panic ; they have now all reopened , with Aviva the last of the big names to do so earlier this month . All of these developers and investors may be wrong for other reasons , of course : the commercial property market looks fragile regardless of geopolitics . The sector is incredibly cyclical and investors have a tendency to pick the worst possible time to spend money . There are always booms and busts , and yields were already far too low well before anybody had the faintest inkling that Brexit was a realistic possibility . But it is clear that investors are as bullish about the UK and London as they have always been and that is great news . The same is true of the big US tech firms : Amazon , Google and Apple are all hiring and spending in London . Apple 's new headquarters in Battersea will anchor that scheme ; Google is helping to build the new King 's Cross business district ; and Amazon is also expanding dramatically . The news is even better for steel : Tata Steel could sell its speciality UK business to Liberty House , saving 1,700 jobs . As to the car industry , it is planning to expand , though unfortunately some state subsidies appear to be involved . Jaguar Land Rover wants to build its new generation electric cars in Britain , and Nissan and all the others will grow their UK operations . It 's time for those City professionals still in denial to readjust and to make the most of the new order . The economy may well dip temporarily at some point , but there will be no Armageddon . The challenge of Brexit is now to get it right . It is time , therefore , for as many academic brains as possible to dedicate themselves to building the most successful post-Brexit economy possible . There is a great model to follow . A group of top , public-minded lawyers are helping map out a new route for an independent UK competition policy . The Brexit Competition Law Working Group has been convened by the excellent Ali Nikpay , a partner at Gibson Dunn & Crutcher and one of the world 's pre-eminent experts in European competition law ; its chairman is Sir John Vickers , who has been among other things chief economist of the Bank of England , Director General of the Office of Fair Trading and chair of the Independent Commission on Banking . Other members include John Fingleton ( another former boss of the OFT ) , Richard Whish , Amelia Fletcher , Jon Turner and Sir Nicholas Forwood . The group has already published two fascinating papers . The latest , by Sir Philip Lowe , argues ( among other things ) that `` there is every reason to believe that the Competition and Markets Authority ( CMA ) post-Brexit will be able to maintain and strengthen its position as one of the leading competition authorities in the world ... [ Brexit ] can only enhance the influence of the UK in the handling of competition issues on worldwide markets . '' I would recommend that anybody with an interest take a look at the site - and that other City professions create similar working groups . The Government and the civil service ca n't do everything - they need the urgent help of leading practitioners in every field to help build a successful post-Brexit Britain . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk 'It is clear investors are as bullish about the UK and London as they have always been '
MPs aim for Brexit vote before court appeal ; Tory Eurosceptics seek to pre-empt legal process with parliamentary debate to trigger Article 50
TORY MPs are planning to force a Commons vote on triggering the Brexit process to stop Parliament being dictated to by the Supreme Court . The news came as the Scottish government launched its own legal action to try to frustrate plans for Brexit . British government lawyers were given the formal go-ahead to challenge the High Court ruling at the Supreme Court yesterday . However , Eurosceptic Conservative MPs are poised to press their case with Commons authorities . They are hoping that a backbench debate - followed by a vote on triggering Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty - will satisfy a High Court ruling last week that Parliament must have a say . The Government is under pressure to pass a law paving the way for Britain to leave the EU and not wait for the Supreme Court to hear an appeal on the High Court ruling next month . MPs met Jeremy Wright , the Attorney General , on Monday to raise concerns that a long parliamentary process might delay the start of the Brexit process . David Davis , the Exiting the European Union Secretary , admitted that peers and MPs could vote on a Bill authorising Article 50 before the start of the four-day hearing on Dec 5 . The Tory MPs ' draft legislation would say that the Prime Minister can start Brexit talks at any point between now and the end of March next year . Sir Gerald Howarth , a Eurosceptic Tory MP backing the plans , said : `` The public can not be left in limbo . Industry and commerce want certainty . '' A Government source admitted a vote in the Commons could help its case in the Supreme Court , but ministers could not endorse the debate because it could be seen as pressuring the justices . Nicola Sturgeon said her Government would argue in the court that the Scottish Parliament should have to consent to the triggering of Article 50 . Although Ms Sturgeon denied that she was trying to infuriate the rest of the UK , the motion would allow MSPs to block Brexit as a majority of members in the Holyrood chamber are vigorously opposed to leaving the EU . The Prime Minister 's deputy official spokesman said : `` It is a matter for the Scottish government whether they apply to intervene in this case . We are firmly of the opinion that it 's the UK Government that will deliver on the instructions of the British electorate as set out in the referendum result . '' In an interview with Sky News , Theresa May urged Remain supporters to get over the fact Britain is leaving the EU . She said : `` People voted to leave ... and what I 'm focusing on and what I 'm determined to do is to deliver on that and make a success of it . '' Mr Davis is today expected to outline a plan to share civil service analysis of leaving the EU with the devolved administrations and offer `` informal engagement '' with the Scottish , Welsh and Northern Irish governments . Philip Johnston , Alan Cochrane : Page 18 Editorial Comment : Page 19
May plotting a new year comeback that will shift the focus from Brexit , say insiders
THERESA MAY will use Damian Green 's downfall as an opportunity to relaunch her premiership in the new year by creating a legacy that goes beyond Brexit . The Prime Minister is considering creating a new Whitehall department to concentrate on a major domestic issue , such as housing and infrastructure , rather than replacing Mr Green with another First Secretary of State . She will also make a third major speech on Brexit to set out exactly what she wants Britain 's future relationship with the EU to be . This comes as allies of Mr Green said his 40-year friendship with Mrs May had `` cooled '' as a result of his enforced resignation because he resented the way she had handled the matter . After a turbulent 2017 , Mrs May wants to seize the initiative after her Christmas break . She is desperate to avoid being remembered as `` the Brexit Prime Minister '' and wants to make meaningful progress in areas such as housing , education and social mobility . One option under consideration is the creation of a new Department for Housing and Infrastructure , merging some of the responsibilities currently held by Sajid Javid , the Communities and Local Government Secretary , and Chris Grayling , Transport Secretary . A Whitehall source said : `` The Prime Minister has two weeks over Christmas to think about what to do next . She will start the new year wanting to keep moving forward on Europe but she also has a lot of domestic priorities . One possibility is creating a new Whitehall department with a new Cabinet post to go with it . It would be something big , such as housing and infrastructure . That is really important to her . '' A Ministry of Housing was created in 1951 to rebuild Britain 's housing stock after the Second World War , and was headed by Harold Macmillan before he became prime minister . It was merged with the Ministry of Transport in 1970 to form the Department for the Environment . Mrs May could yet decide to replace Mr Green with another First Secretary of State . Mr Green feels bitter after it emerged that Mrs May had waited two days to inform him he had been found in breach of the ministerial code of conduct . A friend of Mr Green said : `` It 's fair to say he was not overly happy with the way this has dragged on and been dragged out . I hope when the dust settles he and Theresa will be able to speak again as friends , but in the short term he is disappointed with the way this has played out . His relationship with Theresa May has cooled . '' Fraser Nelson : Page 20 'It 's fair to say he [ Mr Green ] was not overly happy with the way this has dragged on and been dragged out '
The historic turning-point when betraying Brexit seems the only way ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Whatever Theresa May read at Oxford , it can not have been history . Danegeld never works . This Government and Parliament , dominated by Remainers , are betraying Brexit and allowing the EU to treat us with contempt . Mrs May and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , are the Chamberlain and Halifax of their day , but where is the modern Churchill ? Rodney G James Brasschaat , Antwerp , Belgium sir - Charles Moore 's brilliant article on his disillusionment with our Brexit approach ( Comment , December 2 ) reflected an issue that is rarely mentioned , in the welter of acrimony about trade talks , but is the driving force behind my decision to vote to leave . That is : the loss of our national self-respect . For years we have , in effect , been governed by foreigners . This is a state of affairs that would have appalled the millions who died in world wars defending this country 's freedom . The EU is now routinely insulting and humiliating us , with no apparent reaction . Am I alone in yearning for an aggressive approach from this country that puts them firmly in their place ? Clive Green Bristol sir - Many who voted to leave the EU will be horrified to read of Mrs May 's latest giveaway proposal to allow the European Court of Justice to make rulings above our own Supreme Court ( report , December 3 ) . She has offered too many concessions and a lot of cash already without securing anything much . If she adds this latest offering to Brussels , she will effectively have reversed the will of the British people , and be known as the Conservative PM who led to the death of her own party . Suzanne Greenhill Bishops Cleeve , Gloucestershire sir - Since its inception , the Supreme Court has followed the jurisprudence of both the ECJ and the ECHR ( European Court of Human Rights ) . After Brexit , clarity and guidance are needed on how past judgments of the Supreme Court are to be regarded . Whatever the future legal relationship between the UK and the EU , the judgments of both the ECJ and the ECHR will still be submitted and relied upon as persuasive authorities . James Keeley , Barrister London WC1 sir - Mrs May now thinks Brexit does n't mean Brexit . What does it mean , pray ? John K Greenwood Southampton sir - My congratulations to Theresa May and her Government for securing a new first for Britain , and indeed , for the world . We are to be the first and only country in history to purchase a trade deficit . M J W Daley London W4
Labour 's double game over Brexit BODY : In February , the House of Commons passed the legislation to trigger Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty and begin the process of Brexit by 494 votes to 122 . At that point , even those MPs who disliked the use of a referendum to supplant the decision-making of Parliament had to accept that all the constitutional hurdles had been negotiated . But in order for that vote to be fulfilled , to make the transition from EU member to independent nation a reality , it is necessary to put the necessary laws in place . The EU Withdrawal Bill , currently before Parliament , is designed to do just that . This is not a flawless measure and there are debates to be had , especially over the so-called Henry VIII powers . It is the duty of MPs and peers to improve legislation , not just swallow whatever the executive serves up . However , there is a risk that the Bill will turn into a proxy battleground for continued warfare over Brexit itself . The Government has twice postponed debate on the committee stages of the legislation because of the large number of amendments tabled , many by Conservative Remainers . At this rate , the Bill may not get through the Commons before Christmas and it then faces a serious challenge in the Lords next year . Labour , which professes to support Brexit in the light of the referendum result , none the less senses an opportunity to frustrate the process . Sir Keir Starmer , the party 's spokesman , has vowed to support the potential Conservative rebels unless the Government accepts six changes to the Bill . It is no surprise to discover that the Opposition wants to make the Government 's task as difficult as possible . Labour did the same to the Maastricht Treaty in 1993 , siding then with Tory Eurosceptics . But having claimed to accept the result of the referendum , Labour is now reluctant to make Brexit happen . The Brussels summit last week appeared to revive the prospect of achieving an EU-UK agreement that is acceptable to both sides . Moreover , a large majority in the Commons is in favour of observing the referendum mandate and leaving the EU . But a minority inside and outside Parliament think this can be reversed and hope parliamentary chaos , coinciding with ongoing disputes over money and future trade relationships , will wreck the process , as well it might . Those who claim to support Brexit must not now use parliamentary tactics to obstruct it .
Labour 's secret plan to increase migration ; The Telegraph Election 2017 ; Leaked document reveals Corbyn would reinstate visa scheme for unskilled workers post Brexit ; Labour proposal welcomes low-skill migrants to the UK
LABOUR has drawn up a secret plan to allow thousands of unskilled migrants to enter the UK after Brexit , according to leaked documents seen by The Daily Telegraph . Jeremy Corbyn 's party is considering bringing back a scrapped visa scheme that allows unskilled labourers to move to the UK and compete with British workers for jobs such as seasonal work on farms , and in factories . The policy paper also sets out plans for a green card scheme and admits Labour does not consider cutting net migration a priority . It gives the first real look at the party 's immigration policy after its manifesto set out aims but no detail on how Labour would tackle a new visa system . After Brexit , EU nationals are likely to require a visa to live and work in the UK as both the Conservatives and Labour have vowed to end freedom of movement . However , Mr Corbyn 's plan makes clear that Labour would extend the visas to workers in low-paid jobs that require no qualifications . Immigration was one of the defining issues of last year 's EU referendum and swathes of Labour voters backed Brexit citing high numbers of low-skilled migrants moving to Northern towns as a reason to `` take back control '' and end freedom of movement within the EU . The decision to open up a new visa route for low-skilled labour , thought to include people from countries outside the EU , will lead to fears that Mr Corbyn 's party will reinstate freedom of movement by another name . Last night Robert Goodwill , the Immigration Minister , said : `` This leaked plan is the latest sign that Jeremy Corbyn and Diane Abbott will never reduce immigration because they simply do n't believe in doing so . `` Only Theresa May and her Conservative team will reduce immigration as we leave the EU , while making sure our economy continues to attract the brightest and best workers it needs . '' The five-page document , written by Lachlan Stuart , Mr Corbyn 's immigration policy adviser , emerged after the Labour leader admitted during a television appearance on Monday that the net migration figure may go up under his government . It is marked `` Leader of the Opposition 's Office '' and written as a question and answer-style piece thought to have been prepared for Labour candidates to help them explain the party 's policy during television and radio appearances . It has a `` confidential '' watermark and is dated from earlier this month . It will come as a blow to Labour MPs in northern England who are working hard to convince voters that the party will be tough on immigration if elected . During his live appearance on Sky and Channel 4 , Mr Corbyn said he would not `` stand here and put a figure '' on the number of migrants coming to the UK . Previously Ms Abbott , the shadow home secretary , told a Bloomberg event : `` We will not , as Theresa May has done , prioritise controlling immigration ; not to say that we do n't believe we should n't have fair rules and management of migration . We will prioritise the economy , that 's what will be different . '' The document casts significant doubt on Mr Corbyn 's promise to put UK workers first . It reveals Mr Corbyn will scrap restrictions on how much money family members must have before they are allowed to relocate to the UK to join others and make it easier to claim asylum in Britain . All current EU nationals living in the UK would be given a green card , giving them the right to live and work in Britain although not British citizenship . Five huge new IT projects would be needed for the new immigration system . The party puts the cost at £2 million , but experts say it would be much more . The leaked plan suggests the means test that ensures people can support family members who want to live in Britain will be scrapped , saying : `` We would revisit the family connection rules in order not to discriminate between rich and poor families . '' The paper also details plans to bring back the tier-three entry route created by a Labour government and scrapped by David Cameron in 2013 . That scheme was designed to encourage low-skilled workers to fill jobs in factories and farms , but was never needed because of high migration from countries such as Poland and Romania . The leaked paper states : `` We envisage a requirement to make continued use of the current five-tiered tiered visa system , including the currently unused tier applicable to those seeking lowskilled , unskilled or seasonal work . '' On whether net migration would go up under a Corbyn government it adds : `` Immigration is driven more by economic requirements of both migrant and host far more than it is regulated by systems of permit control . `` The numbers might go up or down but not as a consequence of these changes . We are not setting false , misleading , divisive targets . '' A Labour spokesman said : `` After Britain leaves the EU , free movement of labour will come to an end . Labour will introduce fair rules and managed migration , based on the needs of our economy . As part of our work in exploring the options , a number of discussion papers have been produced . This is part of one such document . It is not a statement of Labour policy , which is set out in our manifesto . '' The party 's manifesto states that Labour will put `` growth , jobs and prosperity '' ahead of `` bogus immigration targets '' but gives no detail . 'Jeremy Corbyn and Diane Abbott will never reduce immigration because they do n't believe in doing so '
The endgame for a very political banker ; Mark Carney has shown that he is not afraid to stray well beyond economics to get what he wants
Is he jumping earlier than she wanted him to go ? Did she push him out sooner than he wanted to leave ? Or have the two most important figures in Britain 's Brexit saga reached an accommodation that suits both their purposes ? We may never know . But one thing emerges clearly from the drama over Mr Carney 's future : he is a very political central banker indeed . I do n't mean that as a criticism , nor as an endorsement of the argument that Mr Carney has overstepped his remit over Brexit . I am simply making an observation of the skill and daring that the Governor of the Bank of England has displayed in the wrangling over his future - skill and daring that yesterday morning saw Downing Street 's endorsement of Mr Carney as `` absolutely '' the right man for the job . Theresa May 's spokesman expressed the hope that the Governor would stay on after his five-year term ends in 2018 . It was a shift from her speech at the Conservative Party conference last month , where she started a conversation about the impact of Mr Carney 's ultra-loose monetary policies and promised `` change '' . That slightly clumsy intervention may not have been intended to raise questions about Mr Carney 's future but that was its effect . It emboldened Conservatives seeking to punish Mr Carney for his referendum warnings about the risks of Brexit . But calls for Mr Carney 's head gave the Governor an opportunity - one he used deftly . It gave him the pretext to force Mrs May to choose : back me or sack me . Remember , this issue was raised above the level of Westminster chatter to become a real question of importance by Mr Carney himself last week at a House of Lords committee , when he spoke of his `` entirely personal '' decision about whether to stay on as Governor . Of course he insisted that no one should read anything into his comments , but a central banker as smart as Mr Carney does not say such things without knowing exactly what the consequences will be . And the consequence was that sooner or later Mrs May would have to answer Mr Carney 's challenge over his future . To underline the point , `` friends '' of Mr Carney last week briefed newspapers that a man who only weeks ago was privately insisting wild horses could not drag him out of his job was actually ready to walk , perhaps even before 2018 . Mr Carney and friends were betting that the Brexiteers ' line of attack had made it hard for Mrs May to do anything other than back him to the hilt . Before the row over his political stance on Brexit blew up , there was a legitimate question to be asked about Mr Carney 's future , based on his economic competence . Some of his policies , especially `` forward guidance '' about interest rates , have been less than impressive . But the Carney-bashers allowed the debate to shift from economics into politics . He bet that Mrs May could not afford to have markets and investors ( and even some voters ) see Brexit Britain as a country where the central bank governor could be purged for failing to pass a political purity test over Brexit . Tory attacks on him upped the stakes , but Mr Carney raised them again . He could afford to walk away ; could Britain afford to have him go ? Mrs May has answered that question . Mr Carney stays , but not for the eight years his admirers had hoped for . Did she deny him the full threeyear extension to placate his critics and punish his attempts to bounce her into backing him ? Did Mr Carney manoeuvre her into offering him the full extension , then turn it down ? Or did they compromise , both giving ground to get something they want : for her , continuity at the Bank during the crucial years before Brexit , and a Governor who knows who is boss ; for him , the public backing of the PM in the face of Tory attacks ? Mr Carney 's movements will be of prime importance to Brexit Britain ; they will also be closely followed in his native Canada . He once dreamed of returning home as a Liberal Party prime minister . That role is currently occupied by the 44-year-old Justin Trudeau . He does not have to call an election until October 2019 , a few months after Mr Carney starts looking for a new job . Mr Trudeau , like Mrs May , will be in no doubt that Mark Carney is not afraid to play politics in order to get what he wants . FOLLOW James Kirkup on Twitter @ jameskirkup ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Backlash at prospect of more Brexit uncertainty
BUSINESS leaders were grappling with new uncertainties over Brexit and battling to salvage plans for a new industrial strategy after Theresa May 's snap election backfired to leave Britain with a weakened minority administration . The Conservatives failure to win an outright majority stoked fears that manifesto pledges on skills and infrastructure investment could fall by the wayside as Mrs May attempts to keep her Government in power . The Prime Minister faced tacit criticism in public and scathing comments in private from business leaders over her campaign , which was viewed as having made a series of missteps and failing to answer key questions over Brexit and the economy . Writing in The Daily Telegraph , Virgin Money chief executive Jayne-Anne Gadhia said that while she disagreed with some of Jeremy Corbyn 's policies he `` expressed his vision clearly at this election '' and that she `` knew what he stood for '' . The banking leader made no direct comment on Mrs May , but praised the `` energy , passion and vision '' of Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson . Adam Marshall , director general of the British Chambers of Commerce , said : `` There is a great weariness from business after two years of non-stop politics . They are frustrated that practical issues are ignored in favour of high politics . This situation does n't seem likely to change that . '' With the sway gained by the Democratic Unionist Party , Dr Marshall said Northern Irish companies would lobby their politicians hard to keep an open border with the Republic . With all eyes on Westminster , clouds gathered over the wider economy as manufacturing and construction data for April fell short of forecasts . Carolyn Fairbairn , director-general of the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) , warned Mrs May that it was `` a serious moment for the UK economy '' . She renewed calls from big business for Brexit negotiations to move quickly on a smooth path . She said : `` We need to move much faster to fix the foundations of the UK economy and our productivity problem . We need meaningful progress on a modern industrial strategy . '' The new Government is due to begin negotiations with the EU in nine days , and faces a `` ticking clock '' , the CBI chief said . While the planned industrial strategy should be driven through , big businesses called for a rethink on Mrs May 's plan to regulate executive pay and force companies that import skilled labour to pay a levy . Ms Fairbairn said : `` We completely understands that it can be appropriate for Government to intervene in markets - particularly at the moment . But they should be done with a strong evidence base and full consultation . '' Small businesses put pressure on Mrs May to negotiate a softer exit from the EU than her campaign presented . Mike Cherry , national chairman of the Federation of Small Businesses , demanded `` easy access to the single market and the ability to hire workers with the skills they need '' . David Page , a senior economist at Axa Investment Managers , warned that Mrs May 's minority Government could find itself challenged over Brexit . He said : `` The problem for this Government is that its new fragility increases the difficulty in driving its version of Brexit , raising the chances of a chaotic Brexit with no deal in place . '' It meant market reaction to the hung Parliament was relatively muted , as analysts and traders continued to look ahead to the crucial Brexit negotiations . By the end of the day the FTSE 100 was up slightly and the pound regained much of the ground lost in the wake of the shock exit poll on Thursday night . Jayne-Anne Gadhia : Page 36
Scotland Pro-EU campaigner raises funds to support Remain MPs
GINA MILLER , the businesswoman whose legal action forced Theresa May to hold a parliamentary vote on Brexit , has launched a fundraising campaign to support pro-Remain MPs in the general election . Ms Miller has asked for £40,000 in donations to prevent an `` extreme Brexit '' by securing the election of as many MPs as possible who oppose it . Within hours of the launch , it smashed the original £10,000 target and Ms Miller increased her demand to £25,000 and then £40,000 after raising £33,000 in a day . The campaign will tour marginal seats and provide extra campaign staff for anti-brexit MPs . On the gofundme website Ms Miller wrote : `` We need to prevent MPs and the people being forced into an extreme Brexit that is not in Britain 's best interests . ''
City watchdog gears up for Brexit with wishlist for talks
MAKING sure the financial sector remains resilient through Brexit as well as looking after vulnerable customers and an ageing population will be among the priorities for the Financial Conduct Authority in the next two years , the regulator has promised . The City 's finance watchdog has outlined how it will support the Government through Brexit , as it warned that uncertainty surrounding the exit from the EU could hamper liquidity and limit access for UK clients . It pointed to a wishlist of five things it deemed important during the Brexit negotiations and which will guide its `` technical support '' to the Government throughout the process . These included ensuring cross-border market access , consistent global standards `` to minimise the risks of regulatory arbitrage '' , co-operation between regulatory authorities , influence over standards and the opportunity to maintain a skilled , diverse workforce . It warned that a lack of clarity over how the negotiations will go could `` potentially lead to a period of prolonged uncertainty for markets , firms and consumers '' with the impact spreading beyond the financial markets and into the UK economy . The regulator made the comments in its 2017-18 business plan published yesterday , alongside a document outlining its views on the sector and its mission statement , which aims to lay out the rationale behind its decisions . `` Taken together , these documents reflect our aim for the FCA to be more transparent and accountable to the UK public , '' said chief executive Andrew Bailey , later adding that challenges `` come thick and fast '' for the FCA . Those challenges not only span Brexit , which has seen the regulator put aside an `` unavoidable '' cost of £2.5m to help partly cover withdrawal costs and is clearly a key concern for the financial sector , but also making financial advice safer and more accessible to consumers and ensuring that whistleblowers are properly protected . The latter has been even more of a focus since the FCA opened an investigation into Barclays ' boss Jes Staley over an attempt to identify a whistleblower . Mr Bailey would not comment on Barclays but said the watchdog took whistleblowing `` very seriously '' .
UK business will prosper , even with a 'hard Brexit ' , says Fitch
BRITISH companies across all sectors will remain resilient after the country leaves the European Union , even if the UK heads for a `` hard Brexit '' , according to Fitch . Officials at the rating agency said businesses would cope even if Britain did not secure a transition deal with Brussels and fell back on World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules for trade with its former EU partners . `` We 've not seen any sector where Brexit will be the bogeyman that causes everything to fall over , '' said Alex Griffiths , a group credit officer at Fitch . However , Mr Griffiths warned that it was important to resolve uncertainty surrounding the UK 's trading relationships as quickly as possible . `` A long period of uncertainty will be very bad for corporates , '' he said . `` As soon as you look at trade , and global supply chains , for these companies there is going to be a big impact if we have a hard Brexit will tariffs going up . There will be a lot of shuffling around to do , but ultimately the companies will cope . `` It 's pressure . But it 's not companies falling over rapidly . '' Retailers are expected to come under pressure from the weaker pound , which has pushed up import costs , as well as ongoing competition on the high street , Mr Griffiths said . Fitch also warned that it could strip the US of its prized top rating if Donald Trump embarks on a fiscal splurge . Ed Parker , head of European sovereign ratings at Fitch , said rising debt levels and weak growth would lead to a `` heavy flow '' of credit rating downgrades this year , adding that a trade war triggered by the new US president presented one of the biggest risks to the global economy . `` Fiscal stimulus is back , '' he said at a conference in London . `` We do see increasing medium-term pressures [ on the US credit rating ] . Even before elections , the US had the highest level of government debt of any AAA country . `` If we add on top of that Trump 's plans to cut taxes by $ 6.2 trillion over the next 10 years , that could add around 33pc to US government debt [ in 2016 terms ] . '' Fitch also warned that political risks in Europe were also a threat to the global recovery . It came as minutes of the European Central Bank 's latest policy meeting showed `` a few members '' opposed proposals to extend the central bank 's multi-billion-euro bond-buying programme beyond March . The minutes of its December meeting showed that policymakers were divided over whether to continue purchases at ( EURO ) 80bn a month until September 2017 , or extend the programme to the end of the year at a reduced monthly pace of ( EURO ) 60bn , which policymakers eventually opted for . However , the minutes showed that `` a few members could not support either of the two options that had been proposed '' .
Scotland Labour at odds over Brexit and immigration controls
LABOUR 'S policy on immigration descended further into chaos last night after Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , called for changes to freedom of movement after Britain leaves the EU . Sir Keir said Labour could not avoid the issue as he acknowledged that abandoning the principle of free movement of labour would make it harder to maintain tariff-free access to the single market . His comments put him at odds with shadow cabinet colleagues such as Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , who argue there must be no change to freedom of movement rules . In a speech in London Sir Keir said : `` No comprehensive approach to Brexit or response to the referendum result can ignore the issue of freedom of movement . '' As he vowed to produce a `` bold and ambitious '' response to Brexit , the frontbencher said the `` status quo is not an option '' and insisted that the rules must change . Sir Keir said : `` It was striking that the referendum results showed the areas in the country with the highest levels of immigration voted most strongly to Remain . But the areas with the highest pace of change voted most strongly to Leave . That tells me that the British people are open and tolerant ; but that they also expect change to be managed , rather than simply allowing the free market to rip through communities . '' His comments came just days after Ms Abbott said the UK could not `` dump '' free movement and stay in the single market . She said : `` Access to the single market and freedom of movement are inextricably linked . '' Sketch : Page 8
Judge warns Brexit could be 'difficult ' to achieve
A SUPREME Court judge has suggested that Theresa May could be forced to unpick every piece of EU legislation before Brexit is triggered , in comments that one critic said could prompt a `` constitutional crisis '' . In a speech that raised the prospect of Brexit being delayed by years , Justice Hale said a `` simple act of Parliament '' may not be enough to ensure the UK leaves the European Union . Justice Hale is one of 11 Supreme Court judges who will sit next month to rule on whether the Prime Minister must seek the approval of parliament before triggering Article 50 . The Government has appealed against a ruling by High Court judges , who were accused by MPs of attempting to thwart the will of voters who backed Brexit by demanding Mrs May consults Parliament over her plans . In her speech earlier this month Justice Hale said the case raises `` difficult and delicate issues '' . She also stressed that the referendum on June 23 was not `` legally binding on Parliament '' . Iain Duncan Smith said Justice Hale 's remarks raised serious questions about whether she can be impartial in the ruling on Article 50 appeal . Dominic Raab MP warned that Justice Hale `` risks the perception that she has prejudged a case she is about to hear '' . Mr Duncan Smith , a former Cabinet minister , told The Daily Telegraph : `` The President of the court should look at this and ask the question , because it seems to me that we may be in a position of her literally ruling herself out . '' He added : `` If they were to do this , it 's a constitutional crisis . `` The individual concerned herself has always been opposed to Britain leaving the EU and has made her expressions quite clear about that so her opinions are fine , but generally I do not think they will be the majority opinion in the Supreme Court . '' In her speech , Justice Hale said : `` The argument is that the European Communities Act 1972 grants rights to individuals and others which will automatically be lost if the Treaties cease to apply . Such a result , it is said , can only be achieved by an Act of Parliament . `` Another question is whether it would be enough for a simple Act of Parliament to authorise the Government to give notice , or whether it would have to be a comprehensive replacement for the 1972 Act . `` The contrary argument is that the conduct of foreign affairs , including the making and unmaking of treaties with foreign powers , lies within the prerogative powers of the Crown . `` What has to be done instead is perhaps not so clear . But the case is destined for our court , so I must say no more . '' A spokesman for the Supreme Court said that Justice Hale was `` presenting the arguments from both sides of the Article 50 appeal in an impartial way '' . Regrets Lady Hale said we would miss Rights Act Lady Hale , the most senior female judge in the country , has previously been criticised for her outspoken views on the Human Rights Act and her intervention in family law . In 2013 she warned that her fellow justices would `` regret '' the repeal of the Act , something discussed as part of the decision to leave the EU . The Baroness , 71 , has championed feminist causes and has warned of `` sexism '' in the legal profession for its failure to hire talented women .
Stay focused on the 'known knowns ' ; EXPERT VIEW
Donald Rumsfeld , the former US defence secretary , once said : `` There are known knowns . These are things that we know . There are known unknowns . That is to say , there are things that we know we do n't know . But there are also unknown unknowns . There are things we do n't know we do n't know . '' I am amazed by how much time and effort people waste trying to guess what will happen in known unknowns . Brexit , China , commodities , interest rates , the oil price , quantitative easing and the US presidential election are all known unknowns . Take Brexit : who would feel confident in taking an investment stance based on the outcome of an event that every pollster got wrong ? Evidently some fund managers did : `` Brexit changes everything '' exclaimed one absolute return ( what an inappropriate title that is ) fund manager who was down by more than 20pc over the year to date . On the contrary , so far I think it has changed very little . After all , it has n't happened yet . I have just as little sympathy with the few fund managers who were praised for being up by 20pc immediately after the referendum . They were willing to bet their investors ' money on a coin toss , it seems . The problem is n't just that these events are difficult or even impossible to predict . Markets are what are known as `` second order '' systems : to invest successfully on this basis you would not only have to predict the outcome of the events but would also have to know what the market was expecting and how it would react . Good luck with that . Then there is the problem of the unknown unknowns . The event that may cause a major move in the market may be one that no one has even spotted . It 's hard to predict the outcome of something you do n't even know exists . One proposed investment solution to this uncertainty are the so-called absolute return funds , which have attracted huge amounts of money in recent years , rising from a total of £2bn of assets in June 2008 to £63bn by June 2016 . How have they fared ? The average absolute return fund is up by 0.7pc in the past year and had gains of 2.9pc in 2015 and 4.3pc in 2014 . By contrast , Fundsmith Equity is up by 42pc in the past year , 15.2pc in 2015 and 15.3pc in 2014 . Absolute return funds have also underperformed the MSCI World index in four of the past five years . Leaving aside the fact that absolute return funds use complex hedging strategies that neither you nor I understand , their hedging has pretty much ensured that while their investors have not lost money , they do not make any either , to the point that the word `` return '' in their title looks inappropriate . So what should you focus on ? I would suggest just three things . First and foremost , invest in the shares of good businesses . They are not that difficult to identify , having typically been around for ages and produced good financial results by providing products and services that customers want . The average company in the portfolio of the Fundsmith Equity fund , which I run , was founded in 1912 . Having survived two world wars , the Great Depression and the financial crisis , they will probably survive whatever known or unknown unknowns lie ahead . Second , stick to investing in things you understand . I have never found anyone who disagrees that this is an essential ingredient for success . But investors are terrible at defining what it is they understand narrowly enough . Do you really understand banking nowadays ? If not , why do you own bank shares ? How does an absolute return fund use derivatives ? No idea ? Then why do you own it ? How does an exchange-traded fund work ? Do n't know ? Then buy an index tracker fund ( and if you think ETF and index tracker funds are the same , you definitely do not understand the subject ) . Third , do n't worry too much about valuations . You will find pundits and commentators who will tell you that good companies ' shares are too highly valued . Sooner or later they are bound to be right , albeit temporarily , but what gains will you forgo while you wait for that to occur ? If you are a long-term investor , buying shares in a good business is more important than valuation . If you are not a long-term investor , what are you doing investing in the stock market ? Terry Smith is the chief executive of Fundsmith , the asset manager
Scotland EU leaders gang up on May over Brexit ; Hollande 'posturing ' as he warns of hard negotiations hard if MP pushes for a clean break
THERESA MAY was last night rounded on by EU leaders , who demanded that Britain continue to accept hundreds of thousands of migrants if it is to have any hope of accessing the single market . The Prime Minister faced a series of threats from her counterparts as she arrived at her first European Council meeting in Brussels . She will today hold talks with Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , who is expected to criticise her over signals that the Government is pushing for a clean break from Brussels rather than a compromise solution . However , yesterday Mrs May faced a barrage of criticism as she arrived in Brussels . François Hollande , the French president , told her he intends to make exit negotiations `` hard '' if Mrs May pushes for a `` hard Brexit '' . He said : `` I have said it very firmly to her . [ If ] Theresa May wants a hard Brexit , the negotiations will be hard . '' Martin Schulz , the president of the European Parliament , accused Mrs May of trying to `` set a trap '' by not telling the EU exactly when she intends to trigger Article 50 , which formally begins Brexit . He said Britain will only be given access to the single market if Mrs May accepts the `` fundamental rules '' of the EU , meaning abiding by freedom of movement rules allowing all European migrants to live and work in the UK . `` I refuse to imagine a Europe where lorries and hedge funds are free to cross borders but citizens are not . '' Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , said that there will be no substantial discussions about Brexit with Mrs May until the UK triggers Article 50 . `` I want to make clear again that we are waiting for the UK 's notification . It 's up to Great Britain . '' Syed Kamall , a Conservative MEP , described the hostility as `` posturing '' saying : `` The EU leaders are blowing hard now but they will soon see sense when the detailed negotiations begin . `` No 10 played down the row , insisting that Mrs May will press ahead with her plans . A source said : `` It is a negotiation . There is a lot being said . '' Fraser Nelson : Page 16 Editorial Comment : Page 17 Jeremy Warner : Page 17 Theresa May has said she is `` categorically '' not considering whether to exclude students from the net migration target in an apparent rebuke to her Chancellor . Philip Hammond said on Wednesday that there are `` conversations within government '' on whether the figures should be included in the target to reduce net migration . But the Prime Minister 's spokesman insisted yesterday `` our position has not changed '' .
Scotland Germany warns UK it ca n't join single market after Brexit
GERMANY 's finance minister has ruled out Britain joining the single market if the country votes to leave the European Union , declaring that `` out is out '' for the UK . Wolfgang Schäuble , the influential German politician , makes the comments in a special referendum edition of the magazine Der Spiegel urging British voters not to leave the EU . The intervention appears to deny hopes of pro-EU MPs that they could use their majority in Parliament to keep Britain in the single market if there is an Out vote . Mr Schäuble also warns that Brexit could trigger a string of snap referendums across the Continent amid growing Euroscepticism . The single market guarantees free movement of people , goods and services but contains some members who are not part of the EU , including Switzerland . Because Vote Leave has not speci-fied what relationship the UK would have with the EU after Brexit some MPs believe they could remain inside the single market after an Out vote . However , in an interview published today , Mr Schäuble says : `` That wo n't work . It would require the country to abide by the rules of a club from which it currently wants to withdraw . `` If the majority in Britain opts for Brexit , that would be a decision against the single market . In is in . Out is out . One has to respect the sovereignty of the British people . '' Mr Schäuble also suggested Brussels could start a drive to decrease red tape even if the UK backs retaining membership . `` In response to Brexit , we could n't simply call for more integration . That would be crude ; many would rightfully wonder whether we politicians still have n't understood , '' he said . `` Even in the event that only a small majority of the British voters reject a withdrawal , we would have to see it as a wake-up call and a warning not to continue with business as usual . Either way , we have to take a serious look at reducing bureaucracy in Europe . '' He also raised the prospect of referendums across the Continent if Britain votes to leave the EU . Lord Mandelson , the former Labour business secretary , said : `` This finally knocks on the head the Leave campaign 's claim that we can leave the EU and still enjoy the benefits of the single market . We can not leave the club and continue to use its facilities . '' Charles Moore : Page 24
Free trade deal after Brexit 'in EU interest '
EUROPE has a `` large economic interest '' in striking a free-trade agreement with Britain following withdrawal from the EU , the Dutch government forecaster said . A Brexit would have a `` severe '' impact on the Dutch economy and result in `` substantial losses '' for the wider EU . But this toll will be reduced if the EU signs a free-trade agreement with Britain that could result in a `` substantial reduction '' in costs , the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis said . The analysis bolsters the Leave campaigners , who argue that the price of punishing the UK is too great for the EU , meaning it would be forced to offer preferential terms . For the Netherlands , striking a freetrade deal in the event of Brexit would see GDP fall by 0.9 per cent in 2030 . If a deal is not done , and trade is done on World Trade Organisation terms , GDP would fall by 1.2 per www.cent.UK losses would be four per cent of GDP under a WTO option , falling to 3.4 per cent if it gets a free trade deal . The report says that EU countries would have to choose between wanting to punish Britain in order to discourage others from leaving the bloc , and inflicting harm on themselves by leaving . `` On the one hand , the EU wants to avoid the Brexit setting a precedent , and therefore the EU could be willing to increase the costs of the withdrawal by as much as possible , '' the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis said . `` But this would then also lead to higher costs for the EU itself . A new trade agreement would reduce those costs again - but this would also benefit the withdrawing country . '' The worsthit sectors of the Dutch economy - chemicals , plastics , electronics and motor parts - which account for 12 per cent of output , would see losses of five per cent . But this could be cut to three per cent if a deal is done . Britain to suffer a punitive cost of exit . Elisabeth Guigou , the head of the foreign affairs committee in the French National Assembly , told Politico : `` Our president was right when he said that Brexit will have serious consequences . We will need to fight the centrifugal forces , to show that we can draw conclusions from Britain 's decision . '' 4pc The percentage of UK GDP likely to be lost after a Brexit , if trade is done on WTO terms , compared to 3.4pc loss with a deal
The Leave campaign must answer Obama BODY : Barack Obama 's dramatic intervention in the EU referendum came at a halfway point . Two months ago , David Cameron unveiled his renegotiation deal . In two months ' time , on June 23 , Britons will cast their votes . As things stand , Remain enjoys an advantage in the polls - and many will judge that Mr Obama has helped them further . Yesterday 's article in The Daily Telegraph and his joint press conference with Mr Cameron raised important questions about what would happen after Brexit . The Leave campaign suddenly needs to up its game . Eurosceptics have complained about US interference in British politics . But it is hardly surprising that our most important ally would want to be heard , while it is surely incumbent upon the Leave campaign to respond , point-bypoint , to the arguments that Mr Obama has made - chiefly that Britain 's membership of the EU has `` magnified '' our relationship with the rest of the world and , by implication , Brexit would reduce it . The president says that our present relationship with the EU has made us richer . Is this true or has over-regulation and the eurozone crisis weakened us ? He also says that Britain 's security is stronger in the EU . Again , critics might answer that porous borders and the refugee crisis suggest otherwise - but would security networks continue post-Brexit ? Perhaps the most important question raised by the president is what would happen to the UK 's trade post-Brexit . What form would it take with the EU and how long would a renegotiated relationship take to achieve ? Moreover , at the press conference , Mr Obama said that the UK would go to the `` back of the queue '' when it comes to trade with the US . How does Leave respond to that ? They have long insisted that Britain would easily secure fresh deals with the rest of the world . The president clearly said otherwise , although , of course , his term is coming to an end . The EU referendum will be won by courting undecided voters in the centre ground . Mr Obama 's intervention may well have an impact on their thinking . The Leave campaign can complain about `` project fear '' as much as it likes , and with some legitimacy , but that does not change the fact that many voters see reasons to fear a future outside the EU . To win them over , Leave has to show that a prosperous alternative is possible . They need to turn an intellectual proposition into a coherent , detailed plan .
Scotland Concerns over Brexit are already hurting the British economy , warns Bank governor ; Brexit will liberate Europe , says Gove
THE possibility of Britain leaving the European Union has already had a damaging impact on Britain 's economy because it has reduced the value of the pound and hit businesses , the Governor of the Bank of England has suggested . He told a House of Lord 's select committee that a vote to leave the European Union on June 23 could result in lower growth , and higher inflation and may see the City of London lose its place as one of the the world 's `` pre-eminent '' financial centres . His intervention , which will lead to accusations of scaremongering by Eurosceptic MPs , comes just a day after George Osborne published a Treasury analysis claiming that Britain would be poorer by £4,300 per household if it votes to leave the European Union . Mr Carney made his comments as Michael Gove , the Eurosceptic Justice Secretary , said a Brexit could prompt the `` democratic liberation of a whole continent '' and see the EU crumble like the Soviet Union . He used a speech in London to set out for the first time his vision of how Britain could thrive outside the European Union and the single market . He said that it could follow the example of Bosnia , Serbia , Albania and Ukraine by joining the European freetrade zone . He said : `` Our vote to Leave will liberate and strengthen those voices Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 across the EU calling for a different future - those demanding the devolution of powers back from Brussels and desperate for a progressive alternative . `` But for Europe , Britain voting to leave will be the beginning of something potentially even more exciting - the democratic liberation of a whole continent . '' Jean Claude-Juncker , the President of the European Commission , admitted that the European Union is unpopular with voters because `` we are interfering in too many domains in their public lives '' . In a candid and highly pessimistic assessment , he said the bloc faces `` ruin '' because of a backlash from voters angered by a lack of respect for the powers of national governments . Mr Carney yesterday told that the Economic Affairs Committee that the risks of a Brexit are `` beginning to manifest '' . He said that the value of the pound has fallen significantly since November and that the value of UK-focused companies has `` underperformed '' . He added that commercial property deals in Britain have fallen by 40 per cent in the first quarter of this year , and 60 per cent in London . Lord Lawson , the former Conservative chancellor , accused Mr Carney of intervening in the referendum in a `` political '' way . However Mr Carney said there was a `` public duty '' to report on the economic risk of a Brexit , adding that failing to do so would `` suppress '' the Bank 's judgement . Mr Carney added : `` A vote to leave the EU might result in an extended period of uncertainty about the economic outlook . '' It came as it emerged that Mr Osborne is planning to release a second treasury analysis , on the short-term impact of a Brexit , just weeks before the referendum , . The document , which will be published just before the Government is formally barred from campaigning , will warn that a Brexit will push up mortgage payments and food prices . It will infuriate Tory MPs , who yesterday criticised the Treasury 's first analysis of the long-term impact of a vote to leave . Philip Hollobone , one of the MPs , said the `` disgracefully dodgy document '' was `` worthy of the children 's programme Jackanory '' .
Boris dismisses 'millennium bug ' Brexit fears
BORIS Johnson has said that leaving the EU would result in `` no economic shock '' at all to the UK , despite the claims of economists including the Bank of England 's own Governor to the contrary . The London mayor compared fears over an economic shock on the event of a Brexit to the concerns people had over the `` millennium bug '' , a much prophesied computer glitch which was predicted to wreak havoc as the world moved into the year 2000 , but passed without incident . Appearing before the Treasury Select Committee ( TSC ) to answer questions on his support for leaving the EU , Mr Johnson said that `` people would understand the consequences [ of Brexit ] '' , adding that , as with the millennium bug , the nation will have `` freaked out so much that it passed without the batting of an eyelid '' . Mark Carney , the Bank 's Governor , took questions from the TSC earlier this month and argued that the economy could be affected in the run up to the EU vote on June 23 , as uncertainty over the UK 's political future weighs on business decisions . He argued that joining the EU had added to the `` dynamism of the UK economy '' , and that `` there would be an [ economic ] impact '' . The Canadianborn economist also said that the possibly of leaving the EU `` is the biggest domestic risk to financial stability '' . Mr Johnson described a claim made by Mr Carney that the coming EU referendum could weigh on international investment into the UK as `` rubbish '' . The London Mayor argued that there were `` no good economic arguments '' against Brexit , and that the Governor was making `` political arguments '' . Rachel Reeves , a Labour MP who sits on the TSC , asked : `` So the Governor of the Bank of England is not making good economic arguments for staying in the EU ? The Chancellor is not making good economic arguments for staying in ? The CBI ? They 're all making political arguments and not economic arguments ? '' Mr Johnson replied : `` Yes . '' Mr Johnson said : `` I 've looked at foreign direct investment into London , confidence in the City , what 's happening in our economy ... [ there is ] no sign whatsoever of people being discouraged from investing , [ or ] coming to London . I seem to remember that when we were considering whether or not to go into the euro , and thankfully made the right decision not to do so , people were saying very much the same sort of thing . On the contrary London flourished , and prospered as never before . ''
Delays throw early transition hopes into doubt ; Brexit in depth
BRITAIN 'S aim to secure an early transition agreement on Brexit is `` not a foregone conclusion '' , EU sources have warned . The Daily Telegraph can reveal that a deal last month between Britain and the EU which promised `` an agreement as early as possible in 2018 on transitional arrangements '' - meaning the March 22-23 European Council - has been thrown into doubt as France tries to pursue a business advantage . EU sources warn that bureaucratic delays , legal issues and political opposition from France , which wants to drive home its Brexit business advantage , all risk delaying an early deal . `` It is absolutely not a foregone conclusion there will be a deal on transition in March , '' said a senior EU diplomat . `` There is a constituency that believes this would give away our leverage far too easily and wants to keep the pressure on the Brits . '' Failure to secure a `` handshake agreement '' on transition at the March European Council would be a major setback for Theresa May , who wants to seal a deal on transition and clear the way for negotiations on the EU-UK future relationship . This week a top supervisor at the Bank of England warned MPs that preparations by the banks for Brexit would `` go up a gear '' if the Government failed to secure transition by the end of March , in an implicit admission of UK vulnerability to EU foot-dragging . Senior UK officials remain adamant that an in-principle deal can be done in March on the same basis as the December deal , with Mrs May and Jean-Claude Juncker publicly committing to an agreement . The final legal text would not become binding and ratified until the end of the deal process in March 2019 , but the political agreement would provide businesses with the certainty they need . `` Never underestimate the power of a handshake , '' said a senior UK negotiator . Others senior figures in Whitehall are privately less optimistic that the EU will not give in to temptation and delay an agreement transition . `` There is both a belief that fuelling uncertainty will be to their commercial advantage while others argue that increased uncertainty will force the UK to take a 'more realistic approach ' to the trade negotiation , '' a Whitehall source admitted . The time frame even for an inprinciple transition deal remains tight , with the EU only due to approve formal guidelines on transition on Jan 29 , allowing the Commission to produce an `` essential principles '' paper for EU member states early next month . Formal negotiations on the transition are not , therefore , expected to start until mid-February , leaving just a few weeks before the March leaders ' summit to iron out any potentially divisive disagreements . A leaked draft of the EU guidelines seen by The Telegraph this week shows the EU already toughening up terms for transition , in which the UK will have to continue to accept free movement and all EU laws . There also remain several outstanding areas from the first phase of the negotiations not agreed in December , including setting up a body to govern EU expats ' rights , as well as other separation issues , including intellectual property rights , data questions and customs issues . According to the leaked guidelines , the EU will only make progress on trade and future relationships if all commitments made in December are `` respected in full and translated faithfully in legal terms as quickly as possible '' , opening up the pretext for delay . The Telegraph understands Brussels negotiators are worried that Britain will not fully honour its December pledges , instead seeking only to mirror EU law and regulations , rather than accept them wholesale . Mujtaba Rahman , a leading analyst at the Eurasia Group consultancy , said : `` It 's giving rise to the view that the EU should skip the political declaration in March and move straight to legal text , which has the advantage of providing clarity but carries the risk of delaying and deepening the uncertainty over the transition , '' he added . With UK negotiators only beginning preparatory talks with their opposite numbers in Brussels this week , it remains unclear if a deal can be done in time , though pressure from more pragmatic member states could soften the hard lines taken in Paris and Berlin . Charles Grant , of the Centre for European Reform , said both sides ultimately had an interest in moving on to second-phase negotiations . `` It would be difficult for Paris or Berlin to take such a line , partly because the British are likely to agree to most of what the EU requests during the transition , but also because some other member-states would object , '' he said . Increased uncertainty will force the UK to take a 'more realistic approach ' to the trade negotiation
Show a united front , Macron tells EU leaders ; French president warns of potential splits over Brexit as individual countries pursue their own interests
EMMANUEL MACRON has warned of the risk of splits emerging between EU states over Brexit negotiations , in an implicit admission that Europe 's `` united front '' over the talks is under threat . Speaking to The Daily Telegraph at the Elysée Palace , the French president warned fellow EU leaders not to fall for the `` prisoner 's dilemma '' - a notorious paradox in game theory in which two parties act out of individual self-interest and both lose out in the process . Mr Macron 's comments were a French clarion call for unity as Brussels pleads with the remaining 27 EU states not to allow individual self-interest to trump common goals in the coming trade negotiations . His remarks came despite France aggressively prosecuting its own Brexit agenda to erode UK dominance in financial services , including planning what the Financial Times this week dubbed as a `` raid '' on the UK 's £8trillion asset management industry . At a new year 's presidential event on Wednesday evening , Mr Macron , who is due to meet Theresa May at a Franco-British summit on Jan 18 , was asked by The Telegraph how he thought Brexit negotiations were going . The centrist Europhile said that the same unified EU approach to getting a deal in the first phase of talks would be carried into the second phase as the EU seeks to agree a `` common mandate '' on a UK-EU future relationship . `` I think this is the right method as it avoids divisions and once again allows us to preserve the collective interest , '' he said . He added : `` Each of us can have our own interests . That 's what the prisoner 's dilemma is all about . Everyone can have an interest in negotiating on their own , and think they can negotiate better than their neighbour . `` If we do that , it is probable that collectively we will create a situation which is unfavourable to the European Union and thus to each one of us . '' Mr Macron announced that he would host 80 heads of state on Nov 11 to commemorate the end of the First World War , including US President Donald Trump . EU heads of state allowed Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , to move into `` phase two '' last month after securing a commitment from Mrs May on the financial terms of the divorce , the rights of European citizens residing in the UK and the Irish border . Mr Barnier can now engage in `` exploratory '' trade talks with Mrs May 's cabinet before receiving formal , more detailed guidelines in March . But as EU member states try to reach agreement on the guidelines they could be tempted to push their own agenda to try to shape a deal suiting their economic interests or domestic politics . Donald Tusk , the European Council president , has already warned that trade talks will present the `` true test '' of EU unity , while Enrico Letta , the former Italian prime minister , has warned that unity would be `` harder to maintain '' now EU member states ' interests were directly at stake . Ireland and Hungary hinted that they could become allies of Britain during trade talks as they called for a comprehensive deal to be struck . After a meeting between Leo Varadkar , the Irish taoiseach , and Viktor Orbán , the Hungarian prime minister , in Budapest yesterday , Mr Varadkar said : `` We are both committed to working constructively to ensure that the agreement on both the terms of its withdrawal and the nature of its future relationship with the EU is favourable . ''
Scotland Davis hands judges extradition powers to see off rebels ; Ministers bow to Tory rebels over EU arrest warrants
BRITISH judges will be able to block extradition requests by EU nations after Brexit under government plans to avoid a rebellion by Eurosceptic Tory backbenchers . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , has said that the Supreme Court will act as the final body of appeal for British citizens facing extradition under the European Arrest Warrant instead of EU courts . The approach , which will be set out in a Brexit position paper published ahead of negotiations , is intended to address the concerns of dozens of Eurosceptic Tory MPs who are considering rebelling over the issue . Many of them remain concerned that retaining the European Arrest Warrant will still see British citizens extradited and forced to face `` substandard '' judicial systems abroad . A source close to the negotiations said : `` Downing Street is hyper-sensitive to re-opening the long-running row over the European Arrest Warrant with hard Brexiteers . Of all the position papers it 's the one thing they are worried about losing the backbenchers over . '' Mr Davis is also likely to face opposition from senior figures in the EU , who insist that the European Court of Justice must continue to have oversight of the system . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament 's chief Brexit negotiator , told The Daily Telegraph : `` We seek a close relationship with the UK after Brexit particularly on justice and security matters . Criminals and terrorists must Continued on Page 4 Continued from Page 1 not be the beneficiaries of Brexit . However we are also determined that the legal order of the European Union is respected . The European Arrest Warrant is an instrument of European Union law and will therefore continue to be overseen by the European Court of Justice . '' The arrest warrant enables members of the European Union to extradite suspects from other member states . Britain surrenders an average of 1,000 individuals a year to other EU states and issues around 200 . The Government has said retaining membership of the European Arrest Warrant is a `` priority '' after Britain leaves the EU and described it as `` absolutely essential '' in bringing murderers , rapists and paedophiles to justice . However , Tory Eurosceptics have long criticised the system amid concerns that it infringes on Britain 's sovereignty and has led to British citizens being deported on flimsy evidence . Theresa May opted back into the system when she was home secretary in 2014 . At the time , Mr Davis was one of 37 Tory MPs who rebelled against the Government over the issue . He said at the time : `` Let us remember what we are talking about - taking British citizens , with no prima facie evidence , and sending them off to courts elsewhere in Europe . `` What we have been asked to debate assumes that those courts all deliver equal justice . Romania does not deliver equal justice . `` Nor does Bulgaria , Greece or Italy . Some of them have post-Soviet justice systems to which we are sending our constituents . '' Mr Davis is now proposing that after Brexit the Supreme Court will have ultimate oversight of requests to extradite citizens living in the UK , while the European Court of Justice will have oversight of those living in the EU . He told peers last month : `` If we issue a European arrest warrant you would expect that within the European Union to be subject to appeal all the way up through the normal national courts and from them to the ECJ . `` If a Polish police force submits a request for a British citizen in Britain , or anybody in Britain for that matter , it will go up to the British Supreme Court . ''
Scotland May clings on to Brexit lifeline ; PM admits she needs to gain trust of voters as she drops major pledges from today 's Queen 's Speech ; Unpopular policies left out of Queen 's Speech by May
THERESA MAY will today put Brexit at the heart of the Queen 's Speech and jettison a raft of key manifesto pledges in the hope that she can remain Prime Minister for at least two more years . However , Mrs May still has no guarantee that she can form a viable government after the DUP last night threatened to walk away from a proposed deal . The Prime Minister will admit that the general election result `` was not the one I hoped for '' and that she needs to `` gain the trust and confidence of the British people '' . She will start that process by dropping unpopular policies on social care , winter fuel payments , free school meals , foxhunting , grammar schools and the pensions `` triple lock '' . In an attempt to cling to power , Mrs May will pack the Queen 's Speech with Brexit legislation on migration and trade , which will dominate Parliamentary business until 2019 . Mrs May will also promise to show `` humility '' and learn the lessons of `` the message the electorate sent '' . The State Opening of Parliament will go ahead despite no deal yet being reached with the DUP , without whose support Mrs May can not command an overall majority . Last night , the DUP threatened to walk away from the talks altogether , claiming Downing Street was in `` complete chaos '' and urging the Government to give `` greater focus '' to the negotiations . DUP sources said the party should not be `` taken for granted '' in talks that had not `` proceeded in a way that the DUP would have expected '' . There was even speculation last night that the Conservatives could approach the Liberal Democrats for support now that Tim Farron , the party 's leader - who opposed any deal with the Tories - is stepping down . Whitehall sources said they were `` confident '' the DUP would support the Queen 's Speech , even if a deal were to be delayed , with negotiations over money said to be the final sticking-point . An agreement could still be announced tomorrow , with Downing Street saying talks were `` ongoing '' and that no deadline had ever been set . A spokesman for No10 said : `` Both parties are committed to strengthening the Union , combating terrorism , delivering Brexit and delivering prosperity across the whole United Kingdom . '' The DUP is understood to have agreed the content of the Queen 's Speech , which was postponed from Monday , because talks over a deal were taking longer than anticipated . The Speech will contain little in the way of new policies . It will include the Great Repeal Bill , which will transfer EU laws to the British statute books before they can be repealed , and the Government 's White Paper setting out Mrs May 's 12 principles for leaving the EU , including exiting the single market and the customs union . However , the Prime Minister faces opposition within her own Cabinet , as well as from the majority of MPs who favour a soft Brexit . Yesterday Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , used Continued on Page 2 Reports : Pages 6 & 7 Editorial Comment : Page 17 Continued from Page 1 his annual Mansion House speech to the City - delayed because of the Grenfell Tower fire - to promise a `` jobs first '' Brexit , with business needs prioritised over migration controls , in direct conflict with Mrs May 's own plans for leaving the European Union . Mr Hammond said immigration would be managed but not `` shut down '' as the country leaves the EU `` in a way that prioritises British jobs and underpins Britain 's prosperity '' . The Chancellor favours a deal that allows Britain to maintain the benefits of membership of the customs union , but Mrs May and David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , have made it clear that membership of the customs union will end . Mrs May will tell the Commons : `` This Queen 's Speech is about recognising and grasping the opportunities that lie ahead for the United Kingdom as we leave the European Union . `` It is about delivering a Brexit deal that works for all parts of the UK while building a stronger , fairer country by strengthening our economy , tackling injustice and promoting opportunity and aspiration . '' She will insist that the `` priority '' of the electorate is `` to get Brexit right '' , even though other issues dominated the election campaign . The Prime Minister will point out that more than 80 per cent of the electorate backed the Tories or Labour , both of whom support the need to deliver on the result of last year 's EU referendum . In truth , however , Mrs May does not command enough support to put her most controversial manifesto promises into the Queen 's Speech , knowing she would risk defeat .
Brexit fails to deter Malaysian hotelier 's plans for London tower
A SCION of one of Malaysia 's wealthiest real estate dynasties has said that plans to build one of the tallest residential towers in London will not be bulldozed by Brexit . Abigail Tan , head of the St Giles Hotels Group , is to press ahead with a £800mto £1bn mixed use development in Blackfriars despite rising costs linked to the collapse in the value of the pound . She told the Press Association : `` Our plans have n't been altered by Brexit , yet . Blackfriars is still viable and we 're pushing ahead with it , although we 're cautious of costs rising . `` We 're still investing heavily in the UK and still have faith in the UK economy as a hub for business and finance . '' St Giles , whose parent company is listed Malaysian firm IGB Corporation - headed by Ms Tan 's father Robert Tan - is waiting for Southwark Council to rubber-stamp planning applications . The development will consist of a hotel and one of the tallest residential towers in London , along with commercial and retail space . If Southwark approves the plans , the development could be up and running as soon as 2020 . However , Ms Tan also said the group might have to `` get creative '' if the pound continues its downward trajectory and costs soar . `` We do n't really know about Brexit because the Government has n't said anything about its plans . We might have to get creative if costs go up , '' she added . But Brexit has provided a tonic for St Giles ' two London hotels , with the fall in sterling against the euro resulting in increased spending power for Europeans in London . `` We have seen Europeans spending more , especially in our bars , since the collapse in the value of the pound , '' Ms Tan said . The London hotels , which are situated at Heathrow and in central London , are turning over £17m with gross profit of £10m . The St Giles Hotels Group is also on the expansion trail . There are currently nine hotels under the St Giles moniker , but Ms Tan wants 20 by 2020 . With a site secured in Birmingham , she is also looking at opportunities in Spain , Cuba and the US , where it already operates the Court and the Tuscany in New York . £1bn The estimated cost of the development by the St Giles Hotels Group in Blackfriars , which could open as soon as 2020
Britain and the EU set for high-stakes game of blackjack ; Analysis
Theresa May left the EU leaders ' summit with talks still deadlocked over the question of the so-called Brexit bill . As a consolation , EU leaders have agreed to open `` internal preparatory discussions '' on the future UK-EU relationship , but this would be strictly intra-EU . Britain will not be invited to participate . For her part , Mrs May still refuses to spell out what `` commitments '' the UK would honour in a Brexit financial settlement , insisting the ( EURO ) 20billion she offered in her speech in Florence ought to be enough to move talks forward . So what happens next ? Here we look at Mrs May 's options ahead of the next EU leaders summit on Dec 12 . Stick : May stands her ground How will the European Union react ? The EU remains wedded to its hardline position that there will be no trade or transition talks until it judges that `` sufficient progress '' is made on the Brexit bill , Ireland and citizens ' rights . EU diplomats expect concrete proposals if they are to give the go-ahead to discussions on the future relationship . That means the UK saying what it will pay for , though not necessarily specifying how much . `` The only way this process moves is if May talks specifics . That means she must address pensions , loan liabilities and the reste à liquider [ the EU budget overhang ] , or nothing moves , '' a senior EU official told The Daily Telegraph . While they expect the December European Council to make progress , they may yet stand their ground and rely on the Brexit deadline to force up the price of the financial settlement . One senior EU diplomat put the chances of sufficient progress at `` 50/50 '' while Donald Tusk , the European Council president , warned that consideration of what is possible will start to narrow and shift if no progress is made . `` We will have to think about where we are heading '' if the December deadline is missed . How will the Conservatives react ? Theresa May will face increasing pressure from Eurosceptic backbench MPs who until now have been broadly supportive of her approach . Their backing was essential in shoring up her leadership during an attempted coup after the party conference . The December meeting of the European Council will become a crunch point . If talks do not move on , Eurosceptics could openly revolt , with Cabinet ministers including Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Michael Gove , the Secretary of State for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs , emboldened . The Prime Minister 's premiership will hinge on whether she can secure a breakthrough without committing to a huge Brexit divorce bill . If the EU does n't blink , Mrs May could find herself in trouble as markets react negatively to the growing uncertainty . Twist : Concessions on the bill How will the European Union react ? Any concession from London is sure to be welcome , but it will be no guarantee that trade and transition talks will get the green light . Much depends on the size of the concession . For most member states , the question of the Brexit bill looms largest . `` This is not peanuts , '' one senior EU diplomat said this week , `` This is taxpayers ' money '' . The EU does not want Mrs May to sign up to a number , but to concede that the UK will honour commitments made during its membership . This means Eurocrats ' pensions , the EU loan book and the UK 's share of billions of euros already committed to future EU projects ( roads , hospitals ) . The EU side is also insisting that the European Court of Justice have a role in the EU-UK withdrawal agreement . This remains a serious obstacle . However , `` sufficient progress '' does not have to mean full agreement on the three issues , so some concessions could persuade the EU to talk trade , particularly as some member states worry that the process will be run into the ground by hardliners . How will the Conservatives react ? It depends on how big the concession is . If the Prime Minister agrees , even tacitly , to a divorce bill of ( EURO ) 60 billion there will be an explosive reaction . Eurosceptics object to the very principle of a divorce bill , arguing the EU should be giving the UK money . Handing over such a significant amount could trigger an open revolt . Not all Eurosceptics see the Brexit divorce bill as a red line . For some , the short-term pain outweighs the gain . The Prime Minister could win support from the Remain wing of her party who argue that the UK needs to honour its obligations and get on with talks on a future trade deal . For them , avoiding an exit without a deal is the biggest priority . Bust : May walks away How will the European Union react ? With horror and anger . The European Commission has always said it wants a deal and will carry the can if talks fail . However , Brussels has a history of theatrical walkouts and even if May does go , the door would be left open for her to come back to the negotiating table , provided she did so before the March 29 , 2019 Brexit Day deadline . Brussels believes the UK will suffer far worse damage from a crash-out than the EU , and will not rush to grant concessions to bring the UK back to the table . It will just watch as business and markets react to the walkout . The EU would expect concessions to overcome ill will created by a no-deal . The crunch will come if , faced with the reality of a chaotic Brexit , the 27 EU member states are angry enough to accept the economic damage that comes with the hardest of Brexits in order to defend the integrity of the EU . How will the Tories react ? Eurosceptic Tory MPs would be delighted . Some have said they would cheer from the rafters if Theresa May leaves without a deal . Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptics have repeatedly said that leaving the European Union without a deal is nothing to be afraid of . For some Tories , it is the ideal result ; the UK will be free to forge its own way in the world and strike deals . For other Eurosceptics , it is a means to an end . Cabinet ministers have told the Telegraph that Britain and the EU need to have a mighty row to galvanise talks . Threatening to leave without a deal could break the deadlock . However , the Prime Minister knows she faces the wrath of pro-European MPs and ministers . The Government has already been forced to delay the EU Withdrawal bill amid fears that Tories would rebel and block a no-deal scenario . That could well see the handful of Tory MPs prepared to rebel turn into a landslide . State of the talks Leaders ' views EMMANUEL MACRON 'Today , we are not halfway down the road ' DONALD TUSK 'Reports of deadlock between the EU and UK have been exaggerated ' JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER 'Our working assumption is not the no-deal scenario , I hate the no-deal scenario ' ANGELA MERKEL 'We would hope that we will be ready by December to initiate phase two ' THERESA M AY 'I am ambitious and positive for Britain 's future and for these negotiations . But we still have some way to go '
Face the Brexit facts ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : With every day that passes , the petty objections of those who still oppose Brexit become ever less tenable . For months , unreconciled Remainers accused Theresa May of lacking a coherent plan for Brexit . She then provided that plan in a powerful and convincing speech describing the bright future that awaits Britain outside the EU . Then the critics demanded a White Paper . Mrs May has duly obliged them with a paper that sets out her strategy and objectives in detail . That document left MPs such as Labour 's Keir Starmer reduced to cavilling that Mrs May had not set out the precise form that Britain 's relationship with the EU will take , something that is obviously impossible given that this relationship will be the product of a complex international negotiation . Voters have been able to see this for some time , but it must soon dawn even on parliamentary obstructionists that Mrs May has a plan and it is a good one . Instead of bitter sniping and undeclared attempts to slow or even halt the Brexit process , they should think about offering constructive criticism , looking for ways to make a good plan even better . That will require a shift in attitude for some Remainers , accepting that Brexit is not , as they have believed , bad for Britain but is actually a chance to prosper . To help them with that mental leap , they should consider the latest forecast from the Bank of England , which has again raised its prediction for economic growth . If the Bank , which once subscribed to Project Fear pessimism , can admit its mistake and face the facts on Brexit , Remainers in Parliament should do the same . It is time to stop complaining and embrace a great opportunity .
A clear strategy and real leadership ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : Good things come to those who wait.Theresa May 's excellent speech on Brexit was months in the making , but that time was well spent . Mrs May voted Remain , and needed time to think through all of the issues with experts , civil servants and her Cabinet before deciding exactly how to proceed . It is greatly to her credit that she has now developed such a clear and radical vision of a thriving post- Brexit Britain . Her optimistic global outlook - reminiscent of the upbeat , positive spirit of the Vote Leave campaign - will stand Britain in good stead in the negotiations to come . Her enthusiastic belief in Britain 's potential to be even greater satisfies the demand for a clear sense of direction ; this was real leadership , of the sort we see all too rarely . It is no exaggeration to describe this speech as a defining moment in British politics , one that will one day be remembered in the same light as Lady Thatcher 's famous Bruges address , which launched the modern Eurosceptic movement . The Prime Minister has a plan , and it is the right one : we will leave the single market and , in effect , the customs union , cooperate closely with our European allies on a range of issues and seek to be the world leader in free trade . We will remain a proimmigration society but will choose who we want to move here . The plan represents a masterclass in common sense and is exactly what Britain voted for last June . Mrs May 's plan deserves support and will surely get it from most reasonable people . That is because it is rooted in confidence . Confidence about Britain and its prospects in a global economy . Confidence in this country 's ability to grow and prosper regardless of how EU negotiations conclude - crucially , the Prime Minister is willing to walk away from a bad deal and understands the strength of our bargaining position , unlike David Cameron . Some will carp that Mrs May 's vision for a post-Brexit relationship with the EU is too optimistic , that her suggestions about access to the single market for key industries and a new customs-free deal amount to hoping to have our cake and eat it . In fact , Mrs May 's approach is absolutely right : global Britain should seek the freest possible trade with Europe while remaining free to strike trade deals with other economies , not least the US . The plan is ambitious , and all the better for it . The doubters underestimate the strength of Britain 's hand . She was right to observe that trade makes everyone richer , so a sensible EU will seek the deal that allows the greatest possible trade between the EU and Britain . Yet Britain is more than a first-rank economy and trading partner . We are a first-rank military power and a world leader in intelligence . Those capabilities are of crucial importance to the EU , and its eastern members in particular , in a world where Donald Trump regrettably calls the Nato alliance into question . Mrs May was not so crude as to directly link British cooperation on security to Brexit negotiations , but security must be a dimension in those talks . The Prime Minister is doing what Britain wants , and doing it boldly . She deserves to In time , EU leaders who bluster about punishing Britain for succeed leaving will come to realise that it is in everyone 's interests to take a more constructive approach . Mrs May did not say it explicitly , but there was steel behind her words : Britain can be a good friend to the EU , or a bad enemy . And the EU today needs all the friends it can get . As a result , the chances of a good deal with the EU are higher than many observers suggest , especially ones who work in financial markets . Recent days have once again proved that currency traders are poor analysts of the Brexit story : markets were surprised that Mrs May rejected remaining in the single market even though that was the only logical outcome of the referendum vote , then surprised again when she promised a vote in Parliament on the final Brexit deal . A jump in the pound after the speech suggests traders believe that vote could yet block or slow Brexit , a mistaken conclusion , not least since Mrs May will offer MPs a choice between her deal or no deal , leaving the EU without a trade agreement other , of course , than our membership of the World Trade Organisation . And either outcome will be much better for Britain than the markets ' mistaken pessimism suggests . That pessimism can also be found in the House of Commons , where some MPs continue to look for excuses to impede the Brexit process and frustrate the instruction voters delivered in the referendum . Those MPs can no longer say that Mrs May has no plan for Brexit . Claims that the Government has `` no mandate '' to leave the single market were always flimsy but now collapse outright : Mrs May 's plan would deliver the best market access for those British businesses that need it , leaving those that do not operate in the EU free of EU regulation ; if she does decide to walk away , it will be because Europe , not the UK , decided to indulge in childish protectionism and nativism . That pledge to put the final deal to Parliament also invalidates claims that Mrs May is ignoring MPs . The obstructionist arguments are falling away one by one . Should the Supreme Court rule that Mrs May must consult Parliament before invoking Article 50 , there can now be no justification for either MPs or peers standing in her way . Doubtless some diehard Remainers in Parliament will attempt legislative sabotage none the less , but they should pay careful attention to public opinion . Mrs May is the popular leader of a popular government , dedicated to the popular policy of leaving the EU . Her plan to deliver Brexit will no doubt increase that popularity still further . She may have taken her time about it , but she is doing what Britain wants , and doing it boldly . She deserves to succeed . The Prime Minister is doing what Britain wants , and doing it boldly . She deserves to succeed
Brexit means a very different kind of Conservatism to Mrs May ; She is wooing working-class Labour and Ukip voters by being tougher on migrants than Brexiteers want
It 's wrong , really , to tease Theresa May for saying that `` Brexit means Brexit '' . It 's an elegant and memorable soundbite that says , simply : trust me . If you voted to leave the European Union , you wo n't be tricked into Britain staying a member in all but www.name.No more European Court of Justice , no more `` free movement of peoples '' . British voters will live under their own laws , control their own borders and set their own democratic future . But what kind of future does she have in mind ? This is proving the far thornier question . We learnt , this week , that the Prime Minister believes Brexit means a whole lot more than Brexit . It means the start of a new approach to immigration , where companies are asked to draw up a list of the foreigners in their workforce and make the figures public . An approach where voters are told that they may have lost their job , or be suffering low pay , due to these immigrants ( who `` take jobs British people could do '' ) in spite of employment being at a record high . And those who might have reservations about such language ? The sneering metropolitan elite , who disparage the patriotism of the working www.class.No one doubted that the vote to leave the EU was dramatic.But this ? It 's all very new indeed , and a radical departure for Conservatism . Mrs May sees this as following the momentum of the Brexit vote.Intriguingly , Brexit Britain is one where the frontiers of the state are rolled forward , rather than back . To a great many grassroots Tories , this is a courageous , timely and welcome overture to the millions of Ukip and Labour voters - at a time when both parties are in chaos . To others , it 's a terrifying sign that the nasty party is making a comeback . An American visitor to this week 's party conference in Birmingham spotted the conundrum . Why was it , she asked me , that the Brexiteers were the ones most uncomfortable about this more robust language on immigration ? And why are those who backed Remain far more at ease with cracking down on these Europeans ? And is n't this a tad hypocritical : if the Brexiteers rode to victory on the back of anti-immigration sentiment then how can they be surprised when the PM acts on these concerns ? The answer is that , from the offset , the Tories who campaigned to leave the EU were very keen to portray it as a internationalist endeavour - not a nativist yawp . A mission to raise the national sights to more distant horizons ; to go out into the world . Boris Johnson , Liam Fox , Michael Gove , Daniel Hannan , all spoke of Britain as a globally minded country straining at the leash of the EU . As they knew , the Remainers were keen to portray Brexit as a sinister , xenophobic cry from Little Englanders who wanted to stop www.immigration.No , they replied , immigration is good and we want more of it , but in a way fully controlled by an elected government . The Vote Leave campaign said plenty about what Brexit should mean : to end discrimination against non-EU migrants , with a points-based system that would be `` fairer , more humane , and better for the economy '' . And the unachievable pledge to reduce net migration to the `` tens of thousands ? '' The Brexiteers did not repeat it . Even in government , Boris Johnson has warned that making such pledges leads to disappointment . Liam Fox argued in Cabinet for loosening immigration controls with Australia . Both were slapped down and reminded : the Government is playing the numbers game . The Brexit vote was a reset moment , a chance to abandon the immigration pledge . In her first few days as Home Secretary , Amber Rudd had thought the target was being abolished because no one had mentioned it to her . Now , she 's in charge of meeting it . Hence the ever-more-desperate ideas , like naming and shaming of companies that employ too many foreigners . This dismays Brexiteers because it sends out such a toxic message . The world is still asking : what just happened in Britain ? Why is it now talking about making lists of foreigners ? The same divide can be seen over the fate of the three million EU nationals in Britain . The Brexiteers want to offer them immediate assurances that they can stay , no matter what assurances are given to Brits abroad . David Davis told me this week the chances of their staying are `` 100 per cent '' . Michael Gove told me that this may be a weak negotiating tactic but `` decency comes first '' . It 's the two most senior Remainers , Philip Hammond and Theresa May , who are adamant that no such assurances be given . So in this way , the Polish nurses and Italian mechanics now find themselves collateral in negotiations and it 's mainly Brexiteers who find this repugnant . In her speech , Mrs May said her main enemies are the socialist Left and the `` libertarian Right '' - a faction whose troops are perhaps even thinner on the ground than Lib Dems . I suspect what she really had in mind was liberal Conservatism , the type that Boris Johnson and Michael Gove were preparing to champion had their joint leadership bid not ended in such a debacle . They would have carried on the type of Tory liberalism that underpinned David Cameron 's leadership , and made the coalition possible . Mrs May is appealing not to Lib Dems , but what she sees as the abandoned working class . And who can deny the scale of the opportunity ? Steven Woolfe , who was favourite to be the next Ukip leader before he was assailed in Strasbourg yesterday , would have spoken just as robustly and eloquently about patriotism and immigration . His Ukip might have supplanted Labour in the north of England , as the SNP has done in Scotland . `` We could do business with Woolfe , '' one Cabinet member told me this week . `` He 's our kind of kipper . '' Mrs May sees it differently : why bother with a deal , or a coalition , if you 're not too squeamish to take Ukip voters for yourself ? It 's a fascinating , daring and audacious move but it has precious little to do with leaving the European Union . Indeed , much of it is the very opposite to the direction the Brexiteers would have taken had any of them gone on to succeed . Brexit , it turns out , means a very new type of muscular Conservatism - whether the Brexiteers like it or not . FOLLOW Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Juncker tries to heal rifts as he gives way on refugees ; Migrant quotas will not be imposed in olive branch to East Europe , but rebuke for Britain over Brexit
BRUSSELS yesterday publicly backed down over its plans to force eastern EU states to accept refugee quotas in an attempt to heal the continent 's growing East-West rifts before a crucial Brexit summit in Bratislava tomorrow . Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , used his annual State of the Union address to declare that accepting refugees `` must be voluntary , it must come from the heart , it can not be imposed '' . It represented a major concession to eastern EU countries , led by Poland and Hungary , who have rebelled against attempts by Berlin and Brussels to impose refugee quotas on them . The olive branch came a day after Donald Tusk , the European Council president , warned Poland against `` rocking the European boat '' over demands for treaty change to reverse the EU superstate and return power to European capitals . As the heads of 27 EU governments prepared to meet in the Slovakian capital , Mr Juncker said it was time to stop the `` endless disputes , quarrels and bickering '' and focus on shaping a new post-Brexit future for the EU . Acknowledging that Europe is more divided than at any time in his memory , Mr Juncker said that splits on the euro , EU values and migration were an `` existential crisis '' for Europe . `` Never before have I seen such little common ground between our member states , '' he said . With the British vote to leave having shaken the EU , Mr Juncker proposed a series of measures designed to restore confidence that Europe could deliver real prosperity and security , not the ongoing austerity and uncontrolled migration of recent years . EU army Europe needed a military headquarters and `` should work towards a common military force '' , Mr Juncker said , but was quick to add that any efforts to create what critics dub an `` EU army '' must `` complement Nato '' . `` More European defence in Europe does n't mean less trans-Atlantic solidarity , '' said Mr Juncker in another nod to restive eastern European and Baltic states who view Nato as the cornerstone of their security in the face of an increasing Russia aggression . Other security measures included stronger EU border checks , a bolstered EU Coastguard and a new EU visa scheme . Jobs and investment Mr Juncker acknowledged Europe 's citizens , particularly its young , were suffering from chronic unemployment and risked becoming the first generation to be worse off than its parents . Among a raft of popular measures designed to ward-off the `` galloping '' forces of anti-EU populism , Mr Juncker proposed doubling his flagship investment fund to ( EURO ) 630 billion ( £537 billion ) by 2022 to try to create jobs and improve infrastructure . Other measures included promising 5G mobile phone networks as early as 2018 and equipping `` every European village and every city with free wireless internet access '' . Brexit On the subject of Brexit , Mr Juncker urged Britain to begin withdrawal talks as soon as possible and reiterated the European Commission stance that there would be no à la carte deal . `` Only those can have unlimited access to the internal market who accept that there will be free access for persons and goods , '' he said , adding that while Brussels regretted the British vote to leave , `` the European Union as such is not at risk '' from Brexit . However , in a sign of his anger at what the Commission sees as Britain 's irresponsible encouragement of populist forces during the referendum campaign , he singled out the murder of a Polish man in Essex as an example of Europe failing to live up to its values . Response Mr Juncker 's critics accused him of recycling old ideas in his speech and failing to learn the lesson of Brexit - which conservatives and Eurosceptics said was that the people of Europe wanted less Europe , not more . Syed Kamall , the British MEP , said Mr Juncker was ignoring the `` voices of discontent '' in Europe that Brexit represented . `` They are asking for more military integration , more requests for money from member states , more debt to keep today 's socialists happy . But the more Europe you build , the more detached its citizens feel , '' he said . However , Guy Verhofstadt , the arch-EU federalist appointed by the European Parliament to negotiate Brexit talks , said `` more Europe '' would quash populist forces , not stoke them . In the end , there was only one point of absolute agreement - that Mr Juncker , known for giving three-hour speeches - had surprised everyone with his brevity at only 46 minutes .
Scotland Britain must stand firm on Brexit bill , say Boris allies ; EU demands for progress threaten 'collapse ' of talks
BRITAIN must not cave in to EU demands for a bigger Brexit divorce bill after Brussels set a two-week deadline for the UK to improve its offer , allies of Boris Johnson have warned . Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , yesterday said Britain must show `` real and sincere progress '' on the Brexit bill if it wants to break the deadlock by the end of the year . It comes amid reports that Theresa May is preparing to increase the UK 's offer to the EU after Brussels said that the ( EURO ) 20billion ( £18billion ) she had already committed was not enough . The EU wants at least ( EURO ) 60billion . The Foreign Secretary , who has previously said that the EU can `` go whistle '' if it wants a huge divorce bill , is understood to believe that the UK must hold its nerve ahead of the December summit . An ally of Mr Johnson said : `` You do n't pay your bill at a restaurant halfway through ; you pay at the end . That 's sensible business . '' Last night sources close to the British negotiations warned the EU that Brexit negotiations would `` collapse '' if it does not take a more reasonable approach to talks . Tory Eurosceptics have warned the Brexit divorce bill is `` critical '' and that the UK can not afford to give any more ground . Iain Duncan Smith , a Tory MP and former Conservative leader , told The Daily Telegraph : `` They think we blinked in Florence and now they believe we will blink again . We must not blink . `` The one big hand we have is money . They are desperate . If we give away that we give away any chance of getting a good free trade agreement . The two get decided at the same time . `` The money is critical , we can not give any more ground on this . Tory Eurosceptics are getting really unnerved by this . It is stretching them to breaking . '' Senior EU diplomats told The Daily Telegraph that the UK must commit to paying outstanding budget contributions , pensions and other liabilities if it wants to make progress with talks . `` Trust has suffered a lot in the last few months , and the possible interpretations of what these items stand for are very broad , '' the source said . `` So we need all three to be mentioned , and only then we need to work on the amount . '' However , the UK is disputing the way that the EU is calculating the bill and believes that the weaker pound means the UK should pay considerably less than the ( EURO ) 60billion expected . A UK source said : `` The problem is that it is disingenuous - to put it mildly - for the EU to suggest that they just want us to say a single sentence to move on . `` They say they do n't want to generate 'a number ' but they want to define what that sentence means in such a way that , in practice , those commitments are defined within a very narrow band . '' British negotiators say that the UK would , in theory , be prepared to discuss the principles of the Brexit divorce bill but do not want to give away their hand . Another source familiar with Britain 's negotiating position warned : `` If the demands for sufficient progress become too big , there is risk that the whole process will collapse . ''
Scotland Businesses tell Sturgeon : 'get on with day job ' ; Business chiefs tell Sturgeon to forget indyref2 and 'get on with the day job '
BUSINESS leaders are `` fed up '' of Nicola Sturgeon 's bid to break up Britain and want her to get back to her day job , according to the head of one of Scotland 's best-known brands . Les Montgomery , the chief executive of bottled water firm Highland Spring , said the Scottish Government should be helping the Conservatives achieve the best possible Brexit outcome . His comments came after the First Minister `` reset '' her timetable for a second vote on Scottish independence , saying she would revisit the issue in autumn 2018 when the details of the Brexit deal were known . She said a new ballot before 2021 remained `` likely '' , and has been accused of ignoring the message Scots sent to her in the general election when the SNP lost 21 seats . In March this year she had called for a new vote between autumn next year and the spring of 2019 . Mr Montgomery said independence was a distraction and the Scottish Government should instead be `` getting on with the job they are there to do '' , which he said included focusing on Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 employment and investment . He said : `` I have 600 people that I am responsible for , and I am trying to do the best for them . I would think the Scottish Government should also try to do the best for the people as a whole . '' On Brexit , Mr Montgomery said the Scottish Government should be helping the country `` exit as effectively as possible '' , rather than creating more division . `` What we and the wider industry needs is for the UK and devolved governments to continue working together , swiftly and decisively , to bring clarity to key questions for businesses as the Brexit process continues , '' he said . He added that the UK 's divorce from the EU would not have a meaningful impact on Highland Spring , but a vote for independence could be more of a risk . `` We 're based in Scotland but we 're a British company , '' he said . `` We send 85 per cent of our products to England , and we are fortunate to consider 'local ' to mean 'British ' . That 's how it should be . '' Jackie Baillie , Scottish Labour 's economy spokesman , said businesses were `` tired of the SNP obsession with independence and the damage the uncertainty of another referendum is doing to our economy '' . She added : `` Just last week a report from the Fraser of Allander Institute warned that Scotland faces slipping back into recession . We need a government focused on investing in our economy and creating jobs in Scotland , not constitutional game playing . '' Meanwhile , Jamie Hepburn , the employability minister , told the BBC 's Sunday Politics the low oil price was responsible for about two thirds of Scotland 's sluggish growth , although there were `` other underlying trends '' . A spokesman for the Scottish Government said Brexit was `` far and away the biggest threat to Scottish jobs , investment and living standards '' . He added : `` At the same time , Scotland voted overwhelmingly against leaving Europe , and we have made clear that the country should still have a choice on its future at the end of the Brexit process , once the terms of the deal are known . ''
This Brexit deal will be the legacy of our time , says May ; Britain 's plan to negotiate new terms on trade and immigration is made clear and given a warm reception
THERESA MAY yesterday set out a blueprint which will guide Britain 's negotiations to leave the European Union over the next two years . Mrs May said her speech , entitled A Global Britain , was `` the framework of a deal that will herald a new partnership between the UK and the EU '' . It was `` a comprehensive and carefully considered plan that focuses on the ends , not just the means - with its eyes fixed firmly on the future , and on the kind of country we will be once we leave '' . Mrs May and her ministers will not reveal `` blow by blow '' details of her negotiating strategy because it would be against `` the national interest '' . The Prime Minister said : `` This is not a game or a time for opposition for opposition 's sake . It is a crucial and sensitive negotiation that will define the interests and the success of our country for many years to come . And it is vital that we maintain our discipline . '' Mrs May 's 12-point plan for Brexit centred on regaining control of borders , ending the jurisdiction of the European courts and getting a good deal for British businesses . In a passionate plea for Britain to get behind her plans , Mrs May said that it would be `` the legacy of our time '' . Controlling immigration Britain will create an immigration system that `` serves the national interest '' after the UK quits the EU . The Prime Minister said : `` In the last decade or so , we have seen record levels of net migration in Britain , and that sheer volume has put pressure on public services , like schools , stretched our infrastructure , especially housing , and put a downward pressure on wages for working class people . `` As Home Secretary for six years , I know that you can not control immigration overall when there is free movement to Britain from Europe . '' She continued : `` Brexit must mean control of the number of people who come to Britain from Europe . And that is what we will deliver . '' Mrs May warned that `` while controlled immigration can bring great benefits ... when the numbers get too high , public support for the system falters '' . Verdict : The comments on immigration will delight Eurosceptics who for years have called for the Government to curb numbers . This is the reddest of lines in the negotiations and ending freedom of movement must be delivered by the Prime Minister . However , business will want assurances that they will have access to enough labour in the years ahead . Out of the single market Britain will leave the EU single market and `` be free to strike trade deals across the world '' . Mrs May also signalled that Britain would most probably have to leave the customs union , or agree different terms with the EU , to sign these new trade deals . The UK wanted `` the freest possible trade in goods and services '' with the EU after Brexit . Mrs May said Britain was a `` great , global nation with so much to offer Europe and so much to offer the world . '' A `` bold and ambitious Free Trade agreement '' with the EU was a priority . It would `` give British companies the maximum freedom to trade with and operate within European markets - and let European businesses do the same in Britain '' . Mrs May said `` the days of Britain making vast contributions to the EU every year will end '' . Verdict : For Britain to prosper in the world after Brexit , it would have been nonsensical to remain a member of the single market unable to do free trade deals with America , China and India . The deal over the customs union will remain perhaps the most crucial , albeit technical , part of the negotiations . Rights for British expats The right of British expats to carry on living in the EU - and EU nationals living in the UK - will be enshrined `` as early as we can '' , Mrs May said . Britain has made clear to the other 27 EU countries that a reciprocal deal could be signed now to `` give people the certainty they want straight away '' . Verdict : Mrs May 's commitment will be a relief to the UK 's hundreds of expats in the EU who are worried they may have to move back to the UK . However , the detail of the effective amnesty for EU nationals living in the UK represents a major challenge for Whitehall . Smooth , orderly Brexit Shared rules between the UK and the EU on immigration controls , financial regulations and law and order could continue after Brexit , Mrs May pledged . It was in `` our mutual selfinterest '' to phase out regulation from the EU . She said : `` This will give businesses enough time to plan and prepare for those new arrangements . '' The transitional period , however long , would seek to avoid a `` disruptive cliff-edge . '' Verdict : Anthony Browne , chief executive of the British Bankers ' Association , said Mrs May had provided `` important clarity '' on the UK 's future relationship with Europe and the Federation of Small Businesses welcomed plans for a transition period . Ukip said any continued cooperation was `` diametrically opposed to the independence the British people voted for '' . Protecting workers ' rights Workers ' rights which are currently set out in EU employment law will be enshrined in British law after Brexit . There had been fears from unions that protections such as the Working Time Directive which stops staff being forced to work for more than 48 hours each week will not be written into British regulations . Verdict : Designed to appeal to Labour voters in the north of England who backed Brexit . However , the move may prove controversial with free market Conservatives who have long hoped for deregulation away from Brussels . Strengthening the Union The `` precious bond '' which ties together the United Kingdom will be stronger , not weaker , outside of the EU . Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland will each receive more powers as responsibilities are `` repatriated '' from Brussels , Mrs May said . She invited written submissions from Northern Ireland and Wales , having already received one from Scotland , about how they view the UK after Brexit . She said her `` guiding principle '' will be that there are `` no new barriers to living and doing business '' . Verdict : SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon said a different future for Scotland was more likely following Mrs May 's announcement about the single market . She called for `` serious engagement '' on Scotland 's proposal to be allowed to remain even if the rest of the UK leaves . Cooperation on security Britain will continue to share intelligence with EU member states about threats from terrorists after Brexit . Leaving the EU would have no bearing on a shared desire to combat `` crossborder crime '' , terrorism and `` the dangers presented by hostile states '' , Mrs May said . She wanted the UK 's future relationship with the EU `` to include practical arrangements '' on law enforcement and intelligence sharing . She added : `` We will continue to work closely with our European allies in foreign and defence policy . '' Verdict : The comments will have reassured EU leaders who rely heavily on Britain 's expertise Providing certainty Members of both Houses of Parliament will have a vote on the terms of Brexit . Mrs May also confirmed that when the European Communities Act is repealed the Government will write `` the body of EU law into British law '' . Verdict : Business groups welcomed Mrs May 's commitment to provide certainty wherever possible and the value of the pound rose after she confirmed the Brexit agreement would have to be approved by MPs and peers . Controlling our own laws Leaving the EU will mean that the UK `` will take back control of our laws and bring an end to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice in Britain '' . Verdict : The news cheered Eurosceptics . But Tory MP Ken Clarke said Britain could still find itself under the jurisdiction of the European Court as part of its new trade deal with the EU . New trade agreements Ministers will ensure that they `` get out into the wider world , to trade and do business all around the globe '' , Mrs May said . Freeing itself from the single market will allow the UK `` to increase significantly its trade with the fastest growing export markets in the world '' . Talks about trade deals had already started with China , Brazil and the Gulf States as well as Australia , New Zealand and India . Britain would not be `` at the back of the queue '' for a new trade deal with the US , as President Obama had said last summer , but at the `` front of the line '' . Verdict : Allie Renison , of the Institute of Directors , said : `` Business leaders will be heartened by the Prime Minister 's strong argument for the value of free trade , an argument currently being made by all too few global leaders . '' Travel across Irish border People will still be able to travel between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic after Brexit without showing their passports . Mrs May said a Common Travel Area covering the island of Ireland was `` an important priority for the UK in the talks ahead '' . This pre-dated Britain joining the European Economic Community and there was no reason why this `` special relationship '' could not continue . Verdict : Businesses in Northern Ireland welcomed Mrs May 's commitment to maintaining the Common Travel Area but warned of the dangers of leaving the single market . Science and innovation A post-Brexit Britain will be at the forefront of new thinking in science , space exploration , research and technology . The UK will `` welcome agreement to continue to collaborate with our European partners '' . Verdict : The Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry said the comments were a `` welcome statement of intent that provides the UK 's pharmaceutical industry with confidence for the future '' . Look familiar ? May 's trusty tartan Theresa May turns to her `` lucky '' suit whenever she needs to deliver a serious message . The Black Watch tartan suit was crafted by the very British designer Dame Vivienne Westwood . The Prime Minister first wore the £1,190 outfit at the 2013 Tory conference , and again when she announced her Conservative Party leadership campaign in June last year , below . But wearing Best of British on the day she declared that she wants to negotiate new trade deals with the entire world is a smart move on Mrs May 's part . Bethan Holt
Scotland May 's Brexit rebuke to Boris ; EU talks should not take two years , says Johnson
THERESA MAY last night said that only she will decide the terms of Britain 's departure from the EU , after Boris Johnson began setting out a strategy for Brexit . Speaking in the US , the Foreign Secretary suggested yesterday that the UK will begin formal Brexit talks `` early next year '' and leave the EU by 2019 . In comments that will delight Conservative Eurosceptics , he said that the discussions could be wrapped up before the two-year deadline and that Britain will be able to control its borders and do a `` jumbo free trade deal '' . He also indicated that countries such as Australia could send more migrants to the UK in return for trade deals . He also said it was `` absolute baloney '' to suggest that Britain will be unable to retain access to the European single market unless it keeps free movement . However , Downing Street sources last night made clear that all decisions on the timing of Brexit were the Prime Minister 's alone . `` The decision to trigger Article 50 is hers , '' the source said . `` She will be doing it at a time when she Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 believes it is in the best interest for Britain . '' The source added : `` The Prime Minister 's position has not changed . '' Mrs May has repeatedly refused to set out her plans for Brexit , believing that the UK should not `` put its cards on the table '' before the negotiation has started . David Davis , the Brexit minister , was earlier this month slapped down after he suggested that Britain could leave the single market . Mr Johnson said : `` What we 're doing is talking to our European friends and partners now in the expectation that by the early part of next year you will see an Article 50 letter . We will invoke that and in that letter I 'm sure we will be setting out some parameters for how we propose to take this forward . `` You invoke Article 50 in the early part of next year . You have two years to pull it off . I do n't actually think we will necessarily need to spend a full two years but let 's see how we go . '' Mr Johnson said that it was in the `` overwhelming interest '' of the EU to do a deal with the UK that allows it to control its borders while still having a free trade deal . `` We are going to benefit from the fantastic opportunities for greater free trade with our friends in the EU . It 's overwhelmingly in their interest to do that , '' he said . `` Not only do we buy more German cars than anybody else , we drink more Italian wine than any other country in Europe , 300 million litres of prosecco every year . They 're not going to put that at risk . `` Of course , we need a proper deal for our financial services industries . We need to sort out the question of free movement but it is all doable . '' Mr Johnson suggested that the citizens of Commonwealth countries could get easier immigration access to the UK . `` At the moment it is more difficult for Australians than it is for anybody from Slovakia or wherever it happens to be [ to move to Britain ] . '' He rejected the claims made by EU leaders that Britain can not have access to the European single market unless it accepts free movement of migrants . A think tank has said that the EU has more to lose than the UK over the Brexit negotiations . Civitas said the EU has 5.8 million jobs linked to trade with the UK , while Britain has only 3.6 million jobs tied to the bloc . Port development Millions of taxpayer cash wasted Millions of euros of EU taxpayers ' money has been `` wasted '' on ambitious seaport projects , a report by the European Court of Auditors , says . Between 2000-2013 ( EURO ) 6.8 billion of EU funds was spent on ports , but there was a `` high risk '' that almost ( EURO ) 400 million was wasted , with projects that went unused or duplicated facilities nearby .
Industry 's fears over EU exit deserve to be heard ; COMMENT
rexiteers would rather we did n't listen to business leaders who , on the whole , are in favour of the UK remaining a member of the European Union . BHaving seen the shambles that Lord Rose , the former head of Marks & Spencer who is leading the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign , is making of their case , Inners may increasingly be of a similar mind . In Parliament last week to face the Treasury Select Committee , Lord Rose said : `` The benefits of being in the EU are outweighed by the costs . '' Presumably he meant the opposite . He then said wages will rise if Britain votes to leave the European Union . Presumably he did n't realise how this would be interpreted - that the EU may be good for businesses but not necessarily for their employees . The City is making a similar hash of its case for staying in the EU . The economists at a range of investment banks have laid out what they think Brexit will mean for the economy . Most agree that the political uncertainty will weigh heavily on sterling and this could force up inflation , which could , in turn , deter foreign investors . Last week BlackRock , the world 's largest asset management company , said that Brexit offers lots of risk and little obvious reward . The only trouble was that it was fronted by Rupert Harrison . Who 's he ? BlackRock 's chief macrostrategist for multi-asset funds but also George Osborne 's former chief of staff . This handed the Out campaign a Mandy Rice-Davies line of rebuttal to Mr Harrison 's warning about the economic dangers of Brexit : `` Well , he would say that , would n't he ? '' Many feel that the financial industry is more worried about the dangers to itself . Being in the European Union gives banks based in the UK access to the single market under the current `` passporting '' arrangement . Yesterday , Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank of England , told MPs the City of London would `` without question '' lose business if it failed to negotiate the continuation of existing mutual recognition agreements following Brexit . He warned that these kinds of negotiations `` in general take a very long time to achieve '' . The Governor added that a number of major financial sector firms have contingency plans to move headquarters out of the City of London if Britain votes to leave the European Union . There are , however , three problems with these warnings . One is that when bankers say that they might shift in the event of Brexit , many cry out `` good riddance '' . 'Many feel the financial industry is more worried about the dangers to itself ' Then there is the question of where they would go . Would swathes of bankers really want to relocate to Paris , Frankfurt , or , as the European head of one US investment bank suggested to me , with a straight face , Portugal ? Lastly , is the threat of a post-Brexit banking exodus another example of the industry crying wolf ? After all , HSBC rather spiked everyone 's guns by recently committing to keep its headquarters in the UK and saying it would have to move only a few hundred bankers to Paris in the event of Brexit . So that 's that then - we can safely ignore the financial and business naysayers who worry that the UK would n't be able to make it out there in the big , bad world on its own ? Not quite so fast , I 'm afraid . Banks may be arguing for European Union membership out of self-interest . But it does n't necessarily follow that their interests are mutually exclusive to those of the rest of the country . Financial services are responsible for about a 10th of the UK economy and a 10th of all its tax revenue . Brexiteers like to make the distinction between companies ( who may suffer from a vote to leave ) and consumers ( who may gain ) . But that is a false dichotomy - consumers are also employees - the balance of benefits is far greyer . It 's also worth bearing in mind that banks are arguing in favour of the European Union despite all the brickbats that Brussels has thrown their way . These include the threat of a financial transaction tax and the bankers ' bonus cap , which the Mayor of London , Boris Johnson , back when he championed the City , described as `` possibly the most deluded measure to come from Europe since Diocletian tried to fix the price of groceries across the Roman Empire '' . Then there is a misunderstanding of any potential `` exodus '' - there will be no financial Moses to part the English Channel and lead his people to a Promised Land of champagne and money . But when staff quit jobs , as they very regularly do , banks make a decision about where they will replace them and whether the cost of an exbanker in London can be better spent hiring someone in Paris , Frankfurt or even Lisbon . Brexit could put a little pressure on the wrong side of those scales . The business models of banks are already under threat , a raft of new regulations have made many of their activities uneconomical and squeezed the margins of others . In this the City is similar to the UK 's £69.5bn-a-year car industry , which recently came out overwhelmingly in favour of staying in the EU . Both certainly think even a small difference in our trade relations with Europe could have a big impact on their futures . To be clear , I have n't yet made up my mind about Brexit . I suspect that the economic effect one way or the other will be small ( although , let 's not kid ourselves , we 're all guessing ) - a weaker pound and a bit more inflation might even be a good thing . However , I do n't see how you can argue that the economic effects of Brexit will be marginal and then ignore the views of low-margin industries . If they 're worried , that should , at the very least , give us pause for thought . ben.wright @ telegraph.co.uk 'Many feel the financial industry is more worried about the dangers to itself '
City 's worries at heart of Brexit talks , says Davis
DAVID DAVIS reassured City firms he has their concerns at heart before heading off to Brussels for the latest round of Brexit negotiations yesterday . `` When I sit around the negotiating table with [ EU chief negotiator ] Michel Barnier , or round the Cabinet table with my colleagues , it 's always with the importance of the City very much in my mind , '' the Brexit Secretary said , adding he was `` determined to maintain the City 's competitiveness '' . Speaking at an awards ceremony this week , Mr Davis said he wanted to ensure that employing EU citizens remains `` as easy as possible '' post Brexit . `` While leaving the EU will allow us to bring back control of immigration , it wo n't mean pulling up the drawbridge , '' he said . Relationships between the City and the Government have been strained in the wake of the Brexit referendum as some bosses have felt their interests have been overlooked in negotiations . But ministers have been attempting to reassure businesses recently . Talks between Mr Davis and Mr Barnier resumed yesterday , with negotiations expected to be focused on the scale of Britain 's exit bill , rights of EU citizens and the future of the Irish border .
Weary Davis hands out fudge for the vipers to sink their teeth into ; Sketch
Ilove watching David Davis in the Commons . His body language says so much about him . Other ministers simply stand at the dispatch box . Mr Davis , however , leans against it , on one elbow , while jauntily waving his spectacles around in his free hand . He makes it look as if , rather than answering questions in Parliament on matters of grave national import , he 's leaning against the bar of his favourite pub , having a chinwag with the landlord while waiting for his pint to settle . Yesterday , though , the Brexit Secretary seemed to lack his usual blokeish twinkle . He 'd been summoned to the House to explain why , the day before , he 'd told a select committee that MPs might not get to vote on the final Brexit deal until after Brexit had taken place . As he hauled himself to his feet , Mr Davis looked uncharacteristically weary . You could tell what he was thinking . All this dratted bother : having to write a statement , read it out , spend the next 45 minutes answering angry questions about it ... and all because of one tiny , unthinking slip . `` We 've been very clear right from the start ... '' he began , tiredly . Labour MPs guffawed . `` What a mess ! '' snorted Sir Keir Starmer , Mr Davis 's opposite number . The Government , sighed the Brexit Secretary , still `` expects and intends '' MPs to get a `` meaningful vote '' before Britain leaves the EU in March 2019 . Labour and Tory Remainers , though , were not satisfied . What , they demanded to know , did `` meaningful '' mean ? Surely a vote would only be meaningful if MPs could tell the Government to reopen negotiations ? If they could only choose between accepting the Government 's deal and leaving the EU with no deal , was that really a choice at all ? ( If this does prove to be the choice on offer , it could give rise to a fascinating spectacle : Labour Remainers voting with the Government in order to avoid no deal , while some Tory Brexiteers vote against the Government in order to secure no deal . ) In general , Remainer MPs were pretty cross - and by far the crossest was Barry Sheerman . `` Can I say this [ to Mr Davis ] in the friendliest of terms , '' began the Labour MP for Huddersfield , ominously , `` will he stop FUDGING ? We understand why he FUDGED yesterday - because the nest of VIPERS behind him MAKE him a fudger ! Stop FUDGING ! '' Even before Mr Sheerman had finished shouting about fudge , the Commons was in uproar . `` What ? '' spluttered Sir Desmond Swayne , a vocal Tory Brexiteer . `` Me ? A viper ? '' Soothingly , the Speaker reassured Sir Desmond that neither he , nor any other MP , was a viper . However , he added , the use of the word `` viper '' was not in itself unparliamentary . Labour MPs were delighted . `` Ssssssssssssss ! '' they hissed at Sir Desmond with relish . `` Ssssssssssssss ! '' Sir Desmond appeared to take the joke in good part , although word later went round that several Labour MPs had been rushed to hospital with severe bites to their ankles .
If Theresa May can not deliver on Brexit she will lose her core supporters Bird-friendly energy ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - As she fine-tunes her forthcoming speech on Brexit and ponders the divisions in her Cabinet , Theresa May should be aware that if she fails to deliver our exit from the single market , the customs union and the rule of the European Court of Justice then many millions of people will not vote Conservative again . She will lose the hard core of the party , and deliver the country to Jeremy Corbyn and his hard-Left government . Sheila Ellison Thatcham , Berkshire sir - You are right that the Prime Minister `` must clarify her own stand on Brexit '' ( leading article , September 19 ) , and one hopes that she will do so during her speech in Italy this Friday . However , the danger is that her stance may be one of appeasement rather than strength . That is why the Foreign Secretary 's article in The Daily Telegraph last Saturday was so important and why its timing was actually exquisite . Thanks to her ill-advised decision to call a general election , Mrs May has diminished her own authority as Prime Minister . She would do well to embrace Boris Johnson 's optimism and determination , in order to direct Brexit negotiations from the position of strength which is the reality of Britain 's situation relative to the EU . John Waine Nuneaton , Warwickshire sir - Arguments for a `` hard Brexit '' start to unravel when they are articulated by politicians who advocate a short transition period after April 2019 . These politicians ignore the practical impacts of international commerce . The British Retail Consortium ( BRC ) has warned that leaving the EU without a tariff deal would see shoppers face an average price increase of 22 per cent in everyday food products , with cheese , for example , up 30 per cent and tomatoes up 20 per cent . This forecast is based on the impact of World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) tariffs and ignores the additional inflationary effect of an everweakening domestic currency . However , with up to 16,000 trucks using the port of Dover every day , many containing perishable foods , and with no infrastructure to inspect cargo and paperwork under WTO rules , the BRC 's line of argument falls away , as there wo n't be much food left on shelves anyway . Paul Bendit Arlington , East Sussex sir - I am at a loss to understand the apparent terror of company executives over the possibility of a `` cliff-edge '' exit from the single market and customs union . By the time we leave the EU in March 2019 they will have had two years and nine months to prepare for Brexit . If they have n't got all their ducks in a row by then , frankly they have no right to the positions they hold and deserve to go to the wall . John Todd Stoke-on-Trent , Staffordshire sir - We warmly welcome the recognition in Ambrose Evans-Pritchard 's article on offshore wind ( Business , September 14 ) of the need for a debate around our ecological duty to the North Sea . It is vital for the protection of our struggling wildlife that Britain , as well as our European neighbours , pursues an energy transition that is in harmony with nature . The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds considers that there can be space for renewable energy and wildlife to thrive together , but there are significant ecological data gaps that need to be filled before we will fully understand the impact of the extensive expansion of wind energy in the North Sea , and how we can avoid or minimise that impact . Britain may have won the `` zeroemission lottery '' , but rushing ahead and spending its winnings with abandon is unlikely to end well . Simon Marsh Head of sustainable development , RSPB Sandy , Bedfordshire
Brexit stalemate arises out of the EU 's failure to abide by its own rules ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - Why is Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief negotiator , being allowed to ignore the requirements of Article 50 in the current Brexit talks ? The article states that , when a state has notified the European Council of its intention to withdraw from the union , `` the Union shall negotiate and conclude an agreement with that State , setting out the arrangements for its withdrawal , taking account of the framework for its future relationship with the Union '' . It is not logically possible to take account of `` the framework for the future relationship '' until that framework has been settled . The EU should therefore have started by negotiating the framework for the future relationship and only then moved to conclude the agreement on the arrangements for the withdrawal . Robert Heather Southampton sir - The condescending response from Michel Barnier et al towards any proposals put forward by the Brexit secretary , David Davis , shows only too clearly that the EU side has never had any intention of reaching a mutually agreed outcome . By continuing to insist on a resolution on their terms , they are well aware that they can delay and obfuscate to their hearts ' content . Would it not be realistic to accept this , agree that `` no deal is better than a bad deal '' and walk away now ? Paul Strong Claxby , Lincolnshire sir - Michel Barnier , Jean-Claude Juncker and the rest should stop carping about the UK 's approach to the Brexit negotiations and pay a little more attention to what 's happening on their side of the English Channel . According to a `` mini poster '' for students , purchased in a French supermarket at St Omer , `` L'Union européenne '' has only 27 members - and Britain is not one of them . James A Cowan Belmont , Co Durham sir - Venetia Caine ( Letters , August 28 ) is quite right ; this Brexit farce should be brought to an end , and quickly . The referendum should never have been called and the resulting majority was too small for such a significant motion to be carried . Furthermore , David Cameron said clearly at the time that the outcome was not necessarily a mandate . Strong leadership would have ended this whole ridiculous affair a long time ago . Let 's hope that enough people will come to the same conclusion and that common sense will prevail . Ron Stubberfield Beaconsfield , Buckinghamshire sir - Dr Millan Sachania ( Letters , August 29 ) lists three conditions which he believes would be appropriate for the running of future referendums . May I suggest a fourth ? `` That in the event of the wrong result being returned by the electorate , further referendums will be held until the right result is achieved '' . Lord Willoughby de Broke ( Ukip ) London SW1
Scotland Greece demands return of Elgin Marbles as condition of exit deal
GREEK politicians are campaigning for the Elgin Marbles to be returned to Athens as part of the Brexit negotiations between Britain and the European Union . Stelios Kouloglou , a member of the European Parliament for the governing hard-left Syriza party , claims that EU treaty law means that the European Commission 's Brexit negotiators must raise the controversial issue . The Elgin or Parthenon Marbles are a collection of sculptures , inscriptions and architectural features acquired by Lord Elgin between 1801 and 1805 . Lord Elgin has been accused of stealing them or bribing officials to remove them from the Parthenon . They are now housed in the British Museum , which insists the marbles were legally bought from the Ottoman Empire , which ruled Athens at the time . Mr Kouloglou , a respected investigative journalist , has twice written to the commission asking for the marbles to be part of the Brexit negotiations . `` Brexit negotiators must take into account the need to protect European cultural heritage , '' he wrote . `` The Parthenon Marbles are considered as the greatest symbol of European culture . Therefore , reuniting the marbles would be both a sign of respect and civilised relationship between Great Britain and the EU , and much more [ than ] a legal necessity . '' The European Commission told The Daily Telegraph that it did not believe that Articles 3 , 50 and 167 of the treaty of the EU meant their negotiating team were legally bound to address the issue .
Washington offers good news for Brexit BODY : At last some good , upbeat news about Brexit , courtesy of Donald Trump . He used his favoured method of communication , a tweet , to foreshadow a bilateral free-trade agreement with the UK after we leave the EU in 2019 that could be `` very big and exciting '' for jobs . The president 's enthusiasm for a deal with Britain - in stark contrast to his predecessor Barack Obama - is a signal endorsement of the efforts of Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , who is currently in Washington for talks . After weeks during which the Cabinet appeared to be at loggerheads over the course Brexit should take , the chance to talk positively about the opportunities should be welcomed by all of those who otherwise seek out the most downbeat prognostication possible . While disagreements with the EU over citizenship rights , the Irish border and the so-called `` exit fee '' persist and will not be easy to resolve , looking further ahead the auguries are good . Far from Brexit frightening off investors , BMW has announced that a fully electric version of the Mini will be built at the company 's Cowley plant near Oxford and not in the Netherlands , which was also in the running . This follows Nissan 's postreferendum decision to manufacture new versions of its Qashqai and X-Trail vehicles in the UK . Toyota , too , has agreed to invest in the UK after receiving reassurances about post-Brexit arrangements from Greg Clark , the Business Secretary . Dr Fox 's department has also been pro-active , sending out to all US congressional districts an analysis of what a trade deal with the UK would mean to them . This is a sensible recognition that any deal will have to be approved by Congress . The same approach should be taken in Europe : instead of leaving all the running to the Commission , we should remind the regions in France , Germany and elsewhere running a trade surplus with Britain what is at stake for them if barriers go up after Brexit . Clearly , an agreement with the US , our single biggest trading partner , will impact on some British sectors , not least agriculture . The Treasury may need to continue subsidising marginal farmers if we want to keep the British countryside looking as it does . Moreover , trade deals can take years to negotiate . But the direction of travel is what matters and it is encouraging that key ministers are able to provide an optimistic counterweight to those who see nothing but gloom ahead .
The Norwegians and Swiss offer us realistic alternatives to hard Brexit
The surest way to prevent Brexit ever happening is for hardline Eurosceptics to overplay a weak hand . Ideological greed will get the better of them . The vote for British independence can be consummated only if done safely , in manageable steps , and with broad political consent . It can not be done without securing acquiescence from British youth and the devolved nations . Nor is it necessary to force through Brexit in a militant fashion . What Leavers seek can largely be achieved with statecraft and patience . It certainly can not it be done if the nation is frightened , and frightened it will be if ultras push through a scorched-earth withdrawal from the EU in an economic downturn . The phoney war and the fool 's prosperity of the last 11 months have lulled Brexiteers into complacency . From now on we will face a darkening picture . The global mini-boom peaked late last year and has since rolled over . China and the US are both tightening monetary policy . UBS says the global `` credit impulse '' has fallen as sharply over the last eight months as it did before the Lehman crisis . The world is eight years into an economic expansion that is long in the tooth , and laden with debt . For a `` high-beta '' economy such as Britain , leveraged to the ups and downs of the global economy , this is a treacherous stage of the cycle . The Bank of England inadvertently stoked a credit bubble with emergency stimulus after the referendum . This has masked the damage below the waterline , and stored up fresh problems . While the weak pound has been a prop for the economy and a shot in the arm for exporters , it has not led to a durable surge in investment . The sugar rush is already fading . What we face now is the sting in the tail . Inflation reached 2.9pc last month on the delayed feed-through from higher import costs . Yet wages are lagging . Real living standards are being squeezed . When the pound crashed from 2007-2008 , the poor were protected . Benefits and in-work tax credit rates were indexed to inflation . Now the benefits have been frozen until 2020 . The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates that the poorest 8.3million families will end up losing an average of £470 a year . They are already starting to take the brunt as the cost of imported food , clothes and fuel grind higher . The Government will have to carry out Brexit just as stagflation bites , with ever-louder demands to call off the adventure . Europe 's leaders can already sniff it . Germany 's finance minister , Wolfgang Schäuble , has spoken warmly of `` open doors '' if the British people think again . France 's President Emmanuel Macron used identical language . The dynamics are changing fast yet all we get from Theresa May is a refusal to accept that the election makes any difference to Brexit . She is circling the wagons . One can understand why some Tories think the vote shed little light on the coloration of Brexit , whether hard , soft , or clean . Ukip voters returned to Labour precisely because Jeremy Corbyn matched Mrs May 's vows to halt free movement . His vow breaches Labour 's other pledge : to preserve unfettered access to EU markets . Yet Mr Corbyn managed to persuade young voters and Remainers that he would somehow deliver a very soft Brexit . But let us not be distracted . Tory MPs who lost their seats sense that there was a high dosage of protest against a hard Brexit in the Corbyn vote . The emergence of the Ulster Unionists ( DUP ) and the Scottish Conservatives as king-makers changes the equation in any case . Like others , I have floated the Norwegian option as a half-way house for five to 10 years . The European Economic Area ( EEA ) allows Britain to retake farming and fisheries , and to remove itself from EU reach into foreign , policy , defence , justice and home affairs . It would give Britain access to the EU single market without being a member of the customs union , which we should avoid like the plague . Outside the customs union the UK could negotiate trade deals with the US , China , India , Japan and others . To remain inside it - the latest media fashion - is wrong-headed . The beauty of the EEA is that if we wished to withdraw later , we could do so in less traumatic circumstances than withdrawal from the EU today under Article 50 . It would be easier to break free as trade deals stack up . The EEA option greatly reduces the reach of the European Court ( ECJ ) through the Charter of Fundamental Rights . The ECJ would still have sway ( through the EFTA court ) over market matters but this would be defined . It is a compromise on the issue of free movement . Certain things can be done that can not be done in the EU . There is a precedent for Australianstyle quotas in Liechtenstein . Let us not overstate the attraction of the EEA . Lorand Bartels , a law don at Cambridge , has convinced me that the UK would have to join as a new member , subject to veto by others . It would not inherit the right of membership as it steps out of the EU . This would make us a supplicant and reduces the appeal of the EEA . There are other ways to skin a cat . The Helvetophile Tory MEP Dan Hannan - once of this parish - has been a tireless advocate of the EFTA-based `` Swiss '' option , deeming it the closest relationship with the EU that is compatible with sovereignty . Call it medium-soft , if you want . What we hear instead are Tory ultras telling us that a soft Brexit is no Brexit . My fear is that the Government will bluster its way into the coming talks with the wrong priorities , with too little public support and against a recessionary backdrop . This will lead to a showdown that can end only one way . Such a `` Greek '' debacle would discredit Brexit beyond repair . The cardinal objective is to escape the expanding writ of the ECJ and to regain self-government under the supremacy of Parliament . How this is achieved is secondary . How long it takes is immaterial . Ten years is nothing in the life of a nation . To those who balk at any compromise needed to keep the great middle of British society on side , I can only reply : you risk losing the one chance in over 40 years to jump off the federal express . 'The beauty of the EEA is that if we wished to withdraw later , we could do so with far less trauma '
Fears that UK 's aerospace industry could hit Brexit turbulence
BRITAIN 'S ranking in the global aerospace industry could come under pressure if the Government does not hammer out a favourable deal in the Brexit negotiations , according to manufacturers . The warning comes in a report from manufacturers ' organisation EEF and Santander on the British aerospace industry , which is worth £31bn a year to the UK economy and is the world 's second largest , beaten only by the US . Britain 's 2,400 aerospace companies are specialists in making engines and complex components for aircraft , which make up 79pc of the sector 's £28.4bn of annual exports . The airliner market is dominated by pan-European Airbus and US-based Boeing and although neither builds complete aircraft in Britain , both rely on UK-built parts . Both manufacturers have record order books , meaning that even as they ramp up production rates they have almost a decade 's worth of work in hand , with a reliance on UK aerospace businesses to help them meet demand . However , Britain 's essential role in the global aerospace industry could come under pressure as a consequence of Brexit . For example , Airbus builds the wings for its jets in Britain , with the company 's huge plant in Broughton , North Wales , exporting them to factories around the world . `` The concerns around the nature and conditions of any Brexit deal raise serious questions about the next generation of aircraft and where they will be produced , '' the report warns . `` Airbus could face growing political pressure to bring jobs back to France , Germany and Spain as a result of the decision to leave the single market . `` Broughton is likely to face competition for wing work from Germany and Spain as it is the most lucrative part of the supply chain and both nations are keen to accelerate their aerospace sectors . '' If Britain - which is already in the grip of a skills shortage - loses access to talented engineers and technicians as a result of freedom of movement controls resulting from Brexit , Germany and Spain will have their position strengthened when bidding for new aircraft models , the report says . Concerns about protectionist measures , such as customs delays , in the wake of Brexit are also flagged as a key risk , although under World Trade Organisation rules , the industry is exempt from tariffs . A further worry is that Britain 's membership of the aerospace-certifying authority , the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) . If Britain creates its own regulation regime , then manufacturers will still have to have parts authorised by EASA , which would discourage further sector investment . £31bn How much the British aerospace industry is worth to the economy each year . It is second only to America 's in terms of size
The BBC has failed in its duty to provide balanced reporting on Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : sir - It is interesting to read that a substantial number of politicians have written to the BBC complaining of a lack of balance when Brexit is being discussed ( report , March 21 ) . I largely agree with this , although Andrew Neil remains an exception . He is a robust interviewer , and harsh when faced with evasive answers from politicians of whatever persuasion . What is most frustrating is the BBC 's excessive coverage of any negative aspects of Brexit , particularly from its political and economic correspondents , who rarely have anything positive to say about the prospects of life outside the EU . The BBC should offer us a totally balanced view and report news in an unbiased manner . David Kidd Petersfield , Hampshire sir - How right the MPs are . We visited friends in Nova Scotia last September , and the first thing they wanted to talk about was the `` disastrous decision '' the British people had made in June and how awfully worried we must be . When asked how they arrived at such a view , it transpired that , as expats , they were regular viewers of BBC World News . After a fortnight , we had managed to reassure them of our optimism - and of how most British people , while recognising the challenges , are looking forward to a brighter future after our withdrawal from the EU . We now regularly update them . Chris Harland Kingston upon Hull , East Yorkshire sir - I am not so sure that the BBC is negative per se about Brexit . Perhaps it is now reflecting the level of angst that is , for a change , coming from the `` other '' camp . We had years of anti-EU rhetoric , with the great clamour of Nigel Farage and others . Now , having won , these people are no longer making a fuss . Instead it is our turn . It was Mr Farage who said that a very narrow victory for Remain would not mean the end of the fight . In the event , Brexit won by a very narrow margin - and the BBC is reflecting the fact that those who want to remain have not gone away . Stephen Dutton Colchester , Essex sir - I can only assume that these MPs never watch Question Time . Audiences are packed with Brexiteers , and the odd anti-Brexit comment is jeered off the floor . We should be a nation devoted to free speech , but I fear this is no longer true . Theresa May has chosen her path and everything is now being sacrificed to achieve it . Perhaps the BBC can afford to be a little more balanced . Chris Garratt Strassen , Luxembourg sir - Nature , we are told , abhors a vacuum . Is it surprising that the BBC has become the official opposition ? Simon Prendiville Yeovilton , Somerset
Scotland See you in court : Brussels to threaten Britain over £50bn Brexit divorce bill
BRITAIN will be threatened with court action by the European Union if it tries to walk away without paying a £50billion `` divorce bill '' , leaked papers reveal . A draft copy of the EU 's negotiating strategy for the forthcoming Brexit talks discusses taking Britain to the International Court of Justice in The Hague . It quotes an official as saying that if Britain refuses to pay , `` in that case it is , see you in The Hague ! '' . Theresa May has received advice from Government lawyers that Britain could legally leave without paying . A House of Lords committee came to the same conclusion . However , Sir Tim Barrow , Britain 's ambassador to the EU , has warned that Brussels has confidence in `` other legal options '' . The leaked document , obtained by the Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant , says the EU strategy will also insist that access to the single market will only be granted if freedom of movement remains . It came as a poll showed that Remain voters appear to be warming to the idea of Brexit , with more than half wanting an end to freedom of movement . A similar proportion also support a ban on welfare payments for EU migrants . But nine in 10 people want Britain to maintain free trade with the EU after Brexit , regardless of which way they voted in last year 's referendum . The survey , by Professor John Curtice of the National Centre for Social Research , shows that Remain voters and Leave voters do not necessarily disagree on key aspects of Brexit . Prof Curtice said : `` Many a Remain voter would like to see the end of freedom of movement ... the priority that the UK Government appears to place on this issue is not necessarily at odds with the views of those who voted Remain . '' In the survey of 2,322 people , 82 per cent of Leave voters and 58 per cent of Remain voters wanted EU migrants to be treated in the same way as non-EU migrants . Among Conservative voters , 93 per cent back free trade , while 81 per cent want an end to freedom of movement , meaning Tories will be the most disappointed if Mrs May does not manage to achieve the goals . The poll illustrates the difficulties Mrs May faces as she negotiates a deal that will satisfy the British public . EU negotiators have made it clear that free trade can only be offered in conjunction with freedom of movement , meaning the two top priorities for voters are incompatible . Prof Curtice said it presented the Government `` with a considerable challenge . Mrs May could well face a hard task at home keeping voters onside . '' Around seven in 10 voters want to keep EU regulations on water quality standards at beaches , limits to the cost of mobile phone calls abroad and compensation for airline passengers who have experienced delays . More than two-thirds think Britain should still contribute to EU-funded projects such as important university research .
Scotland 9-0 to Brexit , as MPs see off amendments to win the day
REMAINERS had hoped it would be the night when they finally made a dent in Theresa May 's Brexit plans with a bewildering array of new clauses and amendments to the Article 50 bill . Nine proposals in all , ranging from the rights of EU migrants to the opinions of the Gibraltar Government , were put to the vote and , one by one , all nine proposals were thrown out by MPs . It was a flawless night for Theresa May , as the EU ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill was passed by 494 votes to 122 in its original , unamended form . Eurosceptic MPs could barely contain their excitement , with one minister saying as he went to vote : `` I am about to have the best moment of my life since my wedding night . '' Disgruntled SNP members showed their defiance by singing to Beethoven 's Ode to Joy - the anthem of Europe - in the chamber , earning a ticking off from Lindsay Hoyle , the Deputy www.Speaker.No second referendum The amendment with most potential for chaos was clause 43 , tabled by the Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron , which called for a second public referendum before Brexit finally happens . The Prime Minister has already agreed that Parliament will get a vote on the final deal before it goes to the European Parliament for ratification , but Mr Farron said a second referendum was vital to stop Britain going `` over the cliff `` . Only 33 MPs agreed as it was crushed by a 307 majority . Jeremy Corbyn had the biggest headache after 19 Labour MPs , including five frontbenchers , defied a three-line whip to back Mr Farron 's proposal . Mr Corbyn must now decide the fate of shadow policing minister Lyn Brown ; Catherine West ( Foreign Office ) ; Daniel Zeichner ( transport ) ; Andy Slaughter ( housing ) ; and Dr Rupa Huq ( Home Office ) , who had all been told to abstain . EU migrants Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , headed off a potential Tory rebellion over the rights of EU migrants already here by writing to doubting MPs to reassure them `` nothing will change '' for any EU citizen living in Britain after Brexit without a vote in Parliament . The proposed clause 57 , tabled by Labour , required a Government guarantee on rights of EU citizens living in the UK before Article 50 is triggered . Up to a dozen Tory MPs were expected to defy the whip and back the amendment but just three rebelled - Ken Clarke , Tania Mathias and Andrew Tyrie . The clause was rejected by a majority of 42 . Ed Vaizey , one of the would-be rebels , said he was now convinced securing the rights of EU nationals in Britain post-Brexit was a top priority . Caroline Lucas , the Green Party coleader , argued it would be `` cruel and immoral '' to leave migrants in limbo . The amendment proposed that any EU citizen who was lawfully resident in the UK on the day of the referendum last June should be unaffected . But the Prime Minister has refused to agree the future status of EU nationals until the rights of 1.2 million Britons in the EU have also been secured . Gibraltar Labour MP Mike Gapes proposed that Gibraltar , which voted overwhelmingly Remain , should be consulted before Article 50 could be triggered . He argued that Brexit could make it harder for the UK to defend the British Overseas Territory against Spanish `` funny business '' . Spain has long challenged British sovereignty and there are concerns about what Brexit could mean for the territory 's economy , which is reliant on thousands of Spanish people crossing the border every day to work . Mr Gapes told the Commons : `` While we are in the EU our Government can ensure that no silly things , no funny business , can go on as regards what might come out of some draft document produced somewhere relating to waters or environmental issues or maybe flights and trade matters . `` As soon as we leave the EU we no longer have the ability to argue that case and block it if a particular government in Madrid decides to up the ante to make life more difficult . '' His amendment was rejected by 338 votes to 288 . Euratom The European Nuclear Research Agency , established by a 1957 treaty , is a legally distinct body from the European Union , and new clause 192 called on the Government to treat the process of leaving the so-called Euratom as `` separate to that of leaving the European Union '' . Paul Blomfield , the shadow Brexit minister , argued that voters in Copeland , the constituency in Cumbria that includes the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing site , will want to know the position before they vote in the coming by-election caused by the resignation of Labour MP Jamie Reed . He said : `` The people in this country deserve to know on Euratom . People voting in Copeland in a couple of weeks ' time will want to know - their jobs are on the line . '' The proposal was defeated by a majority of 49 votes . The bumpy road to Brexit Bill goes up to the House of Lords Today Peers start to table amendments to the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill . Feb 20 and 21 Peers debate the Bill during its second reading in the House of Lords . MPs vote at end of debate . Peers expected to vote through legislation . February 27 Peers debate the Bill in the first of two days in committee . Numerous attempts to amend the Bill are expected to be made and voted on by peers . March 1 Peers debate the Bill on the second of two days in committee . More amendments can be made and voted on by peers . March 7 The Bill will have its report stage and third reading . If passed without amendments it can receive royal assent . If not , it goes back to the Commons for MPs to agree the changes . March 9 and 10 Theresa May meets EU leaders at the European Council in Brussels when she could formally inform the EU of Britain 's intention to trigger Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty and leave the EU . March 13 , 14 , 15 The Government attempts in the House of Commons to overturn peers ' amendments made in the House of Lords .
Time to put aside political squabbling and focus on getting the best Brexit deal for Britain ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - I voted to remain in the EU . However , we lost - and it is time to move forward as a country . The case in the Supreme Court , the shouts of MPs demanding a running commentary and the shenanigans of the SNP give the impression of a divided Britain . This will be exploited by the EU . We should accept the result and unite behind the people who will be negotiating for Britain . Even though I disagree with the referendum vote , I believe it is sacrosanct . John Hall Malmesbury , Wiltshire SIR - You report ( January 25 ) that a number of MPs are planning to disrupt or thwart the Brexit process . These MPs should be reminded that we voted them in - and we can just as easily vote them out . Barrie McKay South Cerney , Gloucestershire SIR - Should Jeremy Corbyn , along with Liberal Democrat and SNP allies , obstruct the Government 's Brexit plans , then Theresa May will have no choice but to call a general election . If she did this , the Conservatives and Ukip would gain more seats , while Labour and the Lib Dems would suffer . Mr Corbyn will sabre-rattle but pull back from the brink . He says he wants to make Britain more democratic , but he knows that the last thing he needs is an election . Robin Nonhebel Swanage , Dorset SIR - Kate Hoey ( Comment , January 25 ) appears to be embracing `` alternative facts '' . It is simply untrue that Liberal Democrats want to block Brexit by `` any means possible '' . We will only vote against the invocation of Article 50 if the Government refuses to grant the people a say on its final deal . Many Brexiteers said Britain would stay in the single market , but instead we are heading for a hard Brexit that City institutions estimate could cost Britain up to £200 billion over the next 15 years . The facts have changed , and people deserve a vote on the actual terms - not the dodgy promises written on a campaign bus . Tom Brake MP Foreign Affairs Spokesman Liberal Democrats London SW1 SIR - If Remainers are to be true to their principles , they should be advancing the view that it is for the EU Commissioner to decide the terms of our future relationship , and for Parliament to accept that directive without debate . Michael Hely Banham , Norfolk SIR - Nigel Farage ( Comment , January 25 ) says the ruling of the Supreme Court `` was far from the clear-cut issue that some Remainers have suggested '' . The judgment of the Supreme Court was passed by a 73 per cent majority . What percentage would Mr Farage like to set as a minimum for a decision to be classed as clear-cut ? I assume that 52 per cent would fail to meet his own rather strict requirements . Christian Froggatt Reigate , Surrey SIR - Contrary to what Iain Copland implies ( Letters , January 25 ) , the House of Commons Library briefing paper No 07212 on the European Union Referendum Bill states : `` It [ the Bill ] does not contain any requirement for the UK Government to implement the results of the referendum . '' It goes on : `` Instead , this is a type of referendum known as pre-legislative or consultative , which enables the electorate to voice an opinion which then influences the Government in its policy decisions . '' Mike Sufrin Dundee SIR - I wonder if Nicola Sturgeon secretly has mixed feelings about Parliament having to approve a referendum result . Tim Matthews London N6
It 's time for the Brexit bears to calm down
Funny , that . The `` experts '' were not just a little bit wrong but horrendously , hopelessly so . The Markit/ CIPS Purchasing Managers ' Index ( PMI ) jumped to a 10-month high of 53.3 in August , after tumbling to a three-year low of 48.3 in July in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote ; it was the biggest month-on-month surge in a quarter of a century and one that confounded the doom-mongers , yet again . Yet not a single one of the well-paid economists polled by Bloomberg even came close to predicting the extent of the rebound , driven in part by the lower pound : just three forecast any growth at all ( a modest rise to just 50.5 , as it happens , which at least got the direction of travel right ) . The forecasters are on another planet from those they are trying to understand , consumers as well as businesses . The vast majority of City economists thought that the sky would fall in after the Brexit vote , with some going as far as predicting another Lehman Brothers-style financial implosion . Many were expecting - and some are still actually predicting - a technical recession , an eventuality that now looks unlikely . Even commercial property funds , which are set up in a fragile way and were badly hit in the immediate aftermath of the vote are now recovering . The credit markets are fine , as is inter-bank lending and all other key indicators of financial stress . Gilt yields have fallen further . Of course , not all is going swimmingly : the economy has been doing all right but not brilliantly for a while now , irrespective of the Brexit vote . Some parts of the economy are continuing their longer-term slowdown , including property transactions which are suffering from stamp duty , the tax attack on buy-tolet , an array of tax hikes aimed at wealthier foreign buyers and an overvalued London market . The manufacturing PMI had been on a downward trend for a while . It is also obviously true that there has been some sort of Brexit shock , and many companies are worried . Growth will undoubtedly be hit : the figures imply a rebound from excessive , irrational pessimism , not a boom . It is also worth putting the UK numbers into an international context . Britain 's reading was substantially above the final eurozone manufacturing PMI for the month , which fell a little to 51.7 . The UK did far better than France , which fell to 48.3 ( yes , being an EU member-state is no economic panacea , for those who may not have noticed the economic history of the past 20 years ) . Britain also did much better than the US , where the ISM manufacturing slumped to 49.4 from 52.6 . It ought to be obvious , but for some reason was n't , that one can vote to leave the EU and do much better than countries that are choosing to remain ( or of course that have little or nothing to do with Europe at all ) . There are two key messages from the latest figures . First , the new crop of perma-bears in the City need to calm down , and fast : they should n't allow the fact that they did n't want , predict or like Brexit to cloud their judgment when it comes to understanding what is actually going on in the economy . Second , it 's equally important that people such as myself - who can not wait for Brexit to become a reality - do n't get carried away by this and other positive data . For a start , there will be lots more data , and some are bound to be bad . The construction and services numbers will be worth watching ; and then real , hard figures ( though , of course , those will be revised for years to come ) . I can understand why Brexiteers would be tempted to gloat . They were ridiculed , demonised and accused of having destroyed the economy by some Remainers in the ugly , hysterical days immediately after the vote . But the fact that some Remainers behaved appallingly is no reason for Brexiteers to do the same . It 's time to focus instead on what really matters , and that means getting the Brexit negotiations right , not one or other survey or data snapshot . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk 'It ought to be obvious that one can vote to leave the EU and do much better than countries choosing to stay '
Hammond takes Tories 'on path to electoral ruin ' ; Politics Chancellor rebuked by May after telling Davos leaders that UK 's relationship with the EU will hardly change
THERESA MAY rebuked Philip Hammond last night after he prompted a Cabinet row by making a public call for a soft Brexit . The Chancellor used a speech in Davos , Switzerland , to say that there would only be `` very modest '' changes to relations between the EU and the UK after Brexit . He praised a call by the CBI group of business leaders for Britain to have the `` closest possible relationship between the EU and the UK '' . He also called for a liberal approach to free movement , saying : `` We want to maintain the closest possible relationship in people to people exchanges '' . His comments prompted a backlash from Cabinet colleagues and backbenchers , who said he was putting the Tories on the `` path to electoral ruin '' . Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , praised an article by Nick Timothy , Theresa May 's former chief-of-staff , in The Daily Telegraph which accused the Chancellor of failing to understand why people voted for Brexit . One Cabinet source said : `` The party promised in its manifesto to take back control of money , borders and laws . This is official policy . Hammond is working with officials and eurocrats to leave the EU in charge , leaving Britain as a submissive rule-taker . This is the path to electoral ruin for the Tories . '' Another Cabinet source said : `` Hammond seems to be fighting the referendum all over again , he 's had the chance to make this case . `` It 's government policy to leave the single market and end free movement and this is directly against that commitment . Number 10 must act . '' A Downing Street source said last night : `` The Government 's policy is that we are leaving the single market and the customs union . Whilst we want a deep and special economic partnership with the EU after we leave , these could not be described as very modest changes . '' It comes after the Prime Minister and other Cabinet ministers rebuked Boris Johnson for calling for the NHS to receive an extra £100million a week after Britain leaves the EU . Mr Hammond later issued a clarification on Twitter in an attempt to defuse the row . However , he did not retract his claim of `` very modest changes '' . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the leader of a group of 60 eurosceptic Tory MPs , last night said that the Government 's tone needed to `` fundamentally change '' . In a speech at Churcher 's College in Petersfield , Hants , he said : `` If [ Brexit 's opportunities are ] taken off the table , then Brexit becomes only a damage limitation exercise . The British people did not vote for that . They did not vote for the management of decline . They voted for hope and opportunity and politicians must now deliver it . `` If we do not , if we are timid and cowering and terrified of the future , then our children and theirs will judge us in the balance and find us wanting . 'Mene , Mene , Tekel , Upharsin ' - as the writing on the wall said at the feast of Belshazzar . We have our future and our destiny in our hands . '' He added : `` There is a great Brexit opportunity and some really obvious benefits that we can get that improve the condition of the people . This is currently at risk . `` The negotiations that are about to begin sound as if they aim to keep us in a similar system to the single market and the customs union . 'Close alignment ' means de facto the single market , it would make the UK a rule taker like Norway , divested of even the limited influence we currently have . '' At Davos , Mr Hammond even made a joke at the expense of Mr Johnson : `` As we came into Davos , there was an avalanche warning yet the Foreign Secretary is n't even there . '' Andrew Percy , a Tory MP , replied : `` Put a sock in it Phil . Getting a bit sick of 'freelancing Phil ' mocking other Cabinet ministers and writing his own Brexit policy . ''
Call for cash injection to make City watchdogs fit for Brexit
THE watchdogs charged with policing Britain 's financial system need to be beefed up to cope with additional regulatory pressures after Brexit , a report has warned . Responsibility for a host of financial rules and regulations will transfer from Brussels after Brexit , with the Bank of England , the Treasury and the Financial Conduct Authority ( FCA ) set to shoulder the burden . All three should be given extra public money to help them adapt , a report by City think-tank the International Regulatory Strategy Group has urged . Much more cash will be needed if Britain and the EU fail to agree mutual market access , it added . The paper , co-authored by law firm Linklaters , also called for an urgent review of the UK 's post-Brexit mix of financial regulation , arguing that resolving regulatory issues was `` vital for long-term financial stability '' . While it does not argue for `` significant changes '' or a `` lowering '' of standards , the report says the system must be `` flexible and adaptive to market needs '' . The paper also called for the Government to consider regulators ' powers and how they interact with Parliament , businesses and the public . Powers will transfer from a range of EU bodies to the UK , including the European Parliament , other member states , the European Council and the European supervisory authorities . Among the powers being transferred back to the UK are the supervision of credit rating agencies and the handling of regulatory equivalence decisions . The report also argues City watchdogs will need a much bigger international presence if they want to influence global standards that will `` only increase in importance over the coming years '' .
May bows to the 'mutineers ' ; Rebels emboldened after EU states take legal advice over extension to negotiations
THERESA MAY is poised to bow to the demands of the Brexit `` mutineers '' by dropping Britain 's EU exit date from legislation governing the UK 's withdrawal . David Lidington , the Justice Secretary , said `` various constructive suggestions '' had been made to the Prime Minister and that the Government `` will listen '' to calls for the exit date to be removed from the Bill . Another senior Cabinet minister told The Daily Telegraph the Government was considering removing the controversial amendment after a series of tight votes earlier this week signalled Mrs May might lose if it was put to the vote . Dominic Grieve , the leader of the Tory rebels , said that as many as 27 Tory MPs were prepared to oppose Mrs May 's amendment which proposed to set a legal date and time for leaving the EU . The rebels were emboldened last night by the news that EU member states have sought legal advice from the European Commission over a possible extension of the two-year negotiation period set out in Article 50 . Pro-Brexit ministers had warned Mrs May to back down over the plans to enshrine the Brexit date in law after it became clear the Government would be defeated if it was put to a vote . At a lunch in the Houses of Parliament , Mr Lidington said : `` As the PM says , various constructive suggestions have been made during the committee debate about how the Bill might be improved and obviously we will listen to ideas coming from colleagues across the House during the Bill 's progress . '' Reacting to the news that the EU27 had sought legal advice , Tom Tugendhat , one of the Tories now threatening to vote against the amendment , said : `` It puts control in their hands , not ours , and we have to maintain as much control as possible and flexibility in the negotiations . This is about leaving as quickly as possible but on our terms . '' Mr Grieve told `` Chopper 's Brexit Podcast '' the amendment to enshrine the Brexit date in law was `` idiotic '' because it did not allow for last minute changes . He said that if it was put to a vote `` I will vote against it '' . A Government source said legal advice to the European Commission was `` irrelevant because we will not be extending Article 50 , we will have left at the end of March 2019 , and whatever happens , Article 50 can only be extended with the unanimous agreement of all 28 member states . '' Last night David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , warned the EU not to allow its demands for more money from Britain to scupper a deal . At an economic summit in Germany he referred to the £157billion of trade between Britain and Germany as he said : `` I know that no one would allow short-term interests to risk those hard-earned gains . '' Mr Davis 's attempt to court German industry appeared to backfired as his speech was greeted with incredulous laughter . `` This old man is destroying Britain 's future , '' said Jürgen Müller , chief executive of SIG , a leading German outsourcing company . Another added : `` He is being a British gentleman , lying with style . '' Before Mr Davis 's speech , Hans-Olaf Henkel , former head of the Federation of German Industries , said Germany expected Mr Davis to offer his `` unconditional surrender '' to the EU 's terms . It emerged as EU officials said Ireland could not stop Britain opening trade talks in a row over the Northern Ireland border . `` There 's a risk of separation talks not making sufficient progress on Ireland , not a risk of Ireland blocking on its own the advancement of Brexit talks , '' a senior EU official said .
Penny has finally dropped over Brexit ports transition
ONE of the UK 's largest trade associations has said ministers are only now appreciating the importance of post-Brexit arrangements for the flow of imports and exports at ports , after a wake-up moment during the recess . Speaking to The Daily Telegraph , James Hookham , deputy chief executive of the Freight Transport Association ( FTA ) , whose members operate nearly half of UK lorries , 90pc of freight moved by rail , and 70pc of UK sea and air exports , said : `` Until recently , there were cabinet members who just did n't understand what the [ Brexit ] repercussions could be . `` Over the summer , they 've come to understand what 's at stake and how soon the consumer would notice goods not on the shelves . '' Port operators have called for Free Port status for many UK ports , including Teesport , to mitigate the effect of post-Brexit customs arrangements by having tax-free zones to attract manufacturers and stimulate exports . Tim Waggott , chief executive of Dover 's port , has also warned of gridlock if new technologies and logistics plans are not adopted before the UK leaves the EU in March 2019 . Mr Hookham added that while he believed Philip Hammond 's experience as transport secretary meant the Chancellor appreciated the need for supplychain continuity , others were less engaged : `` The big conversion was Liam Fox , who at the end of August accepted the need for a transitional period , having been the first to suggest leaving the Customs Union as early as October last year . '' A government spokesman said : `` We are seeking a time-limited implementation period that will give people and businesses across the UK time to adjust to the new arrangements in a smooth and orderly way . '' 90pc The percentage of goods moved by rail in the UK that is overseen by members of the Freight Transport Association
Britain ignores EU 's demands over Brexit bill
THE Government continued to refuse to show its hand over the so-called `` Brexit bill '' yesterday as it published three more papers giving details of its position on nuclear , justice and other matters - but ignored EU demands for clarity on payments . The refusal to publicly address the question of money ahead of next week 's talks in Brussels has frustrated Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , who this week demanded further information from the UK . Senior sources in the British negotiating team said the decision reflected the failure of the EU to offer legal clarity on the basis for its demands for a gross financial settlement approaching ( EURO ) 100 billion . `` We honestly do n't recognise these numbers that the EU are throwing around , '' the source said . The three papers published yesterday cover the UK 's membership of Euratom , the EU atomic agency ; the rights of EU officials in the UK after Brexit ; and what happens to cases pending at the European Court of Justice . The papers made clear that the UK will quit Euratom , ignoring pleas from Tory rebels to retain associate membership of the body and proposing an equivalent UK regime .
Hammond sets out his plan for softer Brexit to protect jobs ; Chancellor says 'majority ' of people in Britain want to guarantee employment , growth and prosperity
PHILIP HAMMOND is drawing up detailed plans for a softer Brexit that will prioritise `` protecting jobs '' over Britain 's ability to strike free trade deals after Britain quits the EU . Senior Whitehall sources have told The Daily Telegraph that Mr Hammond is pushing for a bespoke deal under which Britain would retain associate membership of the EU 's customs union , but retain the freedom to negotiate separate deals on trade services . As he entered a meeting of EU finance ministers in Luxembourg yesterday , the Chancellor made clear that he was not giving up his battle to resist a hard Brexit . `` My clear view , and I believe the view of the majority of people in Britain , is we should prioritise pro-tecting jobs , protecting economic growth and protecting prosperity , '' he said , in an apparently open challenge to hardline Brexiteers . British negotiators believe that the EU might ultimately be prepared to accept such a deal because it would mean Europe 's trade in goods with the UK - where the EU runs a surplus - would not be disrupted by Brexit . Wolfgang Schäuble , the German finance minister , has not ruled out the UK changing its mind , saying earlier this week it was `` up to the British Government to take their own decisions '' following a post-election telephone conversation with the Chancellor . `` The UK would negotiate associate membership of the customs union but keep the freedom to negotiate on services - which is the much more important part of the UK economy , '' said a source . However , Alan Winters , the director of the UK Trade Policy Observatory , warned : `` It would seem a good halfway house , but it would need a long transitional period because services deals are very complicated to negotiate . '' He added that the UK 's freedom to negotiate deals on services with other non-EU countries is likely to be curtailed . `` We would have defined regulatory practices in the EU agreement and in practice we would n't be able to deviate too far from that , '' he said . Mr Hammond will press his case for a softer Brexit with an appearance on The Andrew Marr Show on BBC One tomorrow morning , and then his delayed Mansion House speech on Monday . Cabinet ministers pushing for a soft Brexit have strengthened their hand on the senior Whitehall committee , chaired by Mrs May , that will oversee the talks . Damian Green , the First Secretary and a passionate Remain campaigner , has taken a place on the committee , alongside Mr Hammond . Boris Johnson and David Davis , both Brexiteers , also sit on the committee . Charles Moore : Page 18
'Special relationship can grow stronger than under Obama ' ; Leon Panetta , the former US defence chief , says new president will try to help Britain through Brexit
DONALD TRUMP can build a stronger `` special relationship '' with Britain than Barack Obama had , Leon Panetta , the former CIA chief , has suggested . Mr Panetta , who also served as President Obama 's defence secretary , was speaking as Theresa May heads to Washington to try to negotiate a new bilateral trade deal between Britain and the US . `` The fact [ Mr Trump ] has recognised that special relationship speaks to its importance . You always hope you can work to strengthen the relationship , '' Mr Panetta said . He told The Daily Telegraph : `` If there are opportunities to try to help our friends in Great Britain to get through this crisis [ Brexit ] by establishing some independent trade deals , then that is a good thing . `` It 's clear you 're going through some difficult times with what the future holds with Brexit and the economy . It is particularly important that the United States and Britain not only talk but support each other . '' Mr Panetta said that Mr Obama was always mindful of the importance of the alliance between Britain and America , and that when he delivered his stark warning that a Brexit vote would send the UK to `` the back of the queue '' for future trade deals , he had been intending to support David Cameron , the former prime minister . Mr Panetta added that he did not believe the referendum result would mean a breakdown in the UK 's role as security gobetween for the US and Europe . `` I believe that the security relationship is strong enough to withstand challenges , '' he said . In his time in office , he said he had found the cooperation between British and American military and security organisations to be `` critical '' . `` I certainly recognised we had a special relationship in my time at the CIA and department of defence in terms of our ability to work together on terrorism , Nato and security generally , '' he said . `` It was critical to be able to know I had the friendship and support of Britain ... I hope Great Britain will remain part of the security blanket with our European allies . '' Mr Panetta , who served as President Bill Clinton 's chief of staff , said he was `` very concerned '' by Mr Trump 's comments on Nato , which the Republican has described as `` obsolete '' . Mr Panetta said : `` If you want to get anything done in this difficult world , you have to rely on strong alliances with our friends . '' When asked why Mr Obama had described Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , as his closest ally , Mr Panetta said the former president was being `` pragmatic '' . `` When it came to dealing with the refugee crisis in Europe or Russian aggression in Crimea and Ukraine , the president relied a great deal on Chancellor Merkel and Germany , but I would n't interpret that as diminishing the partnership with Great Britain . '' Mr Panetta said earlier this week that he thought Mr Trump `` forgot he was president '' when he gave a speech `` whining '' about crowd numbers at Friday 's inauguration . He said Mr Trump should spend less time `` embellishing himself `` . He also said Mr Obama 's legacy as a great president was guaranteed . `` As Mr Obama himself acknowledges , one area of weakness was Syria , '' Mr Panetta said , but `` he always provided thoughtful and dignified leadership in America and around the world . History will be kind to his legacy . '' 'I hope that Great Britain will remain part of the security blanket with our European allies '
No-deal exit would be worst possible outcome , say peers
THERESA MAY 'S Brexit negotiating stance is unhelpful and could be `` economically damaging '' , a group of crossbench peers have said . The Prime Minister has drawn criticism from her own side - including Baroness Browning , who was once in her ministerial team - for saying that no deal would be better than a bad deal . The committee said a tight deadline and lack of progress meant Britain was at risk of leaving without a deal , making a border with Ireland impossible to avoid and resulting in significant financial consequences . The border issue has already delayed trade talks between the UK and EU following the failure of Northern Ireland and the Republic to agree on Mrs May 's proposition . In a report , the Lords EU committee said : `` We will live with the consequences of Brexit for decades to come , so we need to get it right . If buying a bit more time means that we get a better outcome ... a short extension of EU membership may be a price worth paying . This is not about unpicking Brexit , but about delivering the best Brexit possible . '' In a damning assessment , the Lords said it would be `` difficult , if not impossible , to envisage a worse outcome for the UK '' than a no-deal exit . The peers also warned that `` enshrining the Article 50 deadline of 29 March 2019 in domestic law would not be in the national interest because negotiations may need to continue past this point and setting it out in law would restrict the Government '' . Lord Jay of Ewelme , acting chairman , said : `` The biggest risk factor that might lead to a no-deal outcome is time . The clock is ticking . While we support David Davis 's ambition to secure a comprehensive agreement by 29 March 2019 , almost nobody outside the Government thinks this will be possible . ''
Johnson calls for 'efficient ' exit from customs union after one year
BORIS JOHNSON has said that Britain needs to leave the customs union with `` speed and efficiency '' after Brexit amid a new Cabinet row . The UK has committed to retaining membership of a temporary customs union after Brexit to reduce barriers to trade . However , the Government has refused to say how long it will last . The Foreign Secretary indicated in an interview with BBC Radio 4 's Today programme that he supported ending the transition period within a year . He said : `` There 's the customs union transition period , where there 's a discussion about how long that will go - one , two , three years , how you would run that . My view is that we should get on . What business would want us to achieve is speed and efficiency . '' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have both suggested that it should last for two years . Mr Johnson also appeared to concede that the UK could pay some form of Brexit divorce bill after previously saying that the European Commission could `` go whistle '' for sums as large as £100billion . He said `` we are bill-paying people '' , adding that the UK would meet its `` legal obligations '' . He added that Donald Trump would make a state visit to the UK next year despite condemning his comments over violence in Charlottesville as `` totally wrong '' . He said : `` I thought he got it totally wrong . It was a great shame that he failed to make a clear fast distinction between anti-fascists and Nazis . '' It also emerged that the Foreign Secretary told Libyan politicians not to make the same `` mistake '' as Theresa May by calling an early election . Libya is deeply divided with two rival Parliaments and four governments . Mr Johnson was speaking after a visit to Libya in which he urged the nation 's political leaders to set aside their differences . He told Libya 's UN-backed prime minister Fayez al-Sarraj that the June election , called by Mrs May amid Tory hopes of a landslide victory , had not gone `` entirely to plan '' , according to the BBC . He said the Tories had been given `` a bit of a lesson , which is that if you are going to have elections , you have got to get ready '' . In an interview with the BBC 's diplomatic correspondent James Landale , Mr Johnson added : `` We have been telling [ Libyan politicians ] about what it takes to fight an election , warning them about the pitfalls in calling elections too soon or whatever , which is one of the risks they face because they have n't got their ducks lined up properly . ''
Call for 'one million shades of grey ' to plug UK 's skills gap ; Turning to older workers facing a wall of ageism can help businesses seeking to fill jobs amid post-Brexit uncertainty , writes Lucy Burton
When Audrey Worsley tried to find a full-time secretarial job after a ten-year career break , she was faced with an increasingly common problem ; despite having plenty of the required experience , she could n't even get an interview . `` I felt there was loads of barriers because of my age , '' the 63-year old educational support worker said of her time trying to get back into the workforce . `` I 've had a positive experience in education , [ they ] did n't ask my age when I started , but it was a massive issue in other areas I tried to get into . I do n't think there 's enough help out there for women who want to go is not unusual . According to a recent study by Anglia Ruskin University , older applicants are over four times less likely to be offered an interview despite having more experience on their CV , with almost half of all unemployed people aged 50 to 64 out of a job for over a year . This is a big problem for the UK . Recruiters warned barely a week ago that while the appetite for hiring is on the up , candidate availability is at a 16-month low , with EU nationals hesitant to apply for roles amid Brexit uncertainty . That nervousness sits on top of existing estimates that there will be an extra 14.5m jobs created in the UK over the next five years - but only seven million young people entering the workforce . Likely immigration controls post-Brexit will deepen that skills shortage unless employers take the opportunity to tap into the talent of older workers , something Aviva 's UK boss Andy Briggs - who became the Government 's business champion for older workers last October - is urging British companies to do as the retirement age edges further away . `` I ca n't see how the Government can come out of the Brexit negotiations with anything other than a significant shift in immigration , that was the core of people 's concerns , '' he warns . If this is the case , then the skills gap is going to become ever more obvious , Briggs believes . And the only possible fillip will be older workers . With the Recruitment and Employment Confederation last week pointing to a shortage of suitable candidates for over 60 different roles , ranging from cleaner to accountant , businesses might want to listen to Mr Briggs 's plea for one-million shades of grey . His pitch is simple - if Britain hires an extra one million staff aged between 50 and 69 in the next five years , GDP could be boosted by an extra £88bn . But the insurance veteran is not the only person pushing for change . Anna Dixon , the chief executive of Ageing Better , says she is calling on the next government to support the rights of working carers so that older workers do n't have to leave the workforce when caring for elderly parents - something that contributes to the fact that only about half of people are in work by the time they reach the state pension age . `` Even if we could get every young person a job there would still be a [ skills ] gap , '' she said , agreeing that Brexit is likely to exacerbate this problem but also pose an opportunity . `` Tighter immigration [ post-Brexit ] could mean even bigger labour market shortage , [ so ] we do think it 's essential for the economy that older workers are retained and supported for longer . '' Age bias is deeply ingrained , however , with Mr Briggs pointing out that there are misconceptions that older people will be less resilient and take more sick days . It 's the younger ones , he jokes , who are going out and getting `` absolutely hammered '' while also being more likely to jump between jobs . Dr Nick Dydakis , from Anglia Ruskin University , said that businesses ' beliefs over the effects of ageing on productivity and performance are misunderstood - there is nothing to support the stereotype that older workers are less innovative or less emotionally resilient , he argues , adding that there are a number of studies proving performance rises with age . `` Social dialogue should be an integral part of the Brexit process of changing attitudes and establishing more inclusive workplaces , '' he urged , pointing out that now is a good chance for British businesses to address bias against older workers . But with the chances of getting an interview proven to be four times harder for older workers than it is for younger adults , those eager to work are being pushed towards setting up their own business - a move that , while exciting , comes with a huge amount of financial risk given that most start-ups fold within their first five years . `` People shaken out of the labour market a decade ago are finding it difficult to go back into work , '' said Aston University Prof Mark Hart , noting that the number of 50-plus entrepreneurs is steadily rising . `` There 's all sorts of schemes getting people into start-ups and that message is working - my problem is we have the worst record for start-ups breaking into being a macroenterprise . '' That does n't mean grey-haired entrepreneurs do n't have an edge , with many bouncing back from a change in circumstance to launch successful companies later in life . When the financial crisis hit 62 year-old William Fairclough 's house building business `` unimaginably hard '' , he decided to head down a new path by launching industrial strap company Cargo Rack , before overcoming significant hurdles to relaunch a house building company some years later . For Stephen Bruh , the 71-year old founder and chief executive of Astro Jet , a London-based company that charters private planes , spending 35 years working for an upmarket design house meant that when circumstances changed at the age of 55 , he knew exactly how to turn his passion for flying into a successful business . `` By virtue of connections and good luck , I was able to get contracts to manage a number of private aircraft , which involved both providing crews , administration and , of course , flying the planes , '' he said of his career switch , noting that he spent his first-ever salary from a job in a clothing factory on getting a private pilot 's licence . `` So a childhood passion became a business , '' he added . `` Today I look forward to continuing to work . ''
We 'll pay up if we have to , May admits ; Brexit delivered ; The Prime Minister says Britain is a law-abiding nation and must honour its 'obligations to the EU '
THERESA MAY has given her clearest signal yet that Britain is prepared to pay a Brexit `` divorce bill '' to leave the European Union . The Prime Minister repeatedly refused to rule out that Britain would pay an exit fee - estimated by the EU to be as much as £50billion - which must be paid when the UK leaves the EU in March 2019 . In an interview with Andrew Neil on BBC One last night , Mrs May said that while the UK would not be `` paying to leave '' , the country `` had to decide what the obligations '' were to the EU . She said : `` I am very clear about what the people here in the UK expect but I am also clear that we are a law-abiding nation , we will meet the obligations we have . '' She added : `` There may be some particular programmes that we wish to pay to be members of because it is in the national interest - and that will drive us . '' Mrs May also suggested that large numbers of immigrants could still come to the UK after Brexit . She added that `` we will see a decrease in the number coming in '' after Brexit but declined to give a figure . Mrs May stressed that Britain would regain control over numbers of EU migrants coming to the UK . On the prospects of a free-trade deal , Mrs May said she was seeking a `` comprehensive free-trade agreement which gives that ability to trade freely into the European single market and for them to trade with us . `` It will be a different relationship , but I think it can have the same benefits in terms of that free access to trade . '' Mrs May also stressed that no deal with the EU after two years of negotiations `` would be better than a bad deal '' . She added : `` There are some people in Europe who talk about punishing the UK and I do n't want to sign up to an agreement which is based on that . '' Earlier , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , had been accused of undermining Britain 's negotiating position by suggesting that leaving without a deal with the EU would be the `` worst-case outcome for everyone '' . Mr Hammond also said that leaving the EU would have significant `` consequences '' . A government source criticised Mr Hammond 's comments : `` It 's like negotiating to buy a house . If you 're not willing to walk away then they will push you and push you . '' In an interview with BBC Radio 4 's Today programme , the Chancellor said that Britain would not be able to `` cherry pick '' what it wants from the European Union after it left . He said : `` We understand that we ca n't cherry pick , that we ca n't have our cake and eat it , that by deciding to leave the European Union and negotiate a future relationship with the EU as an independent nation , there will be certain consequences of that . And we accept those . '' He said : `` What you can assume is that everybody in the EU and UK is going into this negotiation looking to protect their own interests . I 'm very confident we will not get an outcome that is a worst-case outcome for everyone . ''
Scotland Ukip could axe purple and yellow look ; Brexit
THE UK Independence 's purple and yellow colours and its pound sign could be ditched in a major rebrand as the party prepares for a post-Brexit future . Only the name , Ukip , is safe because it is worth `` millions of pounds '' , Paul Nuttall said . The party 's leader said that he would unveil a new image of a `` post-Brexit Ukip '' at the party 's annual conference in Torquay in September . Mr Nuttall said : `` We are going to rebrand the post-Brexit Ukip and it will all be launched at the annual conference in Torquay in September . '' The party 's pound sign logo might disappear as well as its familiar yellow and purple colours , Mr Nuttall said , adding : `` Everything is up for debate . '' Plans for the overhaul were due to be discussed at a meeting of the party 's National Executive Committee yesterday afternoon . Mr Nuttall said the name of the party was `` the one thing that is off the agenda but everything else we will talk about '' He said : `` Ukip 's brand is worth a lot of money . It is one of the most recognised brands . `` It was worth millions back in 2008 when we looked at the cost of rebranding and it came into the millions . `` I think it needs modernising - we need a different feel to the party as we move into the post-Brexit age . '' Mr Nuttall - who was wearing a yellow and purple tie - said Ukip had orig-inally settled on purple and yellow branding `` because there were no other colours available '' . He shrugged off any concerns that he was having to lead Ukip in the shadow of his predecessor Nigel Farage , who attended the speech in a London hotel . Mr Nuttall said : `` I want him to be on the telly and radio selling Ukip 's message because he is one of the best communicators in British politics today . '' Mr Nuttall also brushed off the resignation of the party 's sole MP , Douglas Carswell , saying that the Ukip does not need any representation in the House of Commons to influence Britain 's exit from the European Union . Mr Nuttall warned Theresa May the Eurosceptics would be the `` guard dogs '' of Brexit .
Berlin backs London as key financial centre ; German finance minister says it would be in EU 's interests for City to remain a strong base
GERMANY 'S influential finance minister has mounted an unexpected defence of the City of London , as rival cities seek to supplant it as Europe 's financial capital in the wake of Brexit . Wolfgang Schaeuble said it is in the European Union 's interest for the Square Mile to remain a major financial centre . The comments from Europe 's most powerful finance minister will be seen as reassuring amid growing concern that the EU could use Brexit negotiations to attempt to lure business and jobs away from London . Paris , Dublin and Frankfurt are all lobbying major banks to transfer their European operations . But Mr Schaeuble told an international finance conference in Frankfurt it would create too much `` upheaval '' to move all the City 's financial operations elsewhere at once . `` I am convinced that for Europe as a whole - and I 'm not sure this will be very beloved in Paris - it 's in our own interests to have a strong financial centre in London , '' he said . Germany wants to negotiate a Brexit deal that will preserve a key financial role for London , Mr Schaeuble said . But he added that it was not always easy `` brainstorming '' with his British counterparts . And comments by Mr Schaeuble that he also wants to promote Frankfurt as an alternative European base for international banks will cause concern in the City that he is offering London a partial deal . It will take time for the EU to develop its own financial services sector , he told the conference , and it is in the bloc 's interest to make sure London is not compromised in the meantime . Mr Schaeuble 's intervention comes amid growing concerns that Brexit is already affecting financial hiring in the City . He was speaking alongside Axel Weber , the chairman of UBS , who said his bank would not wait for the outcome of Brexit negotiations , but would go ahead with plans to move 1,500 jobs to an alternative base in the EU . The number of vacant financial services jobs in London fell by 23pc in a month in February , according to recruiter Morgan McKinley . `` Brexit has pushed institutions into two camps , '' Hakan Enver of Morgan McKinley said . `` On one side we 've got the 'business as usual ' team and , on the other , we have the institutions that are tired of the Government 's hemming and hawing , and have already begun to move jobs to other EU countries . `` It 's the latter group that 's contributed to the quarter drop in jobs available . For many , it 's simply proving easier to get ahead of the worst-case scenario and get out of London now . '' Paris has mounted a campaign in recent weeks to persuade international banks to move from London . Dublin and Frankfurt are also pitching to international banks .
Peers must not try to thwart Brexit Bill ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : Afew months ago , it seemed inconceivable that a Bill to trigger Article 50 and begin the process of the UK 's withdrawal from the EU would get through the Commons unscathed . One reason why Remain campaigners took the Government to court arguing that Parliament must have a say was that they hoped that Brexit might be stopped by MPs . After all , there was a majority in the Commons to stay and the referendum outcome was close . But it was also decisive ; and having agreed to stage the referendum , it would have been undemocratic for Parliament to have gainsaid the wishes of an electorate the MPs entrusted with making the decision . The logic of that position has not been lost on most Remainers in the Commons , who have accepted that Brexit must proceed . Apart from the SNP , the Lib Dems and the recalcitrants on the Tory and Labour sides , a majority of MPs has accepted the timetable for Brexit set out by Theresa May last October , which means giving notice to leave before the end of next month . Jeremy Corbyn has committed his party to supporting departure from the EU , although the revolt on the Opposition benches against his three-line whip suggests he may soon be facing another leadership crisis , with rumours of a coup against him rife at Westminster . Moreover , while the Bill may be through the Commons , it now goes to the House of Lords where , for the first time in history , a Conservative government does not command a majority . It is possible that a coalition of more than 250 Lib Dems and Labour peers backed by crossbenchers could block or frustrate the legislation . But since the wishes of the Commons are now clear , the Lords must not stand in the way of this Bill . Peers have the right to improve it but must uphold the fundamental decision taken by the Commons - that the Government has the authority to move forward with Brexit next month . To spring an ambush or pass a wrecking amendment would be an abuse of its position and would trigger a constitutional stand-off similar to that of 1911 , when the Parliament Act was passed to reassert the rights of the elected House . Senior peers , including Lord Fowler , the Lords Speaker , are adamant that the Upper House must not stand in the way of Brexit . Any peers still considering ways to thwart the decision of the Commons should heed the wise counsel of their colleagues .
Lords call for banking sector to receive special Brexit protection
IT IS vital to fight for the City in the Brexit negotiations , and the Government should not be ashamed to stand up for Britain 's banking expertise , a committee of Lords has announced . Senior financiers have told The Daily Telegraph that ministers have warned that they can not be seen to prioritise the City over other sectors , as bankers are perceived as unpopular figures . But the Lords ' EU Financial Affairs Sub-Committee believes finance firms are too important to miss out on special treatment . `` Despite the poor public perception of the sector since the financial crisis of 2007-2008 , financial services are vital to the prosperity of the whole of the United Kingdom , and therefore should be an important element in the forthcoming negotiations on Brexit , '' said the report . `` Ensuring a smooth and orderly transition to a new relationship with the EU will be a critical consideration . '' Banks need at least two years to adapt to Brexit once they know the Government 's plan for leaving the EU - but that is not yet clear , so the committee said it was important to have a transitional arrangement that gives finance firms the time they need . That should avoid a `` cliff edge '' , and so stop banks from panicking . The report said : `` The danger is that , in the absence of clarity , firms will restructure or relocate on the basis of a 'worst case ' scenario . We call for an early commitment from both sides in the negotiation that there will be a transition period . '' More than a million people are directly employed in finance and another million work in related professional services , and the Lords fear tens of thousands or even more could be lost if the EU actively cuts off chunks of the City from businesses across the Channel . One possibility is that the European Central Bank will try to force the clearing of euro and euro derivatives trades to take place within the EU , removing an important market from London . It is also important to have access to skilled European workers , the committee said . Around 60,000 non-UK EU nationals work in British finance , as well as 100,000 non-EU workers . `` The ability to continue to [ have ] access to highly qualified staff and the ability to transfer them between the UK and the EU is a key issue for the financial services industry , '' said the committee . `` Maintaining appropriate labour market flexibility will be critical to the UK 's long-term prosperity . ''
Scotland Independence vote a worse economic threat than Brexit , warns report
NICOLA STURGEON 'S threat of a second independence referendum is inflicting more damage than Brexit on business demand for office , factory and shop space in Scotland , chartered surveyors warn today . A major report by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors ( RICS ) finds that Scotland experienced the largest drop in demand for commercial property in the UK in the three months following the EU referendum vote . A series of Scottish surveyors blamed the slump on Ms Sturgeon 's threat of a second independence referendum . One said this was `` having a more detrimental effect '' on the market than Brexit itself , another complained that the SNP had added to the uncertainty and a third said the `` biggest problem '' was a possible independence vote . Demand for premises rose across the whole of the UK between July and September , but in Scotland 24 per cent more surveyors reported a drop in demand than said there had been an increase . Central London and Scotland are the only two areas of the country where rents are not expected to increase because of demand levels . Foreign investment inquiries were down for a second successive quarter north of the border . The report further undermines the First Minister 's claim that calling a second referendum would be justified if Scotland does not retain access to the EU single market . Mike Russell , her Brexit minister , yesterday repeatedly dodged questions about why this is more important than the UK single market , which is worth more than four times more to Scottish companies . He also denied the referendum threat was adding to uncertainty . But the RICS survey quotes Niall Burns , a partner with Edinburgh-based Burns and Shaw property consultants , saying : `` The threat of a second referendum is having a more detrimental effect on commercial property in Scotland than Brexit . '' Gavin Anderson , partner in the retail and leisure division of Glasgow-based Montagu Evans , said the threat of another independence referendum `` is the last thing the country needs '' . Mike Dillon , a director of Kames Property in Glasgow , warned : `` Market conditions [ are ] poor , with SNP adding to political uncertainty . '' The warnings were in contrast to some surveyors in the north of England , who reported `` an increased level of activity '' or `` business as usual '' . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , said : `` This report makes it clear that Nicola Sturgeon has cast a cloud of uncertainty over Scotland which is now causing deep and lasting damage to our prosperity and to Scotland 's reputation . '' Labour 's Anas Sarwar was one of several opposition MSPs to take Mr Russell to task at Holyrood yesterday over his assertions that the SNP was acting in Scotland 's best interests . He said : `` We 've heard today again about the hard Brexit cliff . Why is this government so relaxed about the hard independence cliff ? '' A Scottish Government spokesman said : `` It is Brexit which is far and away the biggest threat to Scotland 's economy , jobs and long-term prosperity . ''
EU 'must stand firm against UK demands '
THE European Union must be `` intransigent '' in denying British firms free access to the single market if the UK does not accept free movement of people , Jean-Claude Juncker said yesterday . The intervention by the European Commission president capped a week of strong words from Europe following Theresa May 's announcement that she would take back control of UK borders while retaining access for British goods and services to the single market . `` You ca n't have one foot in and one foot out , '' Mr Juncker said during a speech in Paris . `` On this point we need to be intransigent . I see the manoeuvring . `` It should be obvious that if the United Kingdom wants to have free access to the internal market all the rules and all the liberties ... need to be fully respected . '' Since the Prime Minister 's speech at the Conservative Party conference outlining broad plans for Brexit , Europe - led by Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor and François Hollande , the French president - has vociferously restated its `` red lines '' over Brexit . British officials are frustrated at European intransigence , particularly the refusal to agree to any informal talks that would help Britain arrive at a negotiating position before triggering Article 50 and formal exit talks early next year . This week 's Franco-German rhetoric defending free movement is `` missing the point '' , a senior UK official close to the Brexit talk preparations said , given that Britain is not seeking a deal to remain inside the EU but wants a bespoke deal negotiated from outside . European leaders are signalling that however Britain seeks to frame the negotiations , it is determined to defend the internal cohesion of the EU and ensure that Britain is worse off outside the `` club '' than it was when a member . Yesterday , Mr Hollande said Britain must be seen to pay a heavy price for Brexit in order that other countries were not emboldened to follow suit . `` There must be a threat , there must be a risk , there must be a price , otherwise we will be in negotiations that will not end well and , inevitably , will have economic and human consequences , '' he said , deepening turmoil on the sterling currency markets . His remarks , which came a day after Mrs Merkel told German industry chiefs that they would not be allowed to lobby for a sweetheart Brexit deal for Britain , reflect a general souring of the mood towards the UK across Europe . Mr Juncker 's mention of `` manoeuvring '' is understood to refer to British attempts to sound out other nations on post-Brexit trade deals and lobby industry groups in France and Germany to pressure their governments into a softer response . Mrs May plans to make firms draw up lists of foreign workers have also gone down badly , particularly in parts of the Continent that have benefited from the free movement of people . Bohuslav Sobotka , the Czech prime minister , said the `` unpleasant face of British nationalism '' which was `` strongly boosted by the Brexit result '' , should be a warning as to how Europe might look if the EU fell apart . `` This indicates how Europe might look like if we , God forbid , did not manage to keep the EU together . National animosities and hatred would start splitting us , '' he told the Czech News Agency .
Pharma offers some balm as banking goes into a tailspin
PHARMA stocks became a relative safe port in the post-Brexit storm yesterday , as the FTSE 350 surrendered £140bn in just two trading sessions . A bullish note from Credit Suisse celebrated the pharma sector as one of its most `` favoured '' industries in the Brexit aftermath given its higher proportion of dollar earnings compared with EU costs . The investment bank also highlighted payers , especially governments , have a `` very limited ability to reduce payments for pharmaceuticals in any short-term horizon , whatever happens to local economies . '' Its research shows that GlaxoSmithKline is the `` biggest benefactor '' of Britain 's vote to withdraw from the EU , as it leads to an 8pc increase in its core earnings per share next year . In its wake , shares in AstraZeneca jumped 2.3pc to £41.26 and Glaxo climbed 0.4pc to £14.88 . Meanwhile , shares in drug developer GW Pharmaceuticals leapt 12pc to a nine-month high of 566.5p after saying a late-stage trial of its epilepsy drug met its main goal . The safe-haven status of gold ensured precious metals miners proved popular . The precious metal surged by as much as 1.5pc to $ 1,335.55 an ounce as investors shunned risky assets amid heightened political and economic uncertainty after the Brexit referendum outcome . Fresnillo surged to a three-year high , up 7pc to £14.83 and Randgold Resources made gains of 9pc to £80.35 . On the mid-cap index , Acacia Mining leapt 10pc to 440p and Centamin jumped 8.1pc to 130.1p , as traders in the City said `` further strength is likely '' . As investors scrambled to safehaven stocks , Brexit shock waves reverberated throughout the wider market . The FTSE 100 fell 156.49 points , or 2.55pc , to 5,982.20 , taking its two-day loss to 5.7pc . However , it was the FTSE 250 index , which is considered a closer barometer of the UK economy , that bore the brunt of the Brexit-inspired sell-off . The midcap index nosedived 6.96pc closing at a two-year low of 14,967.86 yesterday , bringing its losses since Thursday to 14.2pc ; that 's its worst two-day drop since Black Monday in 1987 . Such was the extent of the nasty Brexit hangover that trading on 10 stocks was temporarily halted due to volatility . Those suspended and entered into a temporary auction period included : Barclays , Royal Bank of Scotland , Taylor Wimpey , Virgin Money , easyJet , Crest Nicholson , Barratt Developments , Legal & General , Berkeley Group and Persimmon . Markets were sent into a tailspin as banking stocks plunged to a sevenyear low following a raft of rating revisions and recession warnings . However , Goldman Sachs attempted to assuage fears : `` We do not expect a political uncertainty shock as large as that of Lehman or with the same global consequences . '' Nevertheless , the investment bank warned it now expects the UK to enter a technical recession in the first half of 2017 . UBS warned of `` tough '' fundamentals across the board for banking stocks , pointing to two UK rate cuts in the wake of the referendum outcome . Meanwhile , analysts at Jefferies warned : `` A postreferendum world makes Barclays management 's job even harder '' , as the investment bank is already `` overly prone to downside risk '' . The European banking sector posted its biggest two-day loss on record . Barclays plummeted 17.4pc to 127.2p , Lloyds tanked 10.3pc to 51.2p , Royal Bank of Scotland plunged 15.1pc to 174.3p , HSBC lost 2.2pc to 438p and Standard Chartered dropped 6.3pc to 528p . On the mid-cap index , OneSavings fell 33.1pc to 176.2p , Shawbrook shed 30pc to 163.1p and Virgin Money tumbled 25.5pc to 205.2p . Housebuilders also fell sharply with Barratt Development down 19.4pc to 354.4p , Taylor Wimpey off by 14.9pc at 115.8p , Persimmon 13.8pc lower at £13.10 and Galliford Try down 17.5pc to 858.5p . London-based estate agency Foxtons was nursing a hefty 22.6pc loss by close after it warned on profits . It said upturn it was expecting in London property sales in the second half of the year was now unlikely to materialise in the wake of the Brexit vote . Analysts at Numis said the warning will raise questions over the group 's branch expansion strategy and the associated increase in underlying costs . The airline sector also suffered a bout of Brexit-inspired turbulence . Budget airline easyJet became the biggest FTSE 100 faller , slumping 22.3pc to £10.20 , after it issued a warning on third-quarter profit . The British carrier said the vote would create uncertainty in the economy and lower revenue by some 5pc . Despite increased uncertainty , Credit Suisse sees the prospect of the UK joining the European Common Aviation Area . Recruitment companies were also feeling the pain . Paul Checketts , of Barclays , cautioned : `` The vote to leave is likely to stifle recruitment activity in the UK , which should put Hays ' earnings under pressure . '' In its wake , shares in PageGroup slipped 14.9pc to 264.9p and Hays shed 15.2pc to close at 95p . On the other side , Plus500 enjoyed a Brexit boost , rising 2.3pc to 613p , after it confirmed no adverse impact from bad debts or market positions last week . It also expects trading to be `` inline with expectations '' . Finally , on Aim , Omega Diagnostics climbed 3.2pc to 16p after full-year results came in ahead of market expectations .
Scotland Sturgeon wants independence plan post-Brexit
NICOLA STURGEON has ordered officials to draw up contingency plans for a second independence referendum if the UK leaves the EU against the will of a majority of Scots , it emerged yesterday . The First Minister told MSPs `` all options to protect our relationship with Europe and the European Union will require to be considered '' if Scotland leaves the EU against the wishes of most voters . Her official spokesman later confirmed she was referring to plans for a second referendum rather than any potential legal or parliamentary mechanisms to block or delay Brexit . Ms Sturgeon 's intervention was a marked change in tone from her rhetoric during the past few weeks when she has gone quiet about Brexit triggering another independence referendum . Opinion polls have suggested the nationalists would lose again , following warnings that an independent Scotland in the EU could not be expected to adopt sterling . However , David Cameron and Sir John Major both warned last week that Brexit could spell the end of the Union . Speaking at yesterday 's First Minister 's Questions , Ms Sturgeon said plans were being made to counter the `` economic shock '' of leaving the EU . She told MSPs : `` Let me be very clear . As First Minister , my duty is to seek to protect Scotland 's interests in all circumstances and , therefore , I am ensuring that appropriate planning for all eventualities is being undertaken by the Scottish Government . `` Let me also say - I have said this many times before - that , if Scotland faces the prospect of being taken out of the European Union against our democratically expressed will , all options to protect our relationship with Europe and the European Union will require to be considered . '' Ms Sturgeon 's spokesman later said contingency plans were `` more in the political than the legal sphere '' and referred to the SNP manifesto , which argued that the UK leaving the EU against Scotland 's will could trigger a second referendum . He said : `` It is a very , very specific reference to exactly this scenario which was spelled out in black and white . That proviso is in the manifesto . That would influence thinking . ''
Germany will not allow UK banks to set up 'shell ' hubs
GERMANY 'S financial watchdog has said it will not let UK-based banks set up shell hubs in the country because of Brexit , adding that it will deal with requests on a first come , first served , basis as a `` cliff-edge situation '' looms . Frankfurt is one of the leading contenders to lure banks and financial services companies from London if there is a hard Brexit . BaFin president , Felix Hufeld , said regulators now have to assume this will occur , given that `` negotiators have not made sufficient progress on the designated key separation issues '' . He added : `` For the time being , we therefore have to assume that the UK will not be member of the common market or anything close to it following Brexit . There are only 18 months to go before that happens , possibly leading to a so-called cliff-edge situation . '' Speaking in London yesterday , days after Goldman Sachs ' chairman Lloyd Blankfein hinted the City of London could lose out to Frankfurt in the wake of Brexit , Mr Hufeld said the regulator had no limit on the number of relocations it can cope with and could see up to 20 more firms move their EU hubs to the German city . `` One thing that we will not accept under any circumstances is empty shells or what we call letterbox models , '' he added , echoing a message sent out by the European Securities and Markets Authority earlier this year . `` Banks that are planning a comprehensive division of work between offices in London and the EU need to transplant and split up their entire ecosystem established over the years - that means IT infrastructures , knowledge , processes and people . '' 20 The number of additional firms that could move to Frankfurt , according to Lloyd Blankfein , chairman of Goldman Sachs
Divert from Dover and avoid crisis , says ABP
THE UK shipping industry could avoid a post-Brexit `` Armageddon scenario '' by diverting sea cargo from Dover to eastern ports such as Felixstowe , the UK 's largest port operator has said . In a policy paper handed to the Government this week , Associated British Ports ( ABP ) called for the UK to reduce its dependency on Dover and instead invest in ports on the Thames , East Anglia and the Humber . The operator said this would reduce disruption to trade by removing the risk of a `` bottleneck '' of traffic in Dover , which currently receives up to 16,000 trucks a day . It comes after Tim Waggott , the head of the port of Dover , warned it was facing a possible `` Armageddon scenario '' of delays and traffic congestion due to tougher customs checks after Brexit . ABP also urged the Government to consider establishing `` free ports '' on the east coast , which would abolish duties on imported raw materials or components used in manufactured exports . `` Ports and maritime represent a major global opportunity for the UK economy ; an opportunity for Britain to increase its trade with countries throughout the world , '' said James Cooper , ABP 's chief executive . `` To deliver on that potential , we want to see an industrial strategy that is capable of being genuinely transformative . '' In its 10-point plan , ABP said this could be achieved by setting up a `` UK Ports and Logistics Brexit Task Force '' . Rishi Sunak , the Conservative MP , said : `` Free ports are an exciting post-Brexit policy idea that can turbo-charge economic growth in our regions , boost manufacturing and drive exports . '' However , Charlie Elphicke , the MP for Dover , said : `` Everyone knows that the fastest , most efficient and best route for trade to the continent is through Dover - and we 're working tirelessly to see that it stays that way . ''
'A United States of Europe ' ; Juncker lays out his vision for future of the EU - led by a European president - and warns UK it will regret Brexit
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER yesterday called for an ever-more powerful European Union and warned that Britain would `` regret Brexit '' , in a defiant speech that was branded a blueprint for a United States of Europe . The plans push for `` ever-closer union '' on defence , asylum and foreign policy in a bigger , more powerful bloc under a new , directly elected EU president . A eurozone finance minister would be appointed , with every country to adopt the euro . Mr Juncker called for a special summit of the 27 remaining member states the day after Brexit in March 2019 , in the Romanian city of Sibiu , to map out the future of the EU . He insisted the `` wind is back in Europe 's sails '' despite deep divisions on eurozone reform , migration quotas and democratic values . `` I have lived the European project my whole life , '' Mr Juncker declared as he outlined his federalist vision of common EU policy . `` I have fought for it through good times and bad times . '' After almost one hour of his State of the Union speech in the European Parliament in Strasbourg , Mr Juncker , the European Commission president , mentioned Brexit for the first and only time . `` We will always regret this , '' said Mr Juncker , before rounding on Ukip MEPs , who had begun to heckle him . `` I think you will regret it as well , '' he told Nigel Farage , the former party leader . `` We will move on . Brexit is not everything . It is not the future of Europe , '' he said to applause in the chamber . `` It is not the be all and end all . '' Mr Juncker said the roles of European Commission president and European Council president should be merged . `` The European landscape would be clearer and more understandable if the European ship was steered by a single captain , '' he said . The passport-free Schengen zone should extend to Bulgaria , Romania and Croatia , he added , and measures should be taken to allow Western Balkan countries to join the bloc . He demanded that every EU country adopt the euro and submit to EU banking supervision . `` The euro is destined to be the common currency of the entire Union , '' Mr Juncker said . National governments should give up their vetoes over tax and foreign policy , he added . Speaking afterwards , Syed Kamall , the senior Conservative MEP , said : `` Mr Juncker said the EU had the wind in its sails . Anyone that heard his speech now knows what direction he is sailing it in - towards a United States of Europe . '' Mr Farage described the speech as `` the most open , honest and truly worrying speech I have ever heard in my long years in this place '' . Mr Juncker praised Italy for bearing the brunt of the migration crisis but scolded Hungary and Poland for defying Brussels over asylum-seeker quotas . He hailed steps toward EU cooperation on defence . `` By 2025 we need a fully fledged European Defence Union . We need it . And Nato wants it , '' he said . Last year , Mr Juncker conceded , Europe was `` battered and bruised by a year that shook our foundations '' but employment had risen , the EU economy was growing and the migration crisis had been brought under control . `` Let us make the most of the momentum and catch the wind in our sails , '' he said . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , praised the speech , but there were `` longer-term , institutional things I am less keen on '' . He said : `` Juncker is a romantic . I am a politician , not a romantic . '' Reports : pages 4-5 Editorial Comment : page 17 2025 The date by when Jean-Claude Juncker said Europe needed a 'fully fledged European Defence Union '
Big business must take some blame for Brexit ; Firms have used cheap foreign labour as a lazy substitute for investment in training and productivity
How naive can you get ? Downing Street 's attempt to strong arm big business into signing a letter of support for the nation 's still confused Brexit strategy was almost bound to backfire , and so it has . Large numbers of corporate bosses have angrily refused to sign , and many have expressed astonishment that they were even asked in the first place . Had no-one at Number 10 noticed that global business was vehemently opposed to Brexit , and indeed continues to regard it as a historic mistake , for which Britain will pay a high economic cost ? Still bruised and resentful over the electorate 's decision , global CEOs are in no mood to cheerlead the endeavour . They might nevertheless try a little self reflection . In no small measure , it was their own behaviour that led directly to today 's state of affairs . I say this as someone who is both generally sympathetic to the interests of business and the City , and who supported Remain ; if the vote for Brexit was , at least in part , a backlash against globalisation and mass immigration , then these lobbies have much to answer for . Companies have been only too happy to avail themselves of the benefits of cheap foreign labour and goods . In so doing , many of them have shamefully neglected their wider social responsibilities . Why recruit and train locally when it is possible to hire the necessary skills at a fraction of the cost from overseas ? One answer to this question , I suppose , is that with the economy beginning to run up against acute labour shortages , we need the migrant supplement . Despite the surge in European migrants , unemployment is close to a record low and the number of jobs at a record high . As a percentage of the unemployed , vacancies have also never been higher . Even with mass migration , and even with the displacement effects of automation and artificial intelligence , it 's proving hard to get the staff . Yet despite these shortages , the labour market is not behaving as it should . Though technology is probably the greater cause of this malfunction , mass migration has undoubtedly played some part . Too often , firms have used cheap foreign workers as a lazy substitute for investment in training and productivity . The effect has been distinctly unhealthy . For almost a decade now , growth per capita has been at a virtual standstill . Real wage growth has been similarly non-existent . As I say , this can not all be blamed on immigration . Lack of significant wage inflation is common to nearly all advanced economies , even those without much immigration . Take Japan , which has a shrinking workforce , little immigration to speak of , exceptionally low unemployment , and a prime minister who routinely urges his business leaders to pay their workers more . Yet still it has virtually no nominal wage growth . In any case , the traditional yardsticks by which governments judge their economic success - low unemployment and sustained growth in overall gross domestic product - do n't mean a lot if people do n't feel any better off . Brexit supporters would not be having their `` independence day '' but for these wider social frustrations . But business leaders would not be facing the challenge of Brexit had they been a little more responsive to the socially unsettling downsides of globalisation and mass migration . Whether displaced by a migrant or a machine , workers need help in adapting and reskilling for alternative , higher-paid work . The best companies offer that progression ; too many do n't . One of the first rules of business is that you try not to kill the goose that lays the golden egg . By embracing free movement and borderless trade so enthusiastically , many firms have done precisely that , and thereby brought Brexit on themselves . Few issues speak more loudly to the contradictions at the heart of Brexit than free movement . Both Liam Fox and David Davis come over all misty eyed when extolling the supposed benefits of free trade ; their ambition , once unchained from the EU , is for a global , free-trading Britain . Yet the intellectual justification for free trade is almost exactly the same as for the repudiated free movement . Both rest on the idea of `` comparative advantage '' - that if a country or individual can supply something more cheaply than we can , it is economically more advantageous to buy from them , keep the savings and focus on what we do better . A virtuous circle of economic enhancement is thereby established . In some respects , free movement is an extension of the same principle . Yet it is pointless telling people that immigration is good for them if they can not feel it in their pockets . Assuming effective border controls are eventually introduced , we face an interesting economic experiment . Will restrictions on immigration make us poorer , as some companies believe ? Or will they act much like the Black Death in the 14th century , creating an extreme shortage of labour that kickstarts decent levels of wage inflation . If the latter , many will think it a pretty good outcome . follow Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ JEREMYWARNERUK ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Juncker 's Monster of Brussels sets his sights on Theresa May
HIS fearsome reputation is summed up by his many nicknames : Darth Vader , Rasputin and The Monster . As Jean-Claude Juncker 's chief of staff , Martin Selmayr is regarded as the power behind the throne in the Brexit negotiations to come , and the bad news for Theresa May is that he is an EU zealot determined to `` punish '' Britain for leaving the bloc . Mr Selmayr , the German widely suspected of leaking a damaging account of Mrs May 's No10 dinner , is also close to senior figures in Angela Merkel 's party , raising questions about Germany 's role in briefing against Mrs May . Tellingly , Mrs Merkel made a late addition to a speech she gave the day after Mr Juncker met Mrs May , to include a pointed reference to people in Britain having `` illusions '' about the Brexit deal . The man who had informed Mrs Merkel on the phone that Mrs May was `` deluded '' was Mr Juncker , president of the European Commission , and critics of the former Luxembourg prime minister believe his strings are being pulled by Mr Selmayr . Ministers are particularly concerned about his links to the higher echelons of the German government . He is a member of Mrs Merkel 's Christian Democratic Union party , and is close to Peter Altmaier , her chief of staff . Mr Selmayr , 46 , is not a personal friend of Mrs Merkel - she is understood to have opposed his appointment - but Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader , believes he is trying to manipulate the German Chancellor into taking a tough line on Brexit . He said : `` They [ Mr Selmayr and Mr Juncker ] want to box Mrs Merkel in to a hard-line . They do n't care if negotiations succeed , they are obsessed with the idea of the European Union - it 's where their money , jobs and power come from . '' A Whitehall source who has had frequent dealings with Mr Selmayr told The Daily Telegraph : `` He is incredibly clever , he is unbelievably hard-working , he is a consummate operator . He is also a true believer in the European Project and has taken Brexit very personally . He has always felt the UK was getting in the way of greater European integration and is clear that if you choose to leave there is a cost to doing so . His mindset is that of a lawyer , whose world view is about rules and not political judgment . '' Last year Mr Selmayr said his `` horror scenario '' for 2017 would be Boris Johnson as Prime Minister , Donald Trump as US president and Marine Le Pen as French leader . He has since been credited with some of the EU 's most hardline negotiating positions , including its demand that Britain must pay a £50billion Brexit divorce bill . When the details of Mrs May 's meeting were leaked , Mr Juncker was portrayed as the strong man in the face of Mrs May 's Brexit demands , saying that he told her on leaving Downing Street that he was `` 10 times more sceptical '' about the success of the Brexit talks than before the meeting . Mr Selmayr has spent much of his career surrounded by the bureaucracy of Brussels . He started as a lobbyist before working under Elmar Brok , a German MEP , then in 2004 became a spokesman for Viviane Reding , a former commissioner . He has risen to become the most high-profile chief of staff in the history of Brussels . He told the Financial Times : `` Juncker is the good guy and I 'm the bad guy . That 's how it is . '' Asked about his `` monster '' nickname , which even Mr Juncker has taken to using , Mr Selmayr said : `` If you look into the history of Rasputin , that can be both flattering and not . Lenin can be flattering or not . `` If it means there is an efficient manager , somebody who is not a wimp , I 'm OK with that . You ca n't run the European Commission like a Montessori school . ''
Davis admits he has no plan for Brexit without an EU deal
THE EU is not `` intimidated '' by the threat of no deal with the UK , Donald Tusk has warned , as the Brexit Secretary admitted that the Government has not planned for walking away without a settlement . Mr Tusk , president of the European Council , said the outcome would be worse for Britain and the EU if an agreement for trade after Brexit was not reached . It came as David Davis told a committee of MPs yesterday that ministers had not assessed the implications of leaving the union without a deal . A Number 10 source was forced to stress that there was `` rigorous work going on across Government about the implications '' . Mr Davis told the Brexit select committee that it would not make sense to forecast such an outcome because ministers believed some agreement could be reached , even in the event of there being no overall deal . He confirmed that leaving under World Trade Organisation rules would mean tariffs of 30-40 per cent on agricultural exports and 10 per cent on cars , the loss of European health insurance cards for travellers and passporting rights for financial sector firms , as well as departure from the EU-US Open Skies arrangements for air transport . But he said any formal planning for a no deal situation would be undertaken in about a year 's time , after Article 50 had been triggered . Mr Davis said : `` Any forecast you make depends on the mitigation you make , and therefore it would be rather otiose to do that forecast before we have concluded what mitigation is possible . '' Asked whether he thought leaving without a deal would be bad for the UK , Mr Davis told the committee : `` I think it is not as good an outcome as a free trade , friction-free , open agreement , which is why we are trying for that . '' Mr Davis has previously warned the Cabinet of the need for contingency planning if the UK does not secure a deal . Questions have been raised about whether politicians and negotiators in Brussels will allow the UK to agree a trade deal during the two-year exit process or whether such an agreement will have to come after the formal exit from the union . Over the weekend , Mrs May 's senior Brexit ministers offered differing views on what no deal would mean for the UK . Liam Fox first suggested no deal `` would n't be end of the world '' before later stating that it would be `` bad '' for the country . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , said such an outcome would be `` perfectly OK '' . The Prime Minister has repeatedly warned that `` no deal would be better for the UK than a bad deal '' . However , her stance has angered Brussels diplomats , who see the claim as a threat . Explaining Mrs May 's warning , Mr Davis said : `` She said that because in the emotional aftermath of the referendum , there were lots of threats of punishment deals . '' In a statement to the European Parliament yesterday , Mr Tusk told MEPs : `` A 'no deal scenario ' would be bad for everyone , but above all for the UK . ''
Clean Brexit ahead as Tories fall into line to reject both Lords amendments ; Brexit : Parliament
THERESA MAY last night quashed a rebellion by pro-European Conservative MPs as the Government overturned attempts by the House of Lords to frustrate her plans for a clean Brexit . MPs voted overwhelming to reject two House of Lords amendments that aimed to guarantee the rights of EU migrants and give Parliament a `` meaningful vote '' on the final deal with Brussels . Up to a dozen Conservative MPs had threatened to rebel and back the `` meaningful vote '' amendment . However , Mrs May enjoyed a significant boost after not a single Conservative MP voted against the Government on the issue and just 11 abstained . The Government defeated the meaningful vote amendment by 331 to 286 and the migrant rights amendments by 335 to 287 . It came after David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , warned MPs that committing to a meaningful vote would hinder the Government 's ability to `` walk away '' from a deal that seeks to `` punish '' the UK . He said that some of those backing the Lords amendments were in fact seeking to overturn the result of the EU referendum . He said : `` The European Union member states and European Union institutions read the proceedings of this House very closely , and they 'd have read that and it will have raised their interest because that 's precisely what they would like to see happen . `` Whilst this has been badged as a meaningful vote , the reality is there are some who would seek to use this to overturn the result of the referendum . '' He said that the Government would not block a parliamentary vote on Brexit if the UK left without a deal . However , his comments were not enough to persuade Tory rebels . Dominic Grieve , the former Attorney General , said that trying to stop Parliament from having a vote on leaving the EU without a deal would be `` deranged '' . He said it was `` inevitable '' that the Government would have to present its Brexit deal to Parliament , adding that he found the refusal to commit to a vote `` a bit odd '' . He said : `` I 'm afraid I 'm not prepared to follow processes which appear to me to be , frankly , deranged . There is a clear way of doing things and , if we follow them , we will come up with the right decision . '' Anna Soubry , another Tory rebel , said that the refusal to commit to a vote if there is no deal was `` perverse '' . She said : `` They [ the European Union ] know how divided our nation is . They know about the deliberations in this place and in the other place and they also know that , of those who voted , it was only 52 per cent that voted for us to leave the European Union . I would urge the Government to allow parliamentary sovereignty to reign in the event of no deal . '' Sir Oliver Letwin , who served as a Cabinet minister under David Cameron , warned that the Lords amendment on a meaningful vote would provide a `` massive incentive '' for the EU to offer the UK a bad deal . He also warned that amending the Bill would be likely to result in a legal challenge . He said : `` I think the situation is worse than [ Mr Davis ] described , far worse , because this operative subclause is deeply deficient as a matter of law . '' Mike Wood , a Conservative MP who is recovering from sepsis , came to Parliament to support the Government . He said : `` I was determined to make sure that the decision taken in last June 's referendum is implemented . '' Both Labour and the Liberal Democrats supported the amendments . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , said : `` The Government is about to embark on the most complex undertaking of any British government since the Second World War . It is essential that Government does not take the country down the wrong path . ''
The road out of the European Union Will Britain meet its Brexit target of 2019 ? BODY : Dec 7 Parliament votes on motion challenging Commons to `` respect the wishes '' of UK voters , triggering Article 50 by March 31 . Dec 8 Closing arguments in Supreme Court , which will rule whether PM has power to trigger Article 50 using royal prerogative Jan 2017 Supreme Court expected to deliver its ruling on whether the process to start Brexit requires an Act of Parliament March 31 Deadline Mrs May has set for invoking Article 50 by notifying the European Council of Britain 's intention to leave EU Sept 2018 Date by which EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , Michel Barnier , wants to wrap up deal on Britain 's exit from the Union March 2019 Date by which Theresa May wants her ministers for Brexit to complete negotiations with the European Union May 2019 ? Britain formally exits the EU , following ratification of Brexit by all other member states
Telegraph Festival of Business Invitation BODY : `` Brexit means Brexit '' said Theresa May , shortly after entering 10 Downing Street for the first time as Prime Minister . But although the UK 's pending exit from the European Union is not in doubt , what is less clear is on what terms we will leave and when . The vote to leave the bloc raises a series of questions . How quickly will Article 50 be triggered , and when will the UK leave the European Union ? Once it has , what does our trading relationship look like with Europe and the rest of the world ? For business , certainty is often cited as the most important factor for investment decisions . The Telegraph Festival of Business 2016 aims to enlighten business leaders about the best way forward . By bringing together some of the best-known names in British business , along with leading politicians and thought leaders , this one-day conference aims to help those who attend understand what Brexit will mean for them . Now in its sixth year , the Telegraph Festival of Business is a one-day celebration of the best of British commerce , and is to be held this year on Tuesday 8 November in central London . Speakers will include Sir Andrew Witty , chief executive of GlaxoSmithKline , and Michael Spencer , founder and chief executive of the financial services leader ICAP . They will be joined by some of the brightest business personalities the UK has to offer . Although heavily focused on Brexit , the Festival will not lose sight of its commitment to delivering practical solutions to issues that delegates are facing . Through a series of interactive panels , focused on exports , talent , marketing and technology , speakers will deliver real-life examples of how they are moving forward . Together , our aim is to help British business to map out its route through the Brexit landscape , and make sure that the UK economy benefits as a result . James Quinn , Group Business Editor , The Telegraph To apply to attend , call 0207 931 3986 or go online to www.telegraph.co.uk/fob
Pound loses out to euro ahead of economic data
STERLING skidded to a three-year low against the euro as investors prepared to digest the first full round of hard economic data post-Brexit . The pound slumped 0.7pc to ( EURO ) 1.1490 against the euro , surpassing its post- Brexit low , to its lowest level since August 2013 . Meanwhile , it also tumbled against the dollar , sinking below $ 1.29 for the first time in a month , just half a cent off the 31-year lows to which it plunged in the wake of the Brexit vote . Since the Bank of England unveiled its stimulus package and cut interest rates for the first time in seven years just over two weeks ago , the pound has remained under pressure as talk shifts to further stimulus from the central bank before the end of the year . Heightened expectations of additional stimulus measures caused 10-year gilt yields to hit another record low . The first official readings of inflation , jobs and wage data and retail sales for July will all be released this week . Last Friday , weak construction output data prompted a further slide in the pound and , against a negative economic backdrop , Michael Hewson , of CMC Markets , said : `` This week 's economic data will take on greater importance than normal , given it will give markets another snapshot of how the UK economy performed in the aftermath of the Brexit vote . ''
Civil service Brexit forecasts 'always wrong ' , warns minister ; Hammond accused over gloomy report saying UK will do badly outside EU with or without trade deal
A BREXIT forecast by senior officials makes `` astrology look respectable '' , a senior minister said yesterday , as Philip Hammond and mandarins were accused of orchestrating the gloomy analysis . The official report , which found that Britain would be worse off outside the EU in every scenario modelled , was leaked yesterday , prompting a backlash from Eurosceptic MPs and ministers . It concluded that economic growth would fall by 5 per cent over the next 15 years if the UK left with a free-trade agreement and 8 per cent if the UK left without a deal . In an extraordinary appearance in the Commons , Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , said that government forecasts were `` always wrong '' and said the leak was `` an attempt to undermine our exit from the EU '' . Mr Baker said : `` It is not yet anywhere near being approved by ministers . Even the ministerial team in my department has only just been consulted on this paper in recent days . We have made it clear it requires significant further work . `` It 's not a forecast for our preferred outcome of negotiations . It does not take account of the opportunities of leaving the EU . I would agitate for a healthy scepticism about the use of mathematical economics . '' He said that David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , only read the assessment on Monday night , while he had read it only yesterday morning . Philip Davies , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , blamed civil servants . He said : `` We have here some London-centric Remoaners in the civil service who did n't want us to leave the EU in the first place and put together some dodgy figures to back up their case , who still do n't want us to leave the EU and are regurgitating some dodgy figures . '' The Daily Telegraph understands that Sir Jeremy Heywood , the Cabinet secretary , organised a series of one-toone briefings on the report with Cabinet ministers which begin this week . Oliver Robbins , Britain 's most senior Brexit official who runs a unit at the Cabinet Office , is also said to have been heavily involved in the work . While it is being presented as a cross-Government report , officials said that it was heavily influenced by Treasury modelling . Mr Hammond is understood to have made the case in Cabinet that the debate over the future of the EU should be informed by an analysis of the economic impact . A Cabinet source said : `` It 's Project Fear Mark II , but this time the Treasury is hiding behind a cross-Government review . They 're trying to box Boris and Michael into a corner but it 's backfired spectacularly . '' However , there were suggestions last night that the report had been commissioned by a cross-Whitehall steering group led by Philip Rycroft , permanent secretary at the Department for Exiting the European Union . Jacob Rees-Mogg , leader of a group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs , said : `` It 's the thin gruel of Project Fear reheated and served back to the British people . We would n't eat it for breakfast and now we 're getting it for lunch . The Chancellor is continuing to freelance and being a more successful opponent of Government policy than Jeremy Corbyn . '' It came as Theresa May was warned that her dithering and `` meaningless waffle '' over Brexit risks leaving Britain in a precarious place . Lord Bridges , a former trade minister , told the Lords : `` Four months on and there are still no clear answers to these basic , critical questions . My fear is that we will get meaningless waffle in the political declaration in October . The implementation period will not be a bridge to a clear destination , it will be a gang plank into thin air . '' Tory MPs are today expected to rebel against the Government and vote for the forecast to be published . Countdown to leaving the EU The progress towards Brexit June 23 2016 Britain votes to leave the European Union March 29 2017 Theresa May submits Article 50 letter June 8 2017 General Election . Mrs May loses her majority . Brexit negotiations formally begin on June 19 . Sept 22 2017 Mrs May makes Florence speech - offers concessions on Brexit bill and role of European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) . Dec 8 2017 Interim deal agreed that commits the UK to `` maintain full alignment with those rules of the internal market and the customs union '' if other solutions to Irish border question can not be agreed . Jan 29 2018 EU releases negotiating guidelines on a 21-month transition period . Warns UK must accept `` all '' EU rules and regulations . March 22-23 2018 European Council www.Summit.UK hopes to sign `` transition deal '' . Europe could produce guidelines on negotiating a future EU-UK trade deal . June 28-29 European Council Summit . Trade discussions likely to begin in earnest . Oct 18-19 2018 European Council Summit : EU deadline for agreeing an outline deal on EU-UK future relationship . If negotiations run on - as David Davis has hinted they might - period up until December will be critical . Oct 2018 -March 2019 Westminster and European Parliaments need to ratify the deal . It must also be agreed by a qualified majority vote of the remaining 27 members of the European Council . March 29 2019 Britain leaves the EU and enters transition period with EU . Trade negotiations begin formally with other countries . Dec 30 2020 EU says transition period will end although UK government says it currently believes it will run `` for about two years '' . June 2022 Last possible date for next general election .
We must push for agreement with a plus BODY : For all the apparent vagueness surrounding Brexit , the Government 's policy has actually been remarkably consistent . Last November an aide was photographed in Downing St carrying papers for a ministerial discussion which outlined some of the options for Brexit . Foremost among them was something called `` Canada-plus '' . This translates as a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) as hammered out between the EU and Canada , with bits added - principally , financial services . On The Andrew Marr Show on the BBC yesterday David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , reaffirmed that this is indeed the Government 's aim , though it is now `` Ceta-plus-plus-plus '' . This would take the UK out of the single market and the customs union , as Theresa May has promised , while retaining as much frictionless trade , both in goods and services , as is realistically possible . Mr Davis said he did not recognise suggestions among hard-line Brexiteers - and the Labour Party - that the deal struck on Friday to move on to the next stage of talks implied a so-called `` soft '' Brexit in which the UK effectively stays in or mirrors the single market . That impression has arisen largely because of the ambiguities in the document surrounding the future of the Irish border and the need to ensure that Northern Ireland remains an integral part both of the UK and of a free trade area with the Republic of Ireland . Mr Davis said the section on regulatory alignment was more of a statement of intent than a binding protocol , which caused some surprise in Dublin . A Canada-plus trade agreement would help square the circle . However , what we do not know yet is whether the EU will be happy to give the UK such a www.deal.No non-EU member state has ever negotiated trade terms with the EU that extend to services , particularly financial services . But Mr Davis signalled that the Government is prepared to leverage the UK 's position under which it has agreed to give the EU some £39billion net as a farewell payment . He said this would only be forthcoming if we get a trade deal , confounding suggestions by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , that it would be paid come what may . There will be obligations that will have to be met , even without a deal . But , as Mr Davis said , the chances of getting one have now improved , so we should not be shy to use the financial promises we have made to persuade the EU that it would be in their interests to agree .
EU citizens may be able to bring families in post-Brexit
EU CITIZENS living in Britain could be given a window of time during which their families would be allowed to move into the UK after Brexit , David Davis has suggested . The Brexit Secretary hinted that the Government was looking at offering fresh concessions on citizens ' rights to get negotiations moving on a trade deal with the EU . He raised the possibility that EU nationals could enjoy the same family reunion rights as they do now for a limited period of time after Brexit in March 2019 . Concerns had been raised that Theresa May 's offer to give three million EU nationals in Britain `` settled status '' , subject to certain tests , watered down their rights to family reunion . But in an interview with European newspapers , Mr Davis said : `` The issue is that in order to give perpetuity on family rights it would give to three million people in the UK rights that British citizens themselves do n't have . `` I am trying to think of a way , maybe a short-term way , of sorting this , a certain window whatever . '' Asked if the window could be five or 10 years , Mr Davis replied : `` Whatever that might be , might be a bit shorter than that . We have n't engaged on that negotiation properly , it 's next on the agenda . We will talk about that . '' Mr Davis 's comments mark a significant shift from his remarks earlier this month at the end of the fifth round of Brexit negotiations , when he said that the right to bring in family members was one of the issues `` on which we have not yet arrived at a solution '' . Family members are generally accepted as dependent children , spouses and parents , but could also possibly include cousins . It comes after Theresa May posted a message on Facebook which stated : `` We want families to stay together '' . Mr Davis said a `` no deal '' outcome was `` a very distant possibility '' and that preparations for no deal were an `` insurance policy '' . He said : `` It is no part of our negotiating strategy , and no plan of our planning for the future in terms of what we intend . '' He called on EU leaders to allow Michel Barnier , the EU 's chief Brexit negotiator , more `` leeway '' in his mandate so that he can begin talks about the transition period now . He said : `` Also we 'd like him at least to prepare for the future relationship . Some people say progress is slow . By EU standards this negotiation has been lightning fast . '' Mr Davis said that on the issue of European Court of Justice oversight of migrants ' rights , the EU should trust British courts and accept that they were not `` patsies '' to the Government , as they had been overturning Government decisions for centuries . He added : `` Europeans in America do n't have protection of the ECJ , Americans in the UK have no protection from the Supreme Court . There is a point at which we have to say this is a good judicial system , one of the best in the world . '' Mr Davis was also asked if his military training in the Territorial Army 's 21 SAS Regiment had helped with his negotiating skills . He replied : `` Well , I never killed anyone ... ''
I can not imagine a no-deal Brexit scenario , says IMF 's Lagarde
CHRISTINE LAGARDE , managing director of the International Monetary Fund , has said that she `` can not imagine '' a no-deal Brexit scenario . The movement of people and aviation logistics were not covered by the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules that would come into force should a deal not be agreed by March 29 2019 , Ms Lagarde said , as she explained that such a scenario was unthinkable . `` [ I ] can not imagine that would happen , '' said the leader of the world 's lender of last resort , speaking at the IMF 's annual meeting in Washington DC . `` For the people themselves , what does that mean ? WTO does not provide for those , '' the former French finance minister added . As she highlighted the human factor in the Brexit decision making , Ms Lagarde said that the EU and the UK should prioritise the matter of people - those EU nationals living in the UK and vice versa - above all else . `` [ It 's a ] situation of people first [ and ] business second , '' she said . Ms Lagarde 's comments come on the same day that Brexit talks between the UK and the EU appeared be deadlocked , raising the possibility that Britain could crash out of the union with no new trade deal in place . Her remarks follow a speech earlier this week by Carolyn Fairbairn , head of the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) , in which she accused Britain 's leaders of playing `` human poker '' with EU migrants . A clearer timetable and plan for UK negotiations with Brussels was essential , Ms Lagarde argued , adding that `` our [ the IMF 's ] hope is that it be conducted promptly '' . The IMF head also addressed the furore that emerged following the publication of the fund 's bi-annual `` Fiscal Monitor '' , which called for higher taxation on top earners in advanced economies in order to generate more inclusive growth . It provoked significant backlash from leaders in the US who consider the IMF to be opposed to their plans to cut taxes for high earners and claimed that the fund wanted to see them fail . Ms Lagarde also pointed to the importance for all economies of `` increasing participation '' of women in the workforce . She called on policymakers and central bankers to work hard to `` close the gender gap between men and women '' by addressing matters such as equal pay .
Sturgeon 's gamble stakes all on Scotland 's opposition to Brexit ; Brexit : Scotland The SNP leader hopes to offer Scots a clear choice over whether their future lies with Britain or Europe
NICOLA STURGEON has said she wants Scots to vote on whether to leave the United Kingdom within two years . Here we examine what she said and what she meant . `` The UK Government was clear in 2014 that an independence referendum should be , in their words , 'made in Scotland , by the people of Scotland ' . That is a principle that should be respected today . '' Ms Sturgeon wants to give the impression that Scots can control their own fate , and vote on whether to leave the UK when they like . But this is not the case . The Scottish Government has to request the right to hold a referendum ; and the UK Government has to agree . Theresa May has a difficult path to tread , stating that now is not the time for a referendum , rather than ruling one out altogether . `` Next week I will seek the approval of the Scottish Parliament to agree with the UK Government the details of a Section 30 order - the procedure that will enable the Scottish Parliament to legislate for an independence referendum . '' Scotland can hold a referendum as long as Holyrood and Westminster agree to trigger Section 30 of the 1998 Scotland Act to transfer the power to hold the referendum to Edinburgh . It is thought that the Prime Minister will accept the principle but refuse to transfer the powers until after Brexit , arguing that only then will Scots know the choice they face . `` If Scotland is to have a real choice - when the terms of Brexit are known , but before it is too late to choose our own course - then that choice must be offered between the autumn of next year , 2018 , and the spring of 2019 . '' Ms Sturgeon wants Scots to vote before Brexit happens , which is likely to be at the end of March 2019 . This would help the nationalists capitalise on uncertainty caused by Brexit and make voting to leave the UK and rejoin the EU more attractive . `` We will be frank about the challenges we face and clear about the opportunities independence will give us to secure our relationship with Europe , build a stronger and more sustainable economy and create a fairer society . '' The First Minister believes Scotland has a better future inside the EU but outside the UK , justified by the fact that a majority of Scots voted to remain in the EU at last June 's referendum . But the EU does not see it this way , not least because it could spark potential nationalist uprisings in other member states , like Catalonia in Spain . The European Commission has suggested an independent Scotland would join the back of the queue of other countries hoping for EU membership . `` There is across these islands a common travel area . There is absolutely no reason why that would or should change if Scotland became an independent country . '' Ms Sturgeon will be worried that a `` hard '' Scottish border after Brexit would be devastating for Scottish companies that `` export '' into England . She envisages a common travel area will exist within the islands of Great Britain citing the likely post-Brexit solution on the island of Ireland . `` Having Scotland 's referendum at a time when the terms of Brexit are known will give the Scottish people a choice about the kind of change we want . And it must be a choice for all of us . '' Ms Sturgeon is careful not to say she will win any vote . What she wants is to give Scots a `` choice '' about their www.future.No wonder - the latest polling published hours before Ms Sturgeon spoke suggests that Scots would vote 52-48 in favour of remaining in the UK . However a big worry for Mrs May will be that the nationalists started the last referendum campaign at just 32 per cent in early 2013 and rose to 45 per cent by September 2014 . With the polls on a knife-edge , Ms Sturgeon is gambling a considerable amount on www.winning.No wonder that less than 12 hours after Ms Sturgeon had spoken nearly £100,000 had been raised for the nationalists ' cause . Last time leading political figures like David Cameron and Ed Miliband could argue that Scotland was better together with the UK and in the EU . But this time such arguments by their successors will be harder to make because Britain is leaving the EU and faces a far more uncertain future . `` I can see no reason why it ca n't be the same question as last time , but I do n't want to get ahead of ourselves , we have a process to go through . '' In 2014 Scots were asked a simple question : `` Should Scotland be an independent country ? '' Ms Sturgeon wants to ask it all over again . David Cameron was criticised for allowing the nationalists to campaign for a positive `` Yes '' vote . Mrs May is likely to opt for a question that will elicit a more neutral `` Remain/Leave '' answer . `` It will be decided by the people of Scotland . It will be Scotland 's choice . '' Ms Sturgeon is clear that is up to Scots to decide their future . But this ignores the question of whether people living in England should be allowed a say . In the 2014 referendum , all EU citizens aged over 16 who were resident in Scotland were able to vote . Scottish independence polling since the Brexit vote QUESTION : If there was a referendum tomorrow with the question Should Scotland be an independent country ? , how would you vote ? Yes No 58 % 56 54 52 50 48 46 44 Jul ( 16 ) Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan ( 17 ) Feb Mar SOURCE : WHAT SCOTLAND SAYS Nationalists in the last referendum campaign started at +13 % 32 % in early 2013 and rose to 45 % cent by September 2014
Campaigners fight to 'block will of people ' ; Brexit fallout ; Attorney General criticises attempt to force Commons vote on Brexit as trying to subvert referendum result
A WEALTHY City investor and anti-Brexit campaignerhas been accused by the Attorney General of attempting to subvert the democratic will of the British people . Remain supporters yesterday began court action against Theresa May to prevent her using executive powers under the royal prerogative to start the process of leaving the European Union . Jeremy Wright , the Attorney General , said the legal move launched yesterday by Gina Miller to stop the Prime Minister triggering Article 50 was a `` backdoor '' attempt to bypass the Brexit vote . In what has been described as one of the most important constitutional cases in generations , Ms Miller and her fellow anti-Brexit campaigners in the group People 's Challenge argue that the Prime Minister has no power to trigger Article 50 without the prior authorisation of Parliament . But Ms Miller 's bid produced a withering response from the Government . Mr Wright said : `` The country voted to leave the EU in a referendum approved by Act of Parliament . There must be no attempts to remain inside the EU , no attempts to rejoin it through the back door , and no second referendum . The result should be respected and the Government intends to do just that . '' The Government 's lawyers told the High Court that if the legal challenge mounted by Ms Miller and her supporters succeeded , the Government `` could not give effect to the will and decision of the people , as clearly expressed in the referendum , to withdraw from the EU without further primary legislation '' . Mrs Miller , 51 , originally trained as a lawyer , but made her name campaigning on behalf of fellow investors against hidden fees and charges levied by investment funds . It was revealed in court that she has received a stream of `` abuse , threats and insults '' from angry Brexit supporters since the case was launched . The court was told that if Article 50 was triggered , Ms Miller and others would be deprived of important constitutional rights , such as the right to free movement , free movement of goods , and freedom of services across Europe . Lord Pannick told the three judges - Lord Chief Justice Lord Thomas , Master of the Rolls Sir Terence Etherton and Lord Justice Sales : `` The issue in this case is not whether this country should remain a member of the EU , or leave the EU . `` The question is whether the Government may take action unilaterally to notify , or whether it needs parliamentary approval to do so . '' People 's Challenge has raised more than £160,000 to fund its legal costs since it was launched in the wake of the referendum . It was set up by Grahame Pigney , a British expat who now lives in Carcassonne , France , and Paul Cartwright , 50 , a Gibraltarian national who ran the Brex-IN campaign and works as an environmental officer for the British territory 's government . Mr Pigney , 62 , originally from Fareham , Hants , is semi-retired and has lived in the wine-growing region of Carcassonne for 19 years , which left him unable to vote in the referendum . Defending the legal challenge , he said : `` I happen to live in France , but that is inconsequential in the context of the constitutional crisis we are facing . `` What 's at stake is nothing less than Parliamentary sovereignty . `` We need to make sure we do not hand the sovereignty of the UK to a self-appointed Government . '' Foreign legion Anti-Brexit campaigners based abroad Although Gina Miller , pictured left , a trust fund manager , is the public face of a campaign to prevent the Government from triggering Article 50 , it can be revealed that many of those behind the action are British expats who live abroad . A legal challenge is being brought by a group calling itself People 's Challenge , set up by Grahame Pigney , a British expat who now lives in France , and Paul Cartwright , 50 , a Gibraltarian national . Also backing the legal action is the Fair Deal for Expats group , which includes dozens of Britons living abroad . These include a British company director who lives in Limoges , France ; a businessman who runs a holiday rentals business in Italy ; and an English language teacher in Hamburg , Germany . The presence of so many expats among those backing the legal action against the triggering of Article 50 has prompted accusations they are interfering with Britain 's future from the comfort of their homes in the EU . Conservative MP Bernard Jenkin said : `` Among those involved in the court case are a great many people who want to frustrate the UK from leaving the European Union or maintain a half in , half out solution . `` They want to protract the agony and uncertainty when in fact what business wants is certainty and a clear direction . '' Dominic Raab MP said : `` This is a pretty naked attempt to steal the referendum by the back door . ''
EasyJet could shift legal HQ overseas as airline pushes ahead with post-Brexit plans
BUDGET airline easyJet is pressing ahead with plans to set up a new company in Europe to avoid the fallout from Brexit , a move that could involve switching its legal headquarters abroad . The FTSE 100 airline has started the process to acquire a so-called air operator certificate ( AOC ) in a European country as a contingency in case the UK loses its right to fly freely across the continent after Brexit . Gaining a certifi-cate may result in easyJet legally registering its HQ in an EU country , although it insisted yesterday that the 1,000-plus staff at its Luton Airport head office would be unaffected . The AOC would ensure the airline has unfettered access to the European Common Aviation Area ( ECAA ) , allowing the short-haul carrier to fly to destinations across the continent . Depending on the outcome of talks with European aviation regulators , the holding company will either be a subsidiary of easyJet or , more likely , become its legal headquarters . There are fears Brexit could obstruct UK airlines ' access to the ECAA and it is understood a number of carriers are considering purchasing AOCs . The Telegraph revealed before the referendum that easyJet was looking into the certificates . The airline was at pains to stress yesterday that even if its HQ switched abroad , it would only need a skeleton staff at the new legal entity . It would , however , mean that easyJet 's annual general meetings and board meetings would be held in Europe , rather than the UK . Brexit could also mean Irish carrier Ryanair would need an AOC in the UK . FTSE 100 giant International Airlines Group , which owns British Airways , Spain 's Iberia and Ireland 's Aer Lingus , already has AOCs in all three countries . Despite being listed on the London Stock Exchange , IAG is legally a Spanish company .
Scotland Sturgeon accused of 'weaponising ' Brexit to retain single market
NICOLA STURGEON yesterday demanded that Scotland be allowed to `` effectively '' stay in the EU single market after the UK Government moved towards a special Brexit deal for Northern Ireland . The First Minister insisted there was `` no good practical reason '' why one part of the UK should be allowed to align its regulations with the EU and `` others can not do the same '' . She argued that denying Scotland a `` similar solution '' would put it at a `` double disadvantage '' in competing with Northern Ireland for jobs and investment . Although the DUP prevented Theresa May and Jean-Claude Juncker from reaching an agreement yesterday , Ms Sturgeaon also argued that the Prime Minister 's aborted offer demonstrated the Irish government 's influence and `` the importance of being independent '' . But the Tories accused her of making a renewed push to `` weaponise Brexit '' for Scottish independence , and warned that creating different regulatory regimes north and south of the Scottish border would create trade barriers with England . This would be much more damaging to trade than Brexit , they said , as trade with the rest of the UK is worth four times as much for Scottish companies as that with the EU . The row broke out after it was reported that the Government was ready to allow be `` regulatory alignment '' between the north and south of Ireland so there was no hard border between the two . Ms Sturgeon published a plan last December for Scotland to remain in the single market after the rest of the UK comes out . It involved her government getting some control over a range of issues from immigration and business regulation to international trade negotiations . The blueprint said this would allow Scotland to continue to mirror the business regime in the EU single market after Brexit . It was rejected as unworkable by the UK Government amid warnings that it would create trade barriers with England . Academics have also warned against using Ireland as a precedent , pointing to the fact that Northern Ireland , unlike Scotland , will share a post-Brexit border with an EU nation state . Ms Sturgeon yesterday welcomed that there was an `` outline of an agreement '' that there should be no hard border in Ireland and acknowledged that the situation was `` distinct and separate '' from Scotland 's . But she said : `` Today 's developments show very clearly that if one part of the UK can retain regulatory alignment with the EU and effectively stay in the single market , there is no good practical reason why others can not do the same . Indeed , any special status for Northern Ireland would make a similar solution for Scotland even more vital . For Scotland to find itself outside the single market , while Northern Ireland effectively stays in would place us at a double disadvantage when it comes to jobs and investment . '' John Lamont , the Tory MP for Berwickshire , Roxburgh and Selkirk , said : `` It is disappointing - but not surprising - that Nicola Sturgeon has once again tried to weaponise Brexit to further her obsession with independence . ''
We need a new vision to fight the religion of European integration
My attempt last week to shoot down ten canards about Brexit left a major question unanswered . Why do so many intelligent and well-meaning people wish to stay in the EU ? Some do so because they believe one or more of the fallacious arguments that I attacked last week . I hope my duck shoot gave them food for thought . And there are a few more canards flapping across the landscape . One of the juiciest is the idea that the improvement in the UK economy that has taken place since we joined the EU in 1973 has happened because of our membership . Accordingly , some people associate Brexit with a return to the conditions that existed prior to our entry , including dreadful coffee and ubiquitous all-day breakfasts . In practice , of course , nearly all countries in the world have enjoyed the benefits of economic growth over this period . Another argument , although not quite a canard , concerns the reaction of foreigners to Brexit . There is a widespread fear that foreign-owned firms will fail to invest in the UK and/ or withdraw or scale down their operations here . This fear encompasses the auto sector , Japanese investment in all sorts of manufacturing and investments from all around the world in the City of London . In practice , this argument involves a good deal of circularity for if Brexit really is n't that bad for the UK economy , and indeed may actually be beneficial then , given very low tariffs , foreign firms are unlikely to scale down or withdraw their operations in the UK . There is also a fear that the EU will punish the UK , including through the operation of various non-tariff barriers . This is not daft . But it would be against the EU 's own economic interests . And whatever the Commission 's inclinations , not many European firms or consumers would favour this approach . So its scope will be limited . More tellingly , it is widely believed that , although the eurozone has had its fair share of travails , nevertheless there are potentially major economic advantages to be had from size and integration . Accordingly , by cutting ourselves off , the UK will be settling for an inferior economic out-turn . This may not be obvious at first but the costs and disadvantages will build up over time . Similarly , there is a legitimate argument that although it is perfectly possible for the UK to choose policies after Brexit that will bring a net economic benefit - zero tariffs on all imports , for instance - in practice , a combination of economic ignorance and political pressure will mean that we do not adopt such policies . Consequently , Brexit will lead to falls in trade , with a consequent hit to productivity and investment . More generally , left to its own devices , the UK is likely to make bad economic decisions on tax , government spending , regulation and the environment . Remainers are , of course , welcome to this belief but the evidence surely screams the opposite . The costs of EU membership are set to increase sharply as it integrates and controls more , and its decision-making and policy choices are likely to be worse than those that we would make in pursuit of our own interests . Many opponents of Brexit are particularly concerned about reduced immigration - ostensibly for economic reasons . They associate the number of immigrants , regardless of their skills , with wealth creation . They are confusing the overall size of GDP with GDP per capita . It is true that , other things equal , the fewer people we admit then the smaller our overall economy will be . But so what ? No one eats aggregate GDP statistics . On the opposite tack , some opponents of Brexit openly downplay GDP against considerations of war and peace . They believe that the European Union is responsible for continued peace in Europe since 1945 . This argument is not to be lightly dismissed . Peace and the preservation of human life surely trump mere economics . But most Eurosceptics do not believe that the EU is the source of peace in post-war Europe . This has rather been due to the combination of Nato , nuclear weapons and a changed set of attitudes on the part of ordinary European people that has nothing to do with the EU . More generally , a large part of the opposition to Brexit is political and people use economic arguments , including the various canards that I have brought down , as cover for their political views . They value the development of a common European identity and they associate this with the EU . Equally , they are suspicious of a purely national identity , and perhaps especially of a British national identity . Some actively dislike Britain and Britishness . For such people , economic arguments may cut little ice . Their Europeanism is close to being a religion . Feeling , or wanting to feel , `` European '' is understandable . I feel European myself . But European identity is not the same as belonging to a common European political entity . There was Europe well before the EU . And there can be Europe outside the EU , or even well after it . Countering the religion of European political integration may require the adoption of a new vision . It should surely concentrate on the concept of global Britain . Admittedly , there are Brexiteers who nurse a nostalgic , warm beer and village cricket , view of Britain outside the EU . This often features in the caricatures that Remainers like to attack . But most of the leading lights behind Brexit are not like this . They see the EU as an inwardlooking , protectionist bloc that is fading in relative importance at just the time that the rest of the world is opening up and developing . Britain 's future can readily involve a close relationship and deep friendship with the countries of the EU while simultaneously setting our sights over the horizon , economically , politically and culturally . The vision of the future that the Government should actively promote is of an outward-facing but proudly independent Britain , playing a full part on the world stage . That is a future well worth striving for - and voting for . Roger Bootle is chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com 'I feel European myself . But European identity is not the same as belonging to a common European political entity '
Scotland Key policies The SNP manifesto BODY : INDEPENDENCE Reinforce Scottish Parliament 's right to decide on timing of a second independence referendum ; Scotland should have another referendum at the end of the Brexit process . The SNP winning a majority of Scottish seats would create a `` triple lock '' for another referendum after the party won the most seats at last year 's Holyrood election and the Scottish Parliament voted for talks over getting the powers for an independence vote . Scotland should be an EU member state if independent but the process by which this would be achieved would only be set out before a referendum . IMMIGRATION Devolve immigration to allow Scotland to have its own policies after Brexit . Press UK Government to ensure border checks are as seamless as possible after the UK leaves the EU . BREXIT Push for the Scottish Government to be given a seat at the Brexit negotiating table . Push for the SNP plan to keep Scotland in the EU single market when the rest of the UK leaves to be included in the UK 's negotiating stance . This would require the devolution of powers in nearly every area except defence to Scotland could meet the regulatory and administrative requirements of single market membership . Call for the UK Government to guarantee EU nationals ' right to remain in the UK . Oppose any attempts by the UK Government to `` sell out '' the fishing industry during talks . Devolve all powers repatriated from Brussels that relate to devolved areas such as fisheries and agriculture . DEFENCE Scrap the renewal of Trident . Support its Faslane home on the Clyde being turned into a conventional naval base . Halt the closure of a series of old bases TAX Increase the top rate of income tax from 45p to 50p across the rest of the UK in 2018/19 . The Scottish Government would implement the same change north of the Border . Introduce a tax on bankers ' bonuses . Freeze VAT and examine reduction for tourism industry after Brexit . Review alcohol taxation to reflect alcohol content . `` Targeted incentives '' to develop `` small pool discoveries '' in the North Sea oil and gas sector and to help `` late life '' fields . SPENDING & DEFICIT End austerity with an extra £120 billion of spending across the UK over the next parliament . Balance the UK budget by the end of the parliament in 2020/21 . HEALTH Increase English NHS spending by £11 billion , or seven per cent , so it is the same per head as in Scotland . This will produce more than £1 billion extra spending for Scotland via the Barnett formula . An NHS Reinstatement Billl to reverse the supposed privatisation of the health service in England . Abandon `` unsustainable '' pay caps for NHS workers in Scotland . EDUCATION Protect 'free ' university tuition for Scottish students . Call for the full reinstatement of the Post-Study Work Visa scheme , which allows foreign students to stay in the UK after graduation . WELFARE Give Scotland full control over welfare powers . Introduce UK-wide targets to end child poverty . End Work Capability Assessment and review Personal Independence Payments . Oppose cap that restricts child tax credits to two children and the so-called 'rape clause ' providing an exemption for women whose third or subsequent children were the product of rape . Abolish the Bedroom Tax in Scotland . Scrap the current benefit sanction regime . Complete halt to Universal Credit . Reinstate the work allowance for all benefit claimants . Payment of a Real Living Wage to all adults aged 18 and over PENSIONS Oppose increases in the state pension age . Maintain the triple lock on the state pension . Stand up for women short-changed by the accelerated timetable for increases in the state pension age JUSTICE Appeal to the UK Government to refund £140 million of VAT payments made by Police Scotland . Oppose any relaxation of the laws on fox hunting TRANSPORT Call for the devolution of Network Rail . Connect Scotland with HS2 . DEMOCRACY Call for the abolition of the House of Lords . Change the General Election voting system to the single transferable vote form of proportional representation . Lower the voting age in Westminster elections to 16 .
Brexit talks will start just 11 days after the election , warns PM ; Election 2017 ; Theresa May will reveal negotiations ' start date today , telling voters 'weak ' Corbyn will not be ready
BRITAIN has `` no time to waste '' in Brexit talks , Theresa May will warn today as she says formal negotiations about leaving the European Union will start just 11 days after the election . The Prime Minister will tell supporters in Wales , which voted overwhelmingly to leave the European Union at the referendum , not to risk letting Jeremy Corbyn lead these talks . On her first visit to Wales of the official election campaign , Mrs May will stress that she will not take support from Welsh voters `` for granted '' as she seeks to win a Tory landslide on June 8 . Mrs May will say : `` There are just 17 days to go until this crucial general election . Just 11 days after that , the European Union wants the Brexit negotiations to begin . `` The UK 's seat at the negotiating table will be filled by me or Jeremy Corbyn . The deal we seek will be negotiated by me or Jeremy Corbyn . `` There will be no time to waste and no time for a new government to find its way . So the stakes in this election are high . '' She will claim the UK will have a `` weak hand '' should Mr Corbyn secure power with the help of the Liberal Democrat , Plaid Cymru and Scottish National Party MPs as these parties `` do n't want Brexit to succeed '' . The Prime Minister and Conservative leader is expected to say she is `` 100 per cent committed to the cause '' while suggesting Mr Corbyn is `` uncertain or unsure '' when it comes to delivering on Brexit . Mrs May is expected to say the UK 's future prosperity depends on `` getting the next five years right '' , adding : `` That is why we need someone representing Britain who is 100 per cent committed to the cause . `` Not someone who is uncertain or unsure , but someone utterly determined to deliver the democratic will of the British people . `` Because if we do n't get this right , the consequences for the United Kingdom and for the economic security of ordinary working people will be dire . If we do , the opportunities ahead are great . '' Mrs May is travelling to Wales today to launch the party 's Welsh manifesto . Polls have raised the possibility of significant gains at next month 's General Election . Insiders believe the party could win nine more seats , giving it 20 out of the 40 seats in the principality , and making the Conservatives the largest party . One insider said : `` There has been this assumption that Labour 's support is always there . It is certainly not the case . '' Mrs May will use the trip to make a bold plea for support from Welsh voters who feel Labour has taken them for granted . She will say : `` I 'm backing those that want a more secure and full life . I 'm backing those whose only wish is that their children will do better than themselves . `` And to those that look to their government and their politicians for a little help and support , I 'm backing you too . `` Because too often in the past , ordinary working people have found the help and support they need just is n't there . `` And I know that sense of disenchantment is particularly acute here in Wales . `` We saw that when people here in Wrexham and across Wales chose to ignore the hysterical warnings of Labour , Plaid Cymru and Liberal Democrat politicians in Cardiff Bay , and voted to leave the EU . `` We see it now in the way those same politicians refuse to respect that vote as they try to find new ways to put obstacles in our way . `` And the cause of that emerging gulf is clear . It is because the Labour Party has taken people in Wales for granted for decades - just as it has in other communities across Britain . '' In the Conservative national manifesto , which was published last week , Mrs May pledged to invest in `` improved infrastructure '' to help Welsh companies . She also promised a new North Wales Growth Deal `` connecting North Wales with northern England '' and which would `` encourage further cross-border working '' . The Tories also said they would `` protect the interest of Welsh farmers '' and `` ensure the strength of the Welsh brand is maintained '' . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , also raised concerns about the possibility of Mr Corbyn trying to negotiate Britain 's exit from the EU with other EU leaders . He told ITV 's Peston on Sunday : `` They 're going to look at him , and they 're going to have him for breakfast . And I think it would be deeply damaging to the interests of this country . ''
Britain would be perfectly OK with no Brexit deal , says Boris ; Foreign Secretary rejects 'apocalyptic ' warning by MPs ' committee that UK may be seriously damaged
BRITAIN will be `` perfectly OK '' without a deal on Brexit and should be prepared to walk away from the EU talks likely to start formally this week , Boris Johnson has said . The Foreign Secretary rejected warnings from an influential committee of MPs about `` mutually assured damage '' in the event of no deal , saying the consequences would not be `` apocalyptic '' . His comments exposed a Cabinet split , with Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , saying it would `` of course be bad '' if no deal was reached . Meanwhile , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , said he was `` confident I 'll get a good outcome '' from talks with the 27 member states . Their comments came ahead of a crucial Commons vote today that is expected to clear the way for Theresa May to trigger Article 50 - beginning the two-year process of exiting the EU - as early as tomorrow . A Tory rebellion aimed at giving Parliament a `` meaningful vote '' on the Brexit deal , which would hold up the Bill 's passage , is expected to falter , with whips confident the rebels do not have the numbers to overturn the Government 's majority . The Government has offered Parliament a take it or leave it vote on the deal once the negotiations are complete , but some Tories , including Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , want a pledge that MPs will be able to debate the deal and demand changes if they are not satisfied . They have asked Mr Davis to bring the vote forward to Oct 2018 - six months before the Brexit deadline - to allow time for ministers to go back to the EU and hold further talks . There is growing concern in Whitehall that EU negotiators could offer a bad deal to punish the UK for leaving , even if that meant acting against their own best economic interests . The Commons foreign affairs committee warned in a report over the weekend that there was a very real possibility the talks could end with no deal which would be `` very destructive '' for both Britain and the EU . The committee said that a failure to put a back-up plan in place would be a `` serious dereliction of duty '' . Anna Soubry , a former minister , made an even more gloomy prediction by suggesting yesterday that talks could col-lapse within six months , leaving Britain falling off a cliff edge . She described Mr Johnson 's comments as `` irresponsible nonsense '' . Appearing on ITV 's Peston on Sunday , Mr Johnson insisted a deal was a `` very likely '' outcome , stressing that the UK has a `` robust '' economy and a confident negotiating team . `` Our partners and friends around the EU desperately want this thing to work , '' he said . Asked if the Government was drawing up contingency plans in case there was no deal , Mr Johnson said : `` I think that actually , as it happens , we would be perfectly OK if we were n't able to get an agreement , but I 'm sure that we will , for the reasons that I gave . `` I do n't think that the consequences of no deal are by any means as apocalyptic as some people like to protest . '' Appearing on BBC Radio 5 Live , Dr Fox initially agreed with his fellow Cabinet minister , saying : `` Certainly it would n't be the end of the world if we had no deal . '' He performed a U-turn on Sky News later in the morning , saying : `` Not having a deal of course would be bad , not just bad for the UK but for Europe as a whole . '' A spokesman for Dr Fox said he was `` clear that no deal is better than a bad deal '' . A report today warns it is `` inevitable '' that more money will need to be spent in government departments set to see an increased workload after Brexit , such as the Home Office and the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs . Some ministries are already recruiting more civil servants , which shows `` they must have been given indications that they will not be held to the administrative savings agreed in the pre-Brexit spending review , '' the report by the Institute for Government and the UK in a Changing Europe project said . Oxford University is calling on MPs to guarantee the right of EU citizens to stay in the UK after Brexit in order to protect academic staff . Research would `` suffer enormous damage '' if European workers had to leave , according to the university 's vice-chancellor , Louise Richardson , and the heads of all but three of its constituent colleges , in a letter to The Times . Deal or No Deal ? Boris Johnson : `` We would be perfectly OK if we were n't able to get an agreement , but I 'm sure that we will ... I do n't think that the consequences of no deal are by any means as apocalyptic as some people like to protest . '' Liam Fox : `` Not having a deal would be bad . But it 's not just bad for the UK , it 's bad for Europe . '' David Davis : `` I 'm confident I 'll get a good outcome . One of the reasons we do n't talk about the contingency plan too much is that we do n't want people to think it [ pulling out with no deal ] is what we are trying to do . '' 1 Article 50 is passed without a hitch Government 's best scenario . MPs would debate , then pass the Bill , rejecting the amendments and sending it back to the Lords , where peers also allow it to pass in its unamended form . If this happens , the Withdrawal from the European Union ( Article 50 ) Bill will receive Royal Assent quickly and Article 50 can be triggered immediately . The Bill will have passed all stages in both Houses and will become law in exactly the same form as it was first proposed by the Government . 2 The House of Lords fights MPs over amendments If the bill passes the Commons stage today , then goes back to the Lords where it is amended again , this becomes a problem . Peers could trigger a process known as `` ping pong '' where a Bill is sent back and forth between the two chambers because nobody can agree if it should be changed or not . The two issues on which the Government has been defeated in the Lords are on `` a meaningful vote '' for MPs on the final EU deal and protections for EU citizens who are already resident here . Theresa May does n't want either to be part of this Bill because they could face legal delays and she is worried about being tied to promises she may not be able to keep . So far , it looks as though the Lords will not try to send it back a second time if the Commons passes the Bill to the Lords unamended . However , there will be some who are keen to trigger the ping-pong process which could draw out the Bill 's passage and force ministers to make concessions in order to meet their deadline for triggering the process by the end of March . 3 The House of Commons backs the Lords ' amendments If MPs decide to back the two changes made by the House of Lords when the Bill returns to the Commons later today , then that spells big problems for the Government . It is unlikely , but with such a slim majority it is possible that Mrs May could be defeated and is forced to include either one or both of the Lords ' amendments in the legislation . There will be wrangling between Tory MPs and whips today in a bid to prevent this from happening . Should the whips fail , the House of Lords , having proposed the changes in the first place , would be highly likely to support them a second time and there would be very little the Government could do . 48 hours The time it will take the EU to respond to an Article 50 notification , according to council president Donald Tusk
The House of Lords has no right to block Brexit ; Letters to the Editor BODY : SIR - Theresa May may have problems getting the Great Repeal Bill through the Commons but it surely can not be blocked by the House of Lords , notwithstanding the majority of peers said to be opposed . Page 30 of the Conservatives ' 2015 election manifesto contained a clear commitment to hold a referendum on our future membership of the EU . Such a commitment implies an obligation to honour the result , and the Bill is the instrument to achieve this . Against this background , the Lords may delay the passing of the Bill - but under the Salisbury convention in relation to manifesto commitments , which would surely be honoured by the courts , it can not block it . Patrick Balfour London W12 SIR - Those parliamentarians and others who seem intent on hindering Brexit , and specifically the enactment of Article 50 , should remember that David Cameron promised to enact it the day after the referendum in the event of a Brexit vote . Any delaying tactics are an insult to the electorate . Steve Proud Swansea SIR - The terms of negotiation for Brexit are not , in the first instance , a matter for Parliament . Negotiations with foreign powers , including the making and amendment of treaties or action necessary under them , has always been a matter within the royal prerogative . If Parliament is unhappy with the exercise of prerogative powers , it has its remedy - a vote of no confidence in Her Majesty 's ministers . That is the way our system works . Brian Watkins Chepstow , Monmouthshire SIR - Those who are supporting the High Court challenge to the Prime Minister to exercise her right to invoke Article 50 should take note of the following in Article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed by the United Nations in 1948 : `` The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government ; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures . '' Andrew Cave London NW3
The EU is fatally divided on Brexit , and that is our great opportunity ; Europe is making the most of our disunity , so we must adopt a similar strategy of divide and conquer
There are two strategies that a country can adopt during moments of national emergency . The boldest is for Left and Right to come together in a unity government , putting aside their differences to fight for a common purpose . This reduces the space for democratic dissent , and risks enshrining groupthink , but it can be a vital way forward in extreme circumstances . It allows the government to speak on behalf of the vast majority , rather than merely one party , which is especially useful in times of war . Herbert Henry Asquith forged a coalition with Labour and the Conservatives between May 1915 and December 1916 , which continued following his replacement by David Lloyd George . It was triumphantly re-elected after the war and the UK retained a government of national unity until 1922 , allowing it to navigate Ireland 's independence . Our most famous government of national unity was Winston Churchill 's all-party coalition from 1940 until 1945 : it would have been impossible to defeat the Nazis without it . We have also had unity governments , albeit less successfully , in times of intense economic crisis . Starting in 1931 , there was a succession of National Governments , led by Ramsay MacDonald , Stanley Baldwin and then Neville Chamberlain . Coalitions frayed over time but the basic idea - that the challenge was too great , the ideological divisions within rather than between parties too intractable - continued to guide how administrations were put together . We ended up with a cut-down version in 2010 in the shape of the Tory-Lib Dem coalition , tasked with slashing the deficit at a time when there were real doubts about the UK 's solvency . For better or worse , our politicians have embraced the other , more traditional approach since the Brexit vote : they have kept fighting among themselves , while swathes of the establishment want to cancel the great democratic uprising of 2016 . Only the Remainers are working in cross-party fashion , with close contact between Blairites , Remainer Tories and Lib Dems . Theresa May 's strategy , as well as Jeremy Corbyn 's , has been to pretend to normalise the extraordinary : Brexit is merely one policy among many , subject to the usual Westminster games , rather than an all-consuming issue that requires intense cross-party cooperation . The result has been to present an amateurish , uncertain picture to the world , with damaging short-term consequences . The Cabinet is a warring coalition involving the whole spectrum of Brexiteers and Remainers : it has no agreed view of what the ideal end-state should look like , as the negotiators in Brussels understand too well . When one adds the fact that we do n't have a strong , charismatic Prime Minister capable of leading the nation or selling her way forward to the country , it is hardly surprising that it has taken so long for the Government to achieve so little , culminating in a financial offer that could have been made nine months ago . But while we remain hopelessly divided , little attention has been devoted to the fact that the EU is in an even greater mess . We do n't know what we want , but neither do they , and that is our greatest opportunity . Forget Left-Right cleavages : European politics has taken on a matrix-like structure . Some governments want much more European integration and a superstate ; others want less or the same as now . Some believe that Brexit will help achieve their vision ( regardless of whether that is more or less EU ) ; others that it will hinder it . The question , to the integrationists , is whether the EU can ever fulfil its imperial , continental potential if we leave , or whether it can possibly fulfil it if we do n't . Our departure would represent a crippling blow , the loss of a central economic , financial , military and cultural power ; yet the referendum suggests that Charles de Gaulle was right and that we were never going to fit into the EU , seeking to delay and block its gradual mutation from economic market to full-on technocratic Euro-state . To Eurosceptics in the EU , Brexit is either good news ( a great precedent ) or a disaster ( the loss of a principal ally ) . Most EU governments believe that keeping the best possible relations with the UK when we leave makes sense ; others seem up for a fight , however suicidal . Opposition parties often disagree , and governments themselves are riven with splits . Part of the difficulty is that similar tactics can signify opposite end-goals . Threatening the UK with a trade war may be seen as a ploy to frighten us into staying put , or as a means to enrage us into the cleanest of Brexits . Emotions are running high : we often confuse spite and anger from Europeans who feel jilted with a calculated attempt at `` punishing '' us . Take France : what does Emmanuel Macron really think of Brexit ? My own suspicion , informed in part from his autobiography , is that he would like us to leave . Some Eastern European countries do n't want us to go . Others , such as the Dutch and Danes , will be willing to work with us if we do . The German view , if there is one these days , is unclear . Ireland is pursuing a high-stakes game of brinkmanship but clearly would prefer us not to leave . As the second phase of the talks looms , the Foreign Office should focus on determining which European leaders believe that a liberal Brexit would be in their own countries ' interests , and try to work with them to facilitate the smoothest possible departure . Anything could happen , especially if the talks break down : Brexit is an event of such magnitude that our political parties are unlikely to survive it unscathed . If , heaven forbid , a second referendum were held , and we were to vote , once again , to Leave , as I hope and expect , it would be hard to see how Britain would be able to avoid a government of national unity and the complete reconfiguration of our parties . In the meantime , the EU is making the most of our disunity , so we must do the same with their own irreconcilable positions . The next phase of the negotiations will be very different , so now is the time to divide and conquer , or at least to seek to build a new national coalition that supports a genuine , open Brexit . FOLLOW Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Carney : Boom in economy is being stifled by Brexit
BRITAIN 'S economy would be `` booming '' if not for Brexit , the governor of the Bank of England has claimed . Mark Carney said businesses were waiting for the outcome of Theresa May 's negotiations with the EU before making investment decisions , which was slowing down economic growth . He said the Bank 's predictions for foreign investment in Britain was 20 per cent lower than before the referendum . Speaking on ITV 's Peston on Sunday , he said : `` Since the referendum , what we 're seeing is that business investment has picked up , but it has n't picked up to any of the extent that one would have expected given how strong the world is , how easy financial conditions are , how high profitability is and how little spare capacity they have . '' Acknowledging the strength of the economy , Mr Carney warned : `` It should really be booming , but it 's just growing . I think we know why that 's the case , because they 're waiting to see the nature of the deal with the European Union . It 's the most important investment destination and [ businesses ] need to know transition and end state . Everybody knows this , the Government knows it and is working on it , UK businesses know it and the Europeans know it . '' Asked if the economy would take a hit if the UK left the EU without a Brexit deal , he said : `` In the short term , without question . If we have materially less access [ to the EU 's single market ] than we have now , this economy is going to need to reorient , and during that period of time it will weigh on growth . '' He added that in the event of a bad Brexit deal , the Bank would not be able to cut future interest rates because of inflationary pressure . Damien Moore , the Conservative MP , responded : `` Carney and others were saying the economy would suffer until the Brexit vote and quite the contrary has happened . '' George Freeman : Page 18
The overlooked Brexit bargains that allow low-risk trust to eye an 8pc yield ; QuestorTrust Bargains Richard Evans The big banks do n't want to lend on commercial property , so this trust can earn 8pc on its mortgages
THE Brexit vote caused chaos in London 's commercial property market but it also gave rise to some intriguing opportunities for clever fund managers . While those who ran Britain 's `` open-ended '' property funds - which allow investors to get their money out on a daily basis - were forced to suspend trading , their counterparts in the investment trust world were free to go hunting for bargains . The opportunities have not been restricted to buying actual real estate : a handful of investment companies put their money into property-related debt - effectively mortgages or bonds . The one we feature today , Real Estate Credit Investments ( RECI ) , has spoken of a `` unique opportunity '' to make handsome returns by lending to `` opportunistic buyers looking at UK property at this attractive entry point '' - reduced prices brought about by Brexit . Lenders such as RECI can charge high interest rates on relatively low-risk loans because traditional lenders have largely abandoned this specialist market as they seek to shrink their balance sheets . `` The retrenchment of traditional lenders in the UK real estate lending sphere has , in our view , accelerated during the last year , '' Cheyne Capital Management , which runs the trust , wrote in the annual report in March . `` This is due to increasing regulatory pressures on banks and the impact of Brexit . `` If anything , we note a growth in the number of opportunistic buyers looking at UK property at this attractive entry point . This has left established lenders , such as RECI , with a unique opportunity to significantly increase [ their ] presence in the market without compromising on risk or returns . '' The firm added : `` Indeed , in the current climate , RECI has the opportunity to seek a lower-risk profile for its deals , while maintaining , if not improving on , the economic return and the structural terms of its deals . `` We believe that the opportunity set available to RECI today , for the UK market , may be as compelling as that present in 2008 and 2009 in the immediate aftermath of the global financial crisis . '' The fund manager gave the example of one £20m loan in April . It was for just 40pc of the property value , with the owner and other lenders ranking behind RECI in the event of default - but the return is expected to be 8pc a year . This kind of figure is normally associated with highly risky assets , not secured lending on London property when other parties have to lose 60pc of the asset 's value before any impact is felt . Across the £113m loan portfolio as a whole , RECI has lent about 69pc of the value of the properties concerned . The trust also owns about £50m in bonds backed by residential or commercial property . Some were bought below par value , which offers some limited scope for capital growth . The trust currently yields a highly attractive 6.6pc but there are good reasons to expect that figure to rise to about 8pc or perhaps even more , said James Burns , who holds it in multimanager portfolios he runs for Smith & Williamson . `` The trust used to have some expensive preference shares in issue , but they were redeemed last month , '' he said . `` These prefs cost 8pc a year but the fund manager expects to refinance at less than 2pc . `` The other change is that the management fee will in future be calculated as a percentage of net assets , not the higher gross assets figure . Taken together , these two developments could see the yield rise by between 1.5 and two percentage points , so it could reach 8pc or more at the current share price . '' He said this would amount to `` equity-like returns for non-equity assets '' and added that the portfolio should hold up well in any sell-off thanks to the conservative lending . Unusually for this column , the trust currently trades at a small premium . But the premium can be expected to rise if the dividends are increased as expected . Questor says : buy Ticker : RECI Share price at close : 169.25p Investment trust news Temple Bar is to borrow £25m for 30 years at 2.99pc , replacing a £25m 9.875pc debenture . Merchants will borrow £35m over 35 years at 2.96pc . Other things being equal , cheap refinancings can be expected to improve returns . Electra has announced the results of a strategic review . Key numbers Market value : £215.1m Year of listing : 2005 Discount : 2.9pc premium Ave discount over past year : 1.1pc premium Yield : 6.6pc Most recent year 's dividend : 11.1p Annual charge : 2.24pc not actual loans have last Management , trust , wrote Real Estate Credit Investments Buy Opportunistic property buyers need credit - and will pay for it Dyson Portfolio Dyson
Scotland All EU citizens in Britain to get full rights ; 3 million EU citizens will be able to stay
BRITAIN plans to grant the right to remain in the UK to nearly a million EU citizens who have not achieved the five-year residency qualification as part of plans to kick-start Brexit negotiations within days , The Daily Telegraph can reveal . The proposal will be part of a `` generous '' package of measures that will offer to guarantee the rights of all 3million European Union citizens in the UK . Cabinet ministers are expected to debate the measures next week ahead of talks in Brussels where the fate of British and EU expats on both sides of the Channel will be top of the agenda . Officials sources added that the UK will offer to grant EU citizens `` full equivalence '' with the rights of UK citizens after Brexit , at the end of March 2019 . In a third olive branch to Brussels , the UK is preparing to create a `` light touch '' approach to establishing whether EU citizens are eligible to remain . EU citizens had raised concerns over an 85-page residency form , but official sources said this had already been `` radically simplified '' so applicants could automatically skip sections not relevant to their circumstances . To make things even easier for EU migrants , sources said that a new system will rely on HMRC tax databases to establish simply if someone has been resident . This would go a long way to meeting the EU demand that its migrants in Britain should be given residence after Brexit even if they do not actually have documents `` evidencing that right '' . The Telegraph also understands - subject to a decision to be taken by the new government - that Britain is prepared to compromise over the so-called `` cut-off date '' when EU citizens will be eligible for full rights . Hardliners had argued that anyone who arrived after the Brexit vote on June 24 last Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 year should have known the rules would change , but British negotiators are expected to take a softer approach , perhaps with the cut-off date being the day Article 50 was triggered in March . `` It would be reasonable to argue anyone who arrived after that date could reasonably have foreseen that the rules were going to change , '' a second source with knowledge of the Brexit preparations said . The EU side is demanding that any EU citizen who arrives in Britain up until Brexit day should be granted full rights , but Britain fears this could provoke a last-minute rush . Even so , officials say that the UK `` has not ruled out '' conceding this as a goodwill gesture . Figures from the Oxford-based Migration Observatory estimate that there are some 975,000 EU migrants in the UK who have not met the five-year residency test . This group will be allowed to remain under the plans . Britain will , however , stick to several red lines most notably refusing to submit to EU demands that the European Court of Justice should be the ultimate arbiter of any Article 50 agreement . The UK will also balk at any attempts by the EU to create a `` special class '' of EU citizen after Brexit who would enjoy better rights than UK citizens in a way sources describe as `` clearly not fair '' . This is expected to include removing the rights of EU migrants to claim child benefit for children who are not living in Britain , and the automatic right to bring non-EU spouses into Britain .
Scotland Viscount arrested over 'racist threats ' to Brexit campaigner
AN ARISTOCRAT has been charged with sending racially aggravated messages directed at the anti-Brexit court campaigner Gina Miller . Rhodri Colwyn Philipps , the 4th Viscount St Davids , was charged yesterday with sending malicious communications with racially aggravated factors , the Metropolitan Police said . Lord St Davids , 50 , of Knightsbridge , London , who also holds the titles Lord Strange of Knockin , Lord Hungerford , and Lord de Moleyns , is known as a keen polo player . He once owned a sprawling property in West Sussex known as Strange Place . Ms Miller , 51 , complained of receiving a series of racist messages after her decision to spearhead the legal challenge to the EU referendum vote , which resulted in an historic Supreme Court defeat for the Government over Brexit in January . A Guyana-born mother of three , she became the face of the first successful legal battle against Brexit , but said in a radio interview that it had resulted in her becoming `` apparently the most hated woman in Britain '' . Lord St Davids , whose family motto is Ducit Amor Patriae , `` Patriotism is my motive '' , was arrested by officers from the Met 's Operation Falcon on January 25 after a complaint was received concerning alleged threats made online against a 51-year-old woman . He is a member of one of the oldest aristocratic families in Wales , which dates back to the Normans . Members of the family have served as MPs and sat in the Lords . Ms Miller has previously said that she has had to spend £60,000 on security after receiving threats , but they did not deter her from pursuing the Brexit case . She argued that the UK would be deprived of important , constitutional rights if Article 50 was triggered , such as the right to free movement , free movement of goods , and the right to freedom of services across Europe . Lord St Davids has been bailed to appear at Westminster Magistrates ' Court on April 4 .
Britain takes charge of its borders ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : For a long time we had the phrase `` Brexit means Brexit '' . It was powerful in its simplicity , but became disconcerting in its lack of detail . Then Theresa May , both in a long speech and in Parliament , provided that detail , fleshing out the substantive elements of Britain 's departure from the European Union . A slavish devotion to neither the single market nor the customs union would stand between this country and full sovereign control of its own borders and laws . Now we are seeing the first practical implementation of that policy . Taking back control of British borders inevitably means new EU migrants no longer having automatic right to remain permanently in this country . But from when ? Much sooner than expected , it seems . Not at the end of the two-year negotiation period that will follow the triggering of Article 50 next month , but at the very moment it is triggered , in little more than a fortnight perhaps . This is both legal - as the implementation of the new controls will only take effect after Brexit - and sensible , as waiting two years might encourage a large number of immigrants from poorer parts of the EU . For those who once hinted darkly that the Government under Mrs May , who voted to Remain , was dithering , or that `` Brexit means Brexit '' was a formulation that disguised a vacuum , it is a significant turnaround . Instead of deploring her hesitancy , they must celebrate her decisiveness about one of the principal drivers of discontent with our membership of the EU . But there are also questions . Are British border forces up to the task of monitoring and recording who arrives before - and after - the cut-off date ? Will we see an influx in the coming days ? And what other differences , such as limited access to benefits , will there be for those who arrive afterwards ? How will those who `` overstay '' be removed ? Mrs May has rightly said that she wants exit negotiations with the EU to be as harmonious and mutually beneficial as possible . Yet in this development there is ample scope for bad blood to accrue . Given that more than one million Britons are resident in EU nations , Mrs May must now display the same deft talent for calming agitated EU leaders as she has in reassuring Brexiteers concerned that she might not prosecute their cause with the necessary diligence . It was tempting to think that Article 50 would be the end of the drama . In fact , the hard work is about to begin .
Sterling effort or pound down ? Analysts split over currency path
CURRENCY experts at Bank of America believe the pound 's post-referendum plunge will be short-lived and no doubt some company bosses , including Ryanair chief Michael O'Leary , will be hoping they are right . While exporters have been helped by the pound 's weakness , Europe 's biggest airline yesterday joined a host of other firms , including rivals easyJet and British Airways ' owner International Airlines Group , as well as retailer Sports Direct and cake maker Premier Foods , that have been hurt by a sell-off that has seen sterling plumb 31-year lows against the US dollar . Given the carnage sterling 's fall has caused some companies , Bank of America 's bullish assessment of the currency 's prospects will have come as a welcome relief . According to the bank 's strategists Athanasios Vamvakidis and Kamal Sharma , the pound - which is trading at about $ 1.2455 against the greenback - will hit a low of $ 1.15 before rallying sharply to $ 1.35 or even $ 1.40 if London secures a smooth Brexit . In the long run , the Bank of America experts say they `` doubt that the markets will be in a perpetual state of panic over every Brexit -related headline '' . However , Kit Juckes , of Societe Generale , said that the pound is `` still on track to spend much of 2017 in the $ 1.20 to $ 1.25 range '' . Last week , Deutsche Bank analysts also advised clients to `` stay short the pound '' . While they agreed with Bank of America that `` clarity on a transitional arrangement between the UK and EU '' would be a `` key stabiliser '' , they believe such a deal `` seems unlikely '' . Leaving the EU 's single market , in a so-called `` hard Brexit '' , will also be bad for sterling , they said . `` There are no fallback options for hard Brexit , '' analysts warned . `` Negotiating multiple free trade deals in parallel with EU talks over a two-year time frame is neither realistic nor good policy . '' Meanwhile , Credit Agricole analysts cautioned yesterday that the likelihood the Bank of England will keep interest rates at record lows for the foreseeable future , combined with the looming EU exit negotiations , will also keep a lid on sterling . `` With Brexit-related uncertainty unlikely to fall with actual exit negotiations from the EU drawing closer and as the Bank of England is unlikely to make a case of higher rate expectations any time soon , we believe GBP downside remains at risk , '' they said .
A defining challenge for Mrs May ; ESTABLISHED 1855 BODY : Theresa May opens the Tory conference tomorrow - a conference that presents her first real chance to define her premiership and detail her admirably radical agenda . First , however , she has some prior business to take care of . Mrs May probably does not want to be defined solely by Brexit , but she does need to give significant indications as to how she sees Britain 's future relationship with Europe when it comes to trade and immigration . Make that clear at the start of the conference and she can then focus attention on her personal philosophy - and how it relates to tackling Britain 's many domestic challenges . Some nonsense is being spoken about the EU negotiations , particularly the suggestion that there is a diametric choice to be made between a hard or soft Brexit . What is sometimes called soft is barely Brexit at all ; what is sometimes called hard is a mix of proposals that are either logical or so radical that they are not even on the table . But saying that Brexit will mean Brexit is clearly not good enough . Enigma wo n't satisfy the public ; business needs to know what it has to look forward to . Nissan , for instance , has suspended new investment in Sunderland while it awaits the outcome of Brexit talks - and warns against allowing tariffs to be placed on its products . So Mrs May will have to use her opening address on Sunday afternoon to lay out goals even if she can not go into specifics . Those goals are interrelated . Many Leave voters expect immigration to be controlled , which means ending free movement . If free movement goes then it is highly likely that membership of the single market will be challenged by other EU members . Membership of the customs union must surely be rejected by the UK . And if Britain is to decouple from the EU then it must be ready to go straight out into the world and negotiate new free trade arrangements . This the country is well placed to do . Several nations have indicated that they want to strike deals ; some have even offered to lend Britain the negotiators it lacks after decades of Brussels being in charge . If Mrs May can offer a positive vision for Brexit , then the rest of conference can consider her personal priorities for legislation . Her proposals have been splendid . Grammar and faith schools will be given the go ahead - a popular move because they happen to get very good results . Local people will receive financial rewards for backing fracking , which will hopefully promote the shale revolution . Foxhunting will get a second shot at legalisation , overturning the absurd and prejudiced ban . And the Prime Minister has shown that she is sensitive to the challenge thrown down by her predecessor to make Toryism relevant to the working class . Mrs May has repeatedly said that too many feel locked out of power and opportunity . Too few voters are saving money for their retirement . Too few are getting on the housing ladder . Both problems can be addressed with changes to tax and regulation that encourage investment . As for housing , supply has to be increased in a way that protects our beautiful landscape and provides the variety of high quality yet affordable new builds that people actually want . One prime minister after another has promised action on this and failed to deliver . The problem in the past was partly a preference for style over substance - for winning short-term poll bounces rather than dedicating oneself to the spade work . Mrs May , however , seems to be a different kind of politician . She keeps her own counsel , which some find frustrating , but tends to get things done . On Wednesday , she will give her final , keynote address to the conference and she would do well to link her personal biography to her determination to help others flourish . Brexit is a chance to liberate and expand British business . Given a sense of direction on that , the country can digest her other plans to expand opportunity and give people a stake in the democratic capitalist system . A system that has helped elevate a vicar 's daughter to leader of a major world power .
Scotland New leader promises to protect 'precious bond ' with Scotland
THERESA MAY pledged to defend the Union in her first speech as Prime Minister yesterday as Nicola Sturgeon warned her claim that `` Brexit means Brexit '' does not apply in Scotland because it voted to remain in the EU . Mrs May promised to lead a `` one nation '' government and acknowledged the task she faces in keeping the UK intact as she arrived in Downing Street . Speaking outside No 10 , she said : `` Not everybody knows this but the full title of my party is the Conservative and Unionist Party and that word 'Unionist ' is very important to me . `` It means we believe in the Union , the precious , precious bond between England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , but it means something else that is just as important . `` It means we believe in a union not just between the nations of the United Kingdom but between all of our citizens - every one of us - whoever we are and wherever we 're from . '' Ms Sturgeon said she would seek talks with Mrs May in the next few days and would demand a central role in negotiations with Europe . She also repeated her warning that a second independence referendum may be the best way forward for Scotland , despite a warning from a leading economist that it was `` far from certain '' an independent Scotland in the EU was even an `` achievable aim '' . Responding to the Prime Minister 's claim that Brexit means Brexit , she added : `` Well , she has a mandate for that as far as England and Wales is concerned , but not for Scotland , not for Northern Ireland and not for Gibraltar . From my point of view , from the Scottish perspective , Remain means Remain . '' The SNP leader , who earlier met Mark Carney , the governor of the Bank of England , said she believed it was possible Scotland could remain in the Europe as part of the UK . But she added : `` If Scotland concludes that independence is the best way forward , once the UK government triggers Article 50 , we will have a referendum within that two year process . '' Meanwhile , a prominent economist said in a new paper that the most desirable outcome of Brexit would be achieving Norwegian status , by joining the European Economic Area , which would also mean accepting freedom of movement . Prof Jim Gallagher , of Oxford University 's Nuffield College , also warned of the major difficulties that would face an independent Scotland , including a hard border with England , and uncertainty over currency and even membership of the EU . He said it was a `` fantasy '' to imagine the UK could negotiate its own , bebespoke , free trade agreement with the EU in any reasonable timescale . He added that North Sea oil revenues were now virtually zero while Scotland 's fiscal deficit was huge and proportionately twice as large as the UK 's `` The Scottish Government 's single most important priority should be to press the UK as hard as possible to take the Norway option , or something very close to it , '' Prof Gallagher said . `` If it can not achieved , Scotland faces the choice of a hard border at a European airport ( if in the UK ) or a hard border at a new Hadrian 's Wall . '' He concluded : `` No responsible Scottish government could promote independence without being sure of Scotland 's position in the EU and without knowing the likely position of the rest of the United Kingdom in relation to free movement and trade and without a practicable economic plan for public spending and the currency . '' SNP 'scaremongering ' claim : Page 12 'The Scottish Government 's most important priority should be to press the UK to take the Norway option '
Republicans call for AusExit from Britain
AUSTRALIA 'S republican movement says membership has surged in the wake of the Brexit vote , as Australians question the benefits of being part of `` little Britain '' . An `` AusExit '' campaign , including calls to remove the Union Jack from the flag and replace the Queen as head of state , has gained momentum in recent days . Peter FitzSimons , the chairman of the Australian Republican Movement , said the country had belonged to the British empire , but historic ties between the nations had become less relevant because `` Great Britain barely exists any more '' . `` It 's one thing for the monarchists to say 'we should be staying so very closely aligned to Great Britain ' ... but how do you feel about staying so closely aligned to little Britain ? '' he told ABC Radio . `` From the moment that Brexit came through , social media came alive , with people saying 'this is ridiculous , let us be our own people , let us get away from this ' . '' Mr FitzSimons said if Australia abandoned the British monarchy it would be a unifying moment of national pride rather than a `` divisive and horrible campaign as was Brexit '' . `` [ We 're ] not looking to Brexit as the model at all , '' he said . `` We 're just saying that it 's ludicrous in the 21st century to say that Australia can not do better than find our heads of state from one family of English aristocrats living in a palace in London . '' However , the monarchist movement said Britain 's vote `` has nothing whatsoever to do with changing from a constitutional monarchy to a republic '' . `` For the republicans to say that it gives an excuse to become a republic is total , apparent nonsense , '' said Philip Benwell , the chairman of the Australian Monarchist League .
