Treasury ' talk down Brexit ' ; official be fixate on negative of leave EU , say May ally Nick Timothy Hammond accuse of being ' on manoeuvre ' as well as Johnson both minister warn to ' stop their game ' or risk bad deal from Brussels Brexit rival urge to stop squabbling and support PM
the Treasury ' S reluctance even to ` ` mention the positive ' ' of leave the European Union risk Britain receive a bad Brexit deal , Theresa May ' s former chief of staff warn today . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Nick Timothy say that Philip Hammond ' S department have fail to emphasise the ` ` opportunity of Brexit ' ' and accuse the Chancellor of be on ` ` manoeuvre ' ' . ahead of a key speech by Mrs May in Florence tomorrow , Mr Timothy say that the Prime Minister ` ` deserve the full support of her minister , Leavers and Remainers alike ' ' . Boris Johnson be accuse of undermine Mrs May ' s Brexit strategy when he set out his own vision in an unauthorised 4,200-word article last week . but Mr Timothy ' S article suggest that Mr Hammond ' s failure to promote the positive of Brexit have be equally damaging to the Prime Minister . Mr Timothy say : ` ` Boris Johnson and Philip Hammond ... must understand that the sure route to a bad deal , or no deal at all , be to go on behave as they be . they must stop their game now , because the stake for Britain be too high . ' ' Mrs May ' s Brexit speech in Florence be intend to break the deadlock in negotiation with Brussels . the Prime Minister will discuss the speech with her Cabinet this morning after secure a truce with Mr Johnson over the country ' s future payment to the EU . she be expect to tell her minister she will try to resolve the deadlock in Europe by bypass Michel Barnier , the European Union ' S chief Brexit negotiator , and liaise directly with European leader include Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron . she say ahead of her trip to the UN this week : ` ` the negotiation be structure within the European Union so of course the council have delegate a mandate to the commission , the commission have appoint Michel Barnier , but the decision will always be one take by leader . ' ' Mr Johnson , who be say to be prepare to resign as Foreign Secretary over concern that Mrs May be move towards a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' , before he step back from the brink , will now appear alongside her when she speak in Florence . he will be join by Mr Hammond , the Chancellor , after a summer of bitter fighting between the two man over Britain ' s post-Brexit future . last night , Mr Johnson and Mrs May appear together in public for the first time since the Foreign Secretary ' S article . they awkwardly greet one another at the UN General Assembly . Mr Johnson be last night expect to join Mrs May on her flight back from New York , with the two planning to hold talk during the journey . the Prime Minister be expect tomorrow to announce plan to pay ( Euro ) 20billion to Brussels during the transition period up to @card@ before end substantial payment . however , even before she have make the speech , senior EU official tell the Telegraph that they expect the UK to make more significant commitment to a Brexit ` ` divorce bill ' ' on top of the transitional payment . a senior EU diplomat involve in Brexit talk say : ` ` Goodwill gesture be not enough - it be very doubtful that EU member state would consider that offer [ ( Euro ) 20billion ] to be sufficient progress on its own . ' ' write in this newspaper , Mr Timothy say Mrs May must use her speech to set out the broad outline of Britain ' s post-Brexit relationship with the European Union . he say : ` ` the Prime Minister do not need to set out the exact solution tomorrow , but she can set out the government ' S parameter . these detail be important but they be inherently technical . that , together with the Treasury ' s reluctance to even mention the positive of leave the EU , such as the Brexit dividend , be why the government have not talk positively often enough about the opportunity of Brexit . ` ` in that respect , the Foreign Secretary be right in his Daily Telegraph column last Saturday . but this negotiation be complex , and we can not wish our way to future prosperity : we need a serious plan to cut through the complexity . ' ' Mr Timothy say it would be ` ` unacceptable ' ' for Britain to have to seek the agreement of the EU to change its law after Brexit . Mr Timothy say Mrs May need the support of both Mr Johnson and Mr Hammond , who be bitterly at odd over Brexit . Mr Hammond favour a ` ` businessfirst ' ' Brexit , with a lengthy transitional period , after which the UK will stay as close to the Single market as possible . he be think to want a version of the ` ` Swiss model ' ' , in which the UK would mirror EU regulation and continue to pay into the EU ' s budget in order to access the Single Market . by contrast , Mr Johnson and other eurosceptic Cabinet minister believe the UK should follow the ` ` Canada model ' ' , which would remove tariff on good without the need for future budget contribution . the conflicting vision of Brexit have lead to high-profile public intervention by both man to promote their view . the Daily Telegraph understand that Mr Johnson have secure the support of four other eurosceptic Cabinet minister if Mrs May appear to be move towards a soft Brexit . it come as Marina Wheeler , Mr Johnson ' S wife and a QC , say in the Spectator that Britain must leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice after Brexit , warn that the issue of sovereignty have ` ` mysteriously disappear ' ' from the Brexit debate . meanwhile , a senior EU official accuse Mr Johnson of be ` ` completely out of the loop on Brexit negotiation ' ' . Phil Hogan , the Irish EU agriculture commissioner , say the Foreign Secretary have become a ` ` diminished figure ' ' who be act ` ` strangely ' ' . he add that the ` ` sign will not be good ' ' for future EU relation if Mrs May be as ` ` vague ' ' as Mr Johnson in negotiation on issue such as the Irish border .
City ignore Whitehall charm offensive as Brexit patience wane ; despite the good effort of politician , many bank have move closer to the exit door , say Lucy Burton
when Brexit Secretary David Davis make a speech at the London headquarters of Swiss bank UBS earlier this month , there be one message he want the City of London to hear loud and clear - it be not possible to recreate , or duplicate , another lead financial centre in Europe . it be not the first time financial institution have hear that message since the EU referendum . one of Britain ' s most successful sector , make up 10.7pc of the UK economy , the industry have be subject to a charm offensive from senior government figure for month . Chancellor Philip Hammond use his Budget last week to reassure Britain ' s £7 trillion asset management sector that it be go to get more attention after Brexit , while Theresa May meet with Jamie Dimon , the boss of US bank JP Morgan , two week ago . but it be n't enough . JP Morgan have now begin to tell staff whether or not they will be relocate to the EU , while Goldman Sachs confirm last week that its post-Brexit hub would be in both Frankfurt and Paris . Lloyd Blankfein , one of the most powerful banker in the world , have be publicly air his Brexit concern and support for the two EU city on Twitter . ` ` Brexit be force us to decentralise our activity , ' ' he tell French newspaper Le Figaro last week . ` ` we be get closer to a critical moment when decision will have to be make . ' ' the charm offensive be expect to ramp up in the come month as more institution be force to trigger their contingency plan due to a lack of clarity on a transition period or a deal that work for them . although European Council president Donald Tusk say last week that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' could be make on the Brexit talk when EU leader meet on Dec @card@ , many in the City have already make their plan for life after March @card@ . ` ` whatever the outcome of Brexit negotiation , the EU27 have already win business from the City and now it be just a question of how much , ' ' say Stephen Burke , director at consultant Cordium . many be frustrate by the lack of detail so far table . the Bank of England warn last month that as many as @card@ UK finance role could be lose without a trade deal , a number that could rise if the City do n't find an alternative to the so-called passporting right currently enable firm to offer service across the bloc . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , make clear last week that those passport will not be valid post-Brexit . these be the issue Hammond and May will likely address with the sector in the come month , aware that financial institution have run out of time . in a report send to policymaker across Europe last week , think-tank New Financial say it be hard to see how an agreement on a transitional period could be reach before next summer . ` ` perhaps we have move through the denial and anger phase into acceptance and action , ' ' say Steve Grob , who be in charge of strategy for trading technology firm Fidessa . ` ` nearly all firm be anticipate move some of their operation to Europe . ' ' some of these move might be big than necessary . London be one of the most expensive city in the world , and for year bank have look to relocate support staff out of the City or cut role altogether as machine get more sophisticated . with these issue rumble in the background , Brexit could be a handy excuse to make unpopular change . ` ` Brexit mean that question [ over cost ] be be ask more frequently and with great urgency , ' ' say New Financial founder William Wright . ` ` Brexit could be a political excuse for restructuring . ' ' indeed , Brexit be not the only trigger for change . Peter Cruddas , the founder of online trading firm CMC Markets , say if it be n't Brexit it would be something else weigh on chief executive ' mind , while one banking head say his client be look to move business out of the UK not because of Brexit but over fear Jeremy Corbyn could become prime minister . other be focus effort on Mifid @card@ , a regulatory change . ` ` give the number of Mifid @card@ issue this side of Christmas , regulation be overshadow Brexit at the moment , ' ' say Paul Mumford , a fund manager at Cavendish Asset Management . ` ` while there be some sound and fury regard move to Paris and Frankfurt , everything be still very cautious and exploratory . it ' S no small thing to simply set up in another city with @card@ or however many people . ' ' ' perhaps we have move through the denial and anger phase into acceptance and action '
Scotland May : I ' m stick to my Brexit blueprint ; PM want to keep pre-election plan to leave single market despite threat to soften exit ; May adamant Brexit talk stay on course
Theresa May have signal she will not compromise over Brexit despite grow demand for a change in approach in the wake of last week ' s election result . the Prime Minister be understand to be determine to enter talk in Brussels next week with a threat that Britain be prepare to leave the EU without secure a trade deal . she also wish to stick to the preelection Conservative plan for the country to leave the single market and custom union to allow the UK to negotiate free-trade partnership around the world and control immigration . the Daily Telegraph reveal yesterday that senior Conservative and Labour figure have begin private talk over a new cross-party plan to soften Brexit . however , within hour of detail of the meeting emerge , the Prime Minister appoint Steve Baker , the leader of Parliament ' s most prominent Eurosceptic group , to a key ministerial post in the Brexit department . the decision to push ahead with the original Brexit blueprint delight leave campaigner in the Cabinet , but cause disquiet among some junior member and other senior Tory figure . a senior Brexit minister be sack and another resign reportedly because of concern that Mrs May ' S plan would face stiff opposition in the Lords . Lord Bridges , a Remain-supporting minister , quit on ` ` policy ground ' ' because he become ` ` convinced Brexit could n't work ' ' , accord to report . Sir John Major urge the Prime Minister to seek a cross-party consensus , say : ` ` I think the concept of what we crudely call a hard Brexit be become increasingly unsustainable ... a hard Brexit be not endorse by the electorate in this particular election . ` ` it would be very wise indeed to bring in much wide parliamentary opinion so that when the Prime Minister have a deal , she can be certain that she ' s go to have parliamentary and public support for that deal . ' ' in public , Mrs May and her minister be tone down the rhetoric they use to describe Brexit . Mrs May use her first commons appearance since the election to call for MP to ` ` come together in a spirit of national unity ' ' , while ardent leave campaigner Michael Gove , the new Environment Secretary , say the hung parliament mean the government would have to ` ` work with everyone ' ' . Guy Verhofstadt , the lead Brexit negotiator for the European Parliament , say that Brussels be ` ` impatiently wait for the negotiate position of the UK Government ' ' . he add : ` ` the current uncertainty can not continue . ' ' meanwhile , Germany ' s finance minister , Wolfgang Schauble , mischievously suggest it be not too late for continue on Page @card@ Iain Duncan Smith : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Britain to reverse its decision to leave the EU . he say : ` ` if they want to change their decision , of course , they would find open door . ' ' speak after a meeting in Paris with France ' S President Emmanuel Macron , Mrs May say Brexit talk would begin next week and that ` ` the timetable for the negotiation remain on course ' ' . ask about Mr Schauble ' S comment , Mr Macron say : ` ` of course the door remain open , always open until the Brexit negotiation come to an end . ' ' Mrs May , however , tell minister yesterday that she would not be scrap the Brexit White Paper , publish in February , which promise to withdraw from the single market , tackle immigration and leave the custom union . Brexit talk , however , may face delay if the Conservatives have still not reach an agreement with the Democratic Unionist party that will enable Mrs May to lead a minority government . a delay to the Queen ' s Speech , which have be schedule for Monday , also appear inevitable because there be no agreement between the two party on what should be in it .
' how we keep our property fund open ' ; INVESTING Fund of the Week ; Brexit cause many to shut their door - but not Kames Property Income . its manager tell Laura Suter why
the commercial property market be hit hard after the EU referendum , lead to many large fund close their portfolio , effectively lock investor in . the Kames Property Income fund remain open , however . it go into the Brexit period with 33pc of the fund in cash to meet redemption request . it also impose a ` ` fair value adjustment ' ' - in effect , an exit fee - of 10pc at its peak . it remove this adjustment at the end of September . an investor who remain in the fund throughout the Brexit period to the present would have lose 1.8pc , accord to FE Trustnet , the investment analyst . however , if they have sell at the end of September , just before the adjustment charge be scrap , they would have lose 8.8pc . David Wise run the fund with Alex Walker . however , Mr Walker be leave the company in December , to be replace by Richard Peacock , who join from Aviva Investors . Mr Wise tell Telegraph Money about his view on the property market , how hold high level of cash will affect performance and the hard month of his work life . how do you manage the fund through Brexit ? we escape the bad of it and be one of the few that stay open through the post-Brexit period . but July be one of the most challenging month of my work life . while , in general , we be very focus on the individual asset , we ' re not afraid to make some big call when we need to . one of those be on June @card@ : we be sit on 33pc in cash and other liquid investment , by contrast with very low level at one or two major competitor . however , those cash level go from 33pc to 15pc at our low point in the Brexit aftermath . but about 50pc of the money that go out of the door in that panic period have actually come back in from those same investor . have you sell any property since Brexit , and what be valuation like ? we sell four post-Brexit , all either at or above the valuation we have pre-Brexit . I ' m not say we could have sell every asset above pre-Brexit level , but we believe small asset be more resilient , and those four sale be the hard evidence of that . what ' s the outlook for the UK property market ? Brexit do cast a shadow . across the market as a whole valuation be down by around 5pc , but that mask some variation . if you look at London , perhaps the area most expose to Brexit , valuation fall have be great , although there have be some underpinning from the fall in sterling . London tend to lead the cycle in real estate , and London be get pretty late in the cycle , so one ca n't see rent rise much further . London be a very expensive place , but it be likely to get cheap , although I do n't see it fall off a cliff . in general , we be buy in location that be fundamentally cheap and can give us high income return , typically in big northern city such as Manchester and Leeds . how do your investment strategy differ from your peer ? we invest in property worth around £5m-£20m , so small asset than our peer . the return and liquidity at the low end of the market be more attractive . it mean we will never be able to take the fund beyond £1bn , so we ca n't become one of the big fund , but we do n't want to . do you worry about the effect of high cash level on performance ? our cash level be currently 30pc . if I be hold hefty cash level for five year it would be very damaging to return , but I do n't anticipate that we will have 30pc cash well into next year . I be happy with that cash level . it provide some buffer if there be any more article @card@ bump in the road , but it also give us firepower to take advantage of opportunity . we tend to do a lot of buy around Christmas , when other people in the property market put their foot up . do you have your own money in the fund ? yes . I do n't want to say exactly how much , but a reasonably significant sum . what would you have do if you have n't become a fund manager ? I do a degree in zoology and before I get into real estate I have a position to research the malaria parasite . the fund have a total cost ( the ` ` OCF ' ' or ` ` TER ' ' ) of 0.96pc a www.year.Be sure to buy the right ` ` share class ' ' , which be ` ` B ' ' . the investment shop through which you buy the fund will also levy a charge . some will charge a percentage of the amount invest , other will apply a flat annual fee . our colour code table at www.telegraph.co.uk/ investing will guide you to the cheap fund shop for your circumstance .
' the Chancellor be try to thwart Brexit ; his priority be perverse ' ; Politics Interview Jacob Rees-Mogg on how Brexit be more important than anyone other than the Queen , while issue a pointed warning to the PM
for Jacob Rees-Mogg , the glove be finally off . the newly appoint leader of a group of a @card@ Eurosceptic Tory MP be intent on ensure that Theresa May deliver the Brexit that the public vote for . he tell the Daily Telegraph that both Brexit and the Conservative party be more important than the Prime Minister ' S leadership and warn that Britain risk head for ` ` Brino ' ' - Brexit in Name only . ` ` the less of Brexit you get , the more likely you be to get Jeremy Corbyn , ' ' Mr Rees-Mogg say . ` ` if you get a good , clean Brexit , and get the advantage from it , then the chance of get Jeremy Corbyn be much diminish . ` ` if everything be delay for two year and then there ' S ' high alignment ' , you will find that by @card@ no one will have notice any difference from have leave . then what will be the point of voting for the party that ' S implement it ? I ' m against Brino . ' ' the old Etonian insist that he back the Prime Minister despite the mount call for her to quit . ` ` the PM have my full support , he say . ` ` May the PM live forever , amen , amen , Hallelujah , Hallelujah , amen . ' ' but in a pointed warning , he add : ` ` if the Conservative Party do n't deliver the Brexit that the British people vote for , the conservative will not win the next election . the leader be important , but the party be more important . Brexit be more important than anyone other than the Queen . ' ' the Prime Minister , he say , must be bold on Brexit . Mrs May have repeatedly refuse to say whether she would back the Brexit she be deliver in the event of a second referendum . ` ` my personal view be that if you be in favour of something , and if that be your policy , it ' S helpful to say so , ' ' Mr Rees-Mogg say . ` ` that ' s what I would encourage her to do . it always make sense to argue for the policy you believe in . otherwise why on earth be you implement it ? but she do have to contend with other member of the Cabinet that do n't want to do it . ' ' he reserve his strong criticism for Philip Hammond , who he say be intent on ` ` thwart ' ' Brexit and do n't actually want Britain to leave the European Union . the Chancellor ' S priority be ` ` perverse ' ' . he ' s jealous of Boris Johnson ' s ` ` charisma ' ' , and the treasury he lead be a ` ` bruise ' ' institution that be still struggle to come to term with the result of the EU referendum . last week Mr Hammond attract a furious backlash from Eurosceptic MP and Cabinet minister by suggest during a speech in Davos that Britain will only make ` ` very modest ' ' change to its relationship with the EU after Brexit . in his interview with the Telegraph , Mr Rees-Mogg mount his strong attack on the Chancellor yet . ` ` of course he be wrong . high alignment deny us Brexit . it be about obstruct Brexit . it be essentially code for say I do n't want to leave the EU , I never do and I do n't think I ' m wrong . it ' S thwart Brexit . ` ` that be the aim , to thwart Brexit . you simply end up be tie into the EU ' s rule without even have a commissioner , MEPs , attend the Council of Ministers or a judge on the European Court of Justice . ` ` with high alignment you be actually a vassal state . it ' s not what people vote for , nor be it where the opportunity be . the people who want it be the corporatists , the fat cat . it ' S why the CBI want it . ' ' ask about Mr Hammond ' s intervention in Davos , Mr Rees-Mogg add : ` ` the danger of the lack of oxygen and high altitude of Davos mean people forget the manifesto and their obligation of collective responsibility . the Chancellor ought to support government policy . that ' s his job . ' ' Mr Rees-Mogg ' S intervention and assumption of the role of leader of the Eurosceptic European Reform Group be carefully time . ` ` now the bill be through the Commons and we be into the nitty gritty of the negotiation . it ' S noticeable that the people who want to obstruct Brexit be make a lot of noise , ' ' he say . it come at a critical juncture as the Prime Minister and her Cabinet debate the shape of a transition period after Brexit and the future of Britain ' s relationship with the EU . there be significant split in Cabinet between those such as Mr Hammond and Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , who be call for high alignment , and Eurosceptics such as Michael Gove and Mr Johnson . Mr Rees-Mogg be adamant that if Britain be still subject to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , have to accept new law and pay into the EU ' S budget , it will represent a betrayal of Brexit . ` ` it would be a lie to say we have leave under those circumstance , ' ' he say . ` ` the negotiation go on now about what the implementation transition mean be very important . status quo transition would be a failure of negotiation , it would be a sign of weakness . we would not be get the Brexit people vote for . ' ' he be keen to throw his support behind Mr Johnson , who last week be roundly rebuke by Mrs May and other Cabinet minister for suggest that Britain give the NHS an extra £100million a week from the ` ` Brexit dividend ' ' . the Chancellor be the first to criticise Mr Johnson . he say : ` ` the Chancellor , of course , have important priority and the setting of the Budget be one . but if his order of priority be perverse it ' s not surprising other Cabinet minister mention it . this be n't Philip Hammond ' S money . it ' s your money , my money , the rest of the country ' S money . it be taxpayer ' money . ' ' Mr Rees-Mogg believe that Mr Johnson ' S critic be motivate by ` ` jealousy ' ' . he say : ` ` he be the one figure in British politics that people literally stop their car , get out and shake him by the hand . ' ' ask if he be refer to Mr Hammond , Mr Rees-Mogg reply : ` ` why would you think that against a man of charisma and popularity ? I ca n't understand why Philip Hammond would conceivably be jealous of Mr Johnson when he be so noticeably charismatic himself . ' ' Acid drop caustic word from ' the Mogg ' ... on alignment ' with high alignment you be actually a vassal state ' ... on the Chancellor ' I ca n't understand why Philip Hammond would be jealous of Mr Johnson when he be so charismatic himself ' ... on the Brexit negotiation ' status quo transition would be a failure ... it would be a sign of weakness ' ... on May ' s leadership ' the PM have my full support . may the PM live forever , amen , amen , Hallelujah '
boost for May as Remainers back a hard exit
Brexit survey accord to an Aug @card@ article , ` ` Boost for May as Remainers back a hard exit ' ' , an LSE/Oxford University survey of attitude to Brexit have @card@ respondent . in fact , there be @card@ . we be happy to make this clear . ? DT Dec @card@ @card@ the majority of Remain voter now back a hard Brexit and believe that Britain should take control of its border , end the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and pay little or nothing to leave the European Union . a survey of more than @card@ people by the London School of Economics and Oxford University find that @card@ per cent of Remain voter back a hard Brexit over a soft Brexit . the news represent a significant boost to Theresa May and her ambition of unite the country behind her Brexit strategy in the wake of the EU referendum vote . it come in the run-up to the publication of position paper by the Government next week which will set out Britain ' s stance on key aspect of Brexit . the YouGov survey suggest there be now little difference between Remain and leave voter on some of the most contentious issue of the EU referendum . a total of @card@ per cent of Remain voter back a Brexit deal which deliver full control over migration and lead to lower number of EU migrants.The survey also suggest that Remain voter agree with Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , that the EU should ` ` go whistle ' ' for a big Brexit divorce bill . a total of @card@ per cent of Remain voter and @card@ per cent of leave backer say that they do not think the UK should hand over any money to the EU . the position be in contrast to that of Britain ' s Brexit negotiator , who be prepare to hand over a divorce bill of more than £36billion . there be also a significant endorsement of Mrs May ' s ` ` red line ' ' that Britain will leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice - @card@ per cent of Remain voter say they would support a deal in which Britain adopt some EU law but be no longer subject to the European Court of Justice . close to @card@ per cent of leave voter support the same outcome . Thomas Leeper , one of the author of the report from the London School of Economics , say : ` ` one of the thing we be most intrigue by in these result be the degree to which Remain voter be willing to accept Brexit and the specific feature of Brexit that leave voter care the most about , such as legal sovereignty and control over immigration . ' ' Support for hard & soft Brexit policy vote to : leave Remain @card@ % pay nothing towards a Brexit Divorce bill @card@ % @card@ % leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice @card@ % @card@ % full control over border , low number of EU migrant @card@ %
Labour ' stitch-up ' wipe Brexit off the agenda ; Labour in Brighton 2017Party ' s ' gobsmacked ' MP accuse their leadership of ' manoeuvre to avoid the big issue of our time ' as annual conference decide against debate to avoid a row
labour be last night reduce to a ` ` laughing stock ' ' , in the word of its own MP , after the party decide Brexit will not be debate at this year ' s party conference . after a day in which deep division within the party over Brexit be expose , the pro-Jeremy Corbyn group Momentum tell member and union to choose other topic for debate at the conference in Brighton to avoid a public row over the big issue face the country . it come as a former Labour frontbencher suggest that managed migration be ` ` racist ' ' and Mr Corbyn come under intense pressure to commit to stay in the single market and custom union . Andrew Gwynne , Labour ' s election coordinator , admit earlier in the day that Brexit could ` ` tear the party in two ' ' if MP and party member could not reach agreement in a ` ` comradely fashion ' ' . the Labour rift over Brexit seem likely to overshadow the entire conference after @card@ MP , together with MEPs , Labour peer , trade union leader and mayor , publish an open letter in the Observer demand that Labour commit to full and permanent membership of the single market and custom union . instead , member respond by wipe Brexit off the agenda altogether . in a ballot of member Brexit do not make it into the top eight of @card@ topic offer for debate . Heidi Alexander , the Labour MP and former shadow health secretary , say she be ` ` gobsmacked ' ' that Brexit have be keep off the agenda , add : ` ` how can Labour not have a full and proper debate on Brexit policy at [ the conference ] ? we will be a laughing stock . ' ' Chris Leslie , Labour MP for Nottingham , say the decision be ` ` utterly ridiculous ' ' and that member would be shock at the party ` ` manoeuvre to avoid the big issue of our time ' ' . topic include Grenfell Tower , railway and housing will be debate instead . a Labour source say : ` ` this be mean to be a conference about democracy but it will be remember for one of the big leadership stitch-ups in recent history . party member ' right to a voice seem to extend to chant the leader ' S name and no further . ' ' Alison McGovern MP say : ` ` we need to talk about Brexit . it ' S the big issue for our country and will be the big issue for whoever be the next government . those who organise against this debate need to ask themselves what they really believe about Labour Party democracy . ' ' outside the conference hall in Brighton , argument over Brexit have dominate the first day of the Labour gathering . the letter publish in the Observer call on Labour to have the ` ` courage of its conviction ' ' on Brexit by reject a ` ` destructive Brexit ' ' that would involve leave the single market and custom union . Mr Corbyn , appear on the Andrew Marr Show on BBC , appear to be soften his stance when he fail to rule out the idea that a Brexit transifellow tion period could last for as long as @card@ year , while John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , tell ITV ' S Robert Peston that a transition of up to four year would be sensible . then Clive Lewis , the former shadow defence secretary , add further controversy by suggest people who oppose freedom of movement be racist . in a clash of view with Labour MP Caroline Flint , he tell Sky News : ` ` I actually believe in freedom of movement . you be talk about manage migration . you be not go to like to hear this , it always come back down to something the Left in this country have very much difficulty with , which be that it be ultimately about racism . it come down to racism . ' ' Today , Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , will use similarly inflammatory language when he tell delegate that the Conservatives ' Brexit policy show they have ` ` post-imperial delusion ' ' . in his conference speech - which will not be debate - he will claim that Labour be now ` ` the grown-up in the room ' ' on Brexit despite their deep division . further north-south division in the party also open up in a row over whether Sadiq Khan , the mayor of London , should be allow to speak . delegate from the north object to Mr Khan be give a slot , suggest it make the conference too Londoncentric , with the ` ` star ' ' speaker - Jeremy Corbyn , Diane Abbott , John McDonnell and Emily Thornberry - all represent constituency in the capital . Andy Burnham , the Greater Manchester mayor , have also be deny a speak slot , say he be ` ` disappointed ' ' . he say and the decision not to give one of Mr Khan ' s northern counterpart a slot suggest the party be ` ` half-hearted ' ' in its commitment to devolve power in England . editorial comment : page @card@ ' how can Labour not have a full and proper debate on Brexit policy at conference ? we will be a laughing stock '
Britain ' S future may have come and go before politician notice ; Sketch
what Labour have achieve should be impossible . yet somehow they ' ve manage it . they ' ve convinced people who be pro-Brexit that Labour be anti-Brexit - and convinced people who be anti-Brexit that Labour be pro-Brexit . or , to put it another way : they ' re alienate both the @card@ per cent and the @card@ per cent . and become the party of the @card@ per cent . on the one hand , they have Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , forensically probe for flaw in Brexit . and on the other , they have John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , who announce in London yesterday that : ` ` it ' s time we be all more positive about Brexit . ' ' to demonstrate his own positivity , Mr McDonnell promise that Labour would not block or delay Article @card@ , because to do so would put Labour not only ` ` against the majority will of the British people ' ' , but also ` ` on the side of certain corporate elite who have always have the British people at the back of the queue ' ' . which be interesting , because when he be campaign for Remain Mr McDonnell suggest that the ` ` corporate elite ' ' - or , as he call them then , the ` ` robber baron ' ' - be actually in favour of Brexit . maybe the corporate elite have switch side , too . the bulk of the shadow chancellor ' s speech yesterday be about the economy and job . a Labour government , he say , would ` ` plan for the future ' ' , ` ` intervene for the common good ' ' , and ` ` create the wellpaid job we need ' ' . yet he make this pledge without explain how Labour would tackle the great threat to job that our society face . to be fair , Mr McDonnell be n't alone in this . his counterpart in other party have say little if anything about it , too . in the next @card@ year , great number of people - workingclass and middle-class - stand to be make redundant by advance in automation , artificial intelligence and the Internet . yet major politician be barely talk about it . I suppose we ' ve be here before . mass immigration from eastern EU state begin in @card@ , but mainstream party treat it as a serious issue only after the breakthrough of Ukip a decade later . Nigel Farage may feel that he ' S now win that argument . but , if so , he ' S win it too late . there be a big crisis come - and when it arrive , it wo n't be possible to blame it on foreigner . previously , Mr McDonnell have say Labour will ` ` look at ' ' the idea of a universal basic income - which would in theory save the obsolete from destitution . provide he can work out how to pay for it , anyway . yesterday , though , we hear him mourn Britain ' s ` ` dead town centre ' ' , without note that what kill them - primarily , online shopping - be unlikely to prove a pass fad . he talk about create ` ` secure ' ' job , without explain how any job will be secure in a world where technology outperform mere human . the shadow chancellor - like the rest of the political world - sound as if he be plan for a future that have already go .
MP tell Hammond to back May over Brexit or leave Cabinet ; Road to Brexit ; Eurosceptics fear access to Single Market will cost country billion in ' nightmare scenario '
Philip Hammond must back Theresa May over Brexit or quit the Cabinet , Eurosceptic MP have warn amid mount concern over plan to pay billion of pound for access to the Single Market . the Chancellor have be accuse by Cabinet colleague of try to ` ` undermine Brexit ' ' by push for delay to Cabinet measure design to control immigration . there be also anger among Eurosceptic MP over plan which will see Britain continue to pay billion of pound into the EU budget after Brexit in exchange for access to the Single Market and other sector . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pension secretary , say that Mr Hammond must support the Prime Minister over Brexit . he warn that pay for access to the Single Market would be a ` ` nightmare ' ' scenario . other Eurosceptic MP accuse Mr Hammond of ` ` obstruct Brexit ' ' and say he must decide whether he be go to support Brexit and ` ` stick around in Government ' ' . the Cabinet split over Britain ' s future after it leave the EU yesterday prompt the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman to express her ` ` full confidence ' ' in Mr Hammond . she say that the Prime Minister believe that the Cabinet must ` ` work together ' ' to achieve a ` ` successful Brexit ' ' . Mr Duncan Smith yesterday tell the Daily Telegraph that Mrs May have be clear that migration be a red line during Brexit negotiation . he say : ` ` Theresa May have be admirably clear about what her red line be . I think it ' s important when that position be take by a Prime Minister that the Cabinet back the Prime Minister . ` ` the most important member of the Cabinet be the Chancellor . that be the key . ` ` if we be to leave and make payment to the EU for Single Market access that would be the equivalent of put @card@ per cent tariff barrier on UK trade . if we be forever go to pay money that would be the nightmare scenario . ' ' another Tory MP say : ` ` the Treasury be the least open of all department to Brexit . they feel that the set up of David Davis ' S department have take power away from them . ` ` Philip have to decide whether he be go to support Theresa and stick around in government . ' ' the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman yesterday say that Cabinet minister must ` ` work together ' ' if Brexit be to be a success . she say : ` ` the Prime Minister be push a collective government approach where either through the Cabinet or through Cabinet committee the relevant Cabinet minister be able to discuss and debate issue before decision be reach . ` ` the Prime Minister be focus on make sure we prepare for the negotiation and that we get the good deal for the United Kingdom . I ' m not go to give a run commentary of those discussion . the PM want to prepare fully for those negotiation . ` ` that mean hear the differ view of minister , department and stakeholder base on some of the conversation we have be have . ` ` ultimately we need to make sure that we be work together to make a successful Brexit . ` ` the Prime Minister have full confidence in the Chancellor and the work he be do . ' ' it be understand that Mr Hammond be one of a number of voice urge caution during a Brexit Cabinet meeting last week , when proposal be discuss for a new work permit system design to reduce immigration Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , present plan for a post-Brexit visa regime that would see all EU worker force to prove they have secure a skilled job before be allow into Britain . source claim that Mr Hammond raise question about the plan , and that there be fear that the Chancellor could resign over the tension . Treasury source have dismiss the claim as ` ` complete and utter nonsense ' ' . ' the Treasury be the least open of all department to Brexit '
ignore EU complaint - we must start negotiate trade deal now ; there be nothing in the EU treaty to stop Britain reach agreement that begin straight after Brexit
with Theresa May visit Donald Trump to discuss an early trade deal between the US and the UK , the question of whether and to what extent Britain can negotiate post-Brexit trade agreement with non-EU country before formally leave the EU be set to become one of the thorny issue of the Brexit negotiation . the average US trade deal take @card@ month to agree , so could be complete well before we ' ve leave . Australia say ratification could be complete within month of Brexit . at one level it be a mystery that this be an issue at all . we ' ve confirm we ' re leave the single market and custom union , so what business be it of the EU ' s what trade agreement we have , post-Brexit , with non-EU country ? imagine the furore if China tell Japan it be n't permit to have a trade agreement with Australia from @card@ . why should the UK any more tolerate be tell by the EU that it can not have a trade deal with the US or Australia that begin in @card@ ? some commentator and politician claim the EU ' S rule forbid the UK from negotiate with non-EU country before we ' ve formally leave . I ' ll argue in a moment that that ' s not true . but suppose it be . would n't the right response be to feel there be an overwhelming imperative to change those rule or to get permission from the EU to negotiate ? the EU have grant such permission before , even to continue member . at the time of the Lisbon Treaty EU member be grant permission to negotiate their own transitional arrangement for investment agreement with non-EU country . so surely , as a matter of urgency , if indeed the rule do require that , the UK should be grant permission to negotiate with the US or Australia ? as it happen , however , they do n't . the Treaty on the functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) grant the EU exclusive competence over its common commercial policy , include in particular its trade policy . from this flow the EU ' s competence over trade negotiation . and where the EU have a competence , there be a duty of ` ` sincere cooperation ' ' . so EU member state can not negotiate with non-EU country over any matter that might impinge upon the exclusive or shared competence of the EU ( even in some case where the negotiation be not directly about those matter ) . but the EU be not competent over the UK ' s post-Brexit trade policy , and that apply from the moment the UK leave . there be no ` ` gardening leave ' ' or ` ` no-compete ' ' provision in the treaty . once we ' re out , the treaty do n't apply to us . since the EU do not have competence over our post-Brexit trade policy , it do not have competence over negotiate post-Brexit trade deal for us , and we have no duty of sincere cooperation in respect of the EU ' s post-Brexit trading arrangement . furthermore , the EU can not have competence over the UK ' s post-Brexit trading arrangement because it can not make post-Brexit deal for us . an EU deal such as the Ceta trade agreement with Canada can not bind either the UK or Canada post- Brexit . neither can the EU negotiate on behalf of just one of its party ( Ie the UK ) to the exclusion of the rest . there can not be a competence where there be not , even in principle , a power . thus the EU have no competence over our post-Brexit trading arrangement , because we ' ll have leave and because it can not make trade agreement that would bind us after we ' ve leave . why would we accept any restriction over our ability to negotiate with the US or Australia , say , when the consequence of that would be a delay in our finalise a trade deal with these country post-Brexit ? and to repeat , the argument ` ` that ' s what we ' ve sign up for ' ' do n't fly - there be simply no reference in the treaty to our agree to any gardening leave or no-compete period post-Brexit . we should be able to negotiate , finalise and ratify trade post-Brexit deal as soon as we ' ve formally declare we ' re leave the EU ( by trigger Article @card@ ) . if it provide a political fig-leaf and if we can be sufficiently certain that the ratification process in the US and Australia will only take month , we could accept merely negotiate all the main political term of the deal now but save the actual ratification for the post-Brexit period . the practical political reality , though , be that we be , and must be , negotiate now , regardless of what the UK Government say or how hard EU bureaucrat complain . ' we could accept merely negotiate the main term of the deal now but save ratification until later '
remember Brexit , dear ? turn out the issue have n't go away after all ; Sketch
and to think , some of us use to complain about the news be nothing but Brexit . so boring , we groan . it ' S just the same old dreary story , day after day after day . Brexit , Brexit , endless blasted Brexit . be n't there anything else happen in Westminster we could write about ? well , turn out that there be . weird , be n't it ? since be abruptly dwarf by other event , Brexit somehow feel distant , remote , even quaint : as if it happen long ago , in a gentle , more innocent age . remember Brexit , darling ? you know . that thing where Britain vote to leave the European Union . what happen about that , in the end ? do we ever find out ? in case anyone need reassuring , I can confirm that Brexit be still go on , albeit somewhat in the background , and yesterday morning the Commons meet to question David Davis and his minister on the late development . in a vote the night before , MP have back Labour ' s demand that the government publish its secret study on the likely economic impact of Brexit . at the very least , argue Labour , the study should be show to the Brexit select committee . in the Commons yesterday , Robin Walker , a junior minister , respond . Mr Davis , he promise , would discuss it with Hilary Benn , the committee ' S chairman , ` ` in due course ' ' . Labour be far from satisfy . ` ` could minister confirm what they mean by ' in due course ' ? ' ' ask Seema Malhotra ( Lab , Feltham & Heston ) . ` ` and if they do n't know yet , when will they ? ' ' ` ` in due course , ' ' honked an unseen Labour colleague . Steve Baker , another junior Brexit minister , look troubled . the problem face him be clear . the only answer he could give be ` ` in due course ' ' . but he could n't say ` ` in due course ' ' because he ' d just be ask what ` ` in due course ' ' mean . essentially , therefore , he have to find a way to say ` ` in due course ' ' without use the word ` ` in ' ' , ` ` due ' ' and ` ` course ' ' . so , rather gamely , he try : ` ` we ' ll move as swiftly as be possible in all circumstance . ' ' Nigel Evans ( Con , Ribble Valley ) sense a Remainer plot . the German and French government , he sniff , have surely do secret study of the impact Brexit would have on their own economy . so why be n't Labour MP badger the Germans and the French to release those study , hmm ? Mr Baker might have say , ` ` well , it ' S probably because Labour MP be British , and therefore more immediately concern about Britain ' s economy than Germany ' S or France ' S . ' ' but Mr Evans be a party colleague , so he could hardly say that . instead , he tell him it be ` ` an extremely good point ' ' . still , even if Labour do hope the secret economic study will undermine Brexit , Mr Evans need n't worry . after all , Labour be go to look pretty silly when they learn that after March @card@ we ' ll all be drive diamond-studded Rolls-Royces and light our cigar with £50 note .
this be like a Hitchcock thriller , say EU ' S tusk ; election announcement welcome in Europe as lead to a stable base for further Brexit negotiation
European leader react to Theresa May ' s shock election announcement by compare Brexit to a Hitchcock thriller - but insist negotiation would not be affect . Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , comment on the news by tweet : ` ` it be Hitchcock , who direct Brexit : first an earthquake and the tension rise . ' ' the joke be a reference to director Sir Alfred Hitchcock ' s famous quote that ` ` a good film should start with an earthquake ' ' and be follow by increase tension . critic claim the bemuse tweet be a suggestion that the political ramification for the UK from the Brexit vote be only begin to be feel . but Mr Tusk also say he have a ` ` good phone call ' ' with the Prime Minister about the early election , during which Mrs May underline the UK ' s ` ` deep and special partnership ' ' with the EU . EU leader also move to calm concern about how the election could impact Brexit by say preparation for talk would not be affect . a Brussels source say : ` ` this be a domestic matter for the UK . but we have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us with strong backing by the electorate . this do not change thing . we be ready . Early June be always the calendar [ to start the negotiation ] . ' ' a spokesman for Mr Tusk insist that the snap election would not affect the EU ' S attempt to come up with a position on Brexit talk . ` ` the UK election do not change our EU27 plan , ' ' the spokesman say . ` ` we expect to have the Brexit guideline adopt by the European Council on April @card@ and , follow that , the Brexit negotiating directive ready on May @card@ . this will allow the EU27 to start negotiation . ' ' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' s Brexit negotiator , call on UK voter to show how close they want Britain to remain with the EU . ` ` the UK election be an internal affair , but clearly Brexit will be the key element of it , ' ' he say . ` ` this mean there will be an opportunity for the UK citizen to express themselves on how they see the future relationship between their country and the EU . ` ` as the European Parliament Brexit negotiator , I will work with a new government for the well common future possible . ' ' Sigmar Gabriel , the German Foreign Minister , say the early election could help create ` ` accountability ' ' after the Brexit vote . ` ` Accountability and reliability be more important than ever after the Brexit vote of the Briton , ' ' he say . ` ` hopefully the new election announce today ... can lead to more clarity and accountability in the negotiation with the EU . ' ' a diplomat from an EU member state say that Mrs may ` ` be completely right to call these election now ' ' , as she could benefit from a favourable political backdrop . ` ` the good news on the European side be that she will be less weak to make all the concession she will have to make ' ' in the talk , the diplomat say . other EU politician say that Mrs May ' S decision be ` ` understandable ' ' and predict that the Tories would win . Gonzalez Pons , a Spanish MEP for the European people ' S Party , say : ` ` May call for UK election , which mean either undoing Brexit or make it harder by shorten time . I wish the UK all the good . ' ' Mrs May talk to Donald Trump during a string of conversation with world leader . she also discuss the decision with Angela Merkel and Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny . ' we have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us '
Senior Labour MP may be ask to join Brexit commission
Theresa May be consider set up a cross-party Brexit commission , ask senior Labour MP to join it , as part of her attempt to reach a consensus on the term of Britain ' s exit from the European Union . Downing Street source say the Prime Minister be look at ask senior Labour MP like Hilary Benn and Yvette Cooper to sit on the commission , which would ` ` shadow the work of the Brexit department ' ' . the plan emerge after Mrs May ask Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn for his support in deliver Brexit and push through legislation . in a speech on Tuesday , Mrs May make a direct appeal to opposition party to ` ` contribute , not just criticise ' ' and help ` ` clarify and improve ' ' her policy in the House of Commons instead of undermine them . it come at a time when Mrs May ' S leadership be at its weak , amid open call by Tory MP for her to stand down follow her failure to secure a majority at the election . the government ' S slim work majority of @card@ in the House of Commons - with the support of the Democratic Unionist party - mean that some key Brexit vote could be lose without support from MP from other party . Mrs May ' S friend say the commission would allow minister and official to try to win cross-party support for her Brexit negotiating strategy . both Mr Benn and Ms Cooper be member of the Privy Council , which allow them to be brief on sensitive government work . both do not vote for an amendment back by Chuka Umunna this month to keep Britain in the single market after Brexit . Sir Keir Starmer be swear on to the privy council at the end of last month so he could receive briefing on Brexit talk . the Daily Telegraph understand that this be personally push for by David Davis , the Brexit secretary . however , Number @card@ be nervous that any Labour MP who sign up to the commission might be target by hard Left Momentum activist . news of the commission could spark fear among pro-Brexit conservative that Mrs May be willing to compromise on their ambition to leave both the single market and the custom union . she have be determine not to soften her position on Brexit and have insist that end the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and leave the single market and custom union remain a red line . a post-election poll by YouGov last month find that @card@ per cent would prefer Brexit to be negotiate by a cross-party team . Ms Cooper be a known supporter of a cross-party Brexit commission . she have say : ` ` we should set up a small crossparty commission to conduct the negotiation , and have a clear and transparent process to build consensus behind the final deal . it should be accountable to parliament but avoid get catch up in the inevitable hung parliament political row . ' ' the move be also back by Lord Hague , the former Tory party leader , who urge the government to form a commission with the CBI , the Institute of Directors , the British chamber of Commerce , the Federation of small business , the TUC , the first minister of the devolve government , and the leader of all the opposition party . however , Stephen Kinnock , another Labour MP , warn : ` ` if it ' S focus on a tangible outcome , then fine . if it ' s go to be a talk shop for Theresa May to pay lip service to the idea of cross-party working , then forget it . ' '
Scotland Boris ' simple minded ' on Brexit ; Cabinet battle intensify with Hammond ally claim Foreign Secretary fail to see intricacy of leave EU ; Boris ally warn over prolonged transition
Philip Hammond ' S ally have accuse Boris Johnson of be ` ` simpleminded ' ' over Brexit and warn that the transition period may need to be extend until after the next election . the Foreign Secretary have make clear that a Brexit ` ` implementation period ' ' must last no long than two year , mean that the UK will effectively leave the EU by @card@ . however , the Chancellor and other minister include Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , have argue that the UK will need an extra year so that business can adjust . that would mean the Brexit process would still not be complete by @card@ - the late date for the next election - leave open the possibility that the next government could water down Brexit or even try to reverse it . ally of Mr Johnson fear Brexit could yet be ` ` hijack ' ' by pro-Remain MP . the deepen Cabinet split come after Theresa May appear to have brokered a truce between Mr Hammond and Mr Johnson before her speech in Florence last Friday . however , Mr Hammond ' S supporter be left infuriate at the weekend by claim that ally of Mr Johnson have thwart the Chancellor ' s push for a long transition . they point to the fact that the Prime Minister have say only that a Brexit implementation period should last for ` ` about ' ' two year , leave open the possibility that it could take longer . an ally of Mr Hammond say : ` ` the bottom line be that this be not go to be easy , something that ' S overlook by simple-minded Brexiteers like Boris . when it come down to practicality it may well take longer . ` ` Philip be n't be ideological about it , he be pragmatic . what he want be for it to work in the interest of the economy and the country , that be what be drive him . Boris be talk tough for the sake of it . ' ' Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , yesterday announce that he favour an open-ended post-Brexit transition period last ` ` as long as necessary ' ' . speak on the first day of the Labour conference , Mr Corbyn say it be ` ` impossible ' ' for anyone to place an ` ` absolute figure ' ' on how long the transition should last . however , despite conflict within the party , conference delegate yesterday elect not to hold a vote on any Brexit-related issue . the decision save Mr Corbyn ' s blush by avoid a damaging public row on Brexit , but reduce the party to ` ` a laughing stock ' ' , accord to one of its own MP . last week the Prime Minister set out plan for a status quo implementation phase , with the UK and EU maintain access to each other ' S market ` ` on current term ' ' and under ` ` the existing structure of EU rule and regulation ' ' . it mean freedom of movement will effectively continue for another four continue on Page @card@ Labour conference : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ year , with Britain pay its full contribution to Brussels of around £9 billion a year during that period . Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptic minister have argue previously for a six-month transition period , but compromise and agree to a maximum two-year transition after a summer of Cabinet clash . the Daily Telegraph have learn that the Prime Minister be warn at Cabinet last week that Brexit must be ` ` do and dust ' ' by @card@ or risk damage the Conservatives ' chance of win the next election . Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary , and Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , warn that fail to do so risk alienate Eurosceptic supporter if the government have not deliver Brexit by then . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , make clear yesterday that he agree with Mr Johnson ' s position that the transition period should last ` ` up to ' ' two year , not longer . ally of Mr Johnson warn against a long transition . one say : ` ` rub up against @card@ be a problem , the sooner it ' S do the well . ' ' Mr Davis will today embark on a fresh round of talk in Brussels in an attempt to break the deadlock in the Brexit negotiation . he will meet the EU ' s chief negotiator , Michel Barnier , in the Belgian capital at the start of the fourth round of negotiation . Mr Davis suggest yesterday that he believe that Mr Johnson be behave like a ` ` backseat driver ' ' over Brexit . he dismiss claim that Mr Johnson ' s 4,200-word article on Brexit in the Daily Telegraph a week ago have force Mrs May to abandon plan for a soft Brexit . ask about Mr Johnson ' S intervention , Mr Davis say : ` ` the policy in the Prime Minister ' S speech have be come for a long time . ` ` some of them - transition - we be design right back in the beginning of the year . ` ` some of it we have be design month ago . I do n't think there ' s be any change of policy in the last few week . ' ' the Foreign Secretary also want Britain to stop adopt any new EU rule and regulation after it formally leave the bloc in March @card@ . he believe it be wrong for ruling from Brussels to apply in the UK during the two-year transition because Britain will no longer be involve in the decision-making process .
Scotland Juncker dismiss talk of call off Brexit
BREXIT be inevitable , Jean-Claude Juncker have say , as he dismiss claim that Britain will not leave the EU . the president of the European Commission make the comment after Malta ' s prime minister and Ireland ' s taoiseach cast doubt over whether the UK would ultimately leave the bloc . in an interview with the Politico Europe website , Mr Juncker say : ` ` I do n't go as far as the Maltese prime minister , who have not rule out that it will not come to Brexit . ' ' he add : ` ` my work hypothesis be that it will come to Brexit . ' ' Mr Juncker warn : ` ` people will become more and more conscious of the density of problem on a daily basis , without always be able to provide a coherent answer to these problem . ' ' Joseph Muscat , Malta ' s prime minister , say last week that he think the ` ` tide be turn ' ' against Brexit . Malta hold the rotate presidency of the EU when Article @card@ , the legal process take the UK out of the EU , be trigger . ` ` for the first time , I ' m start to believe that Brexit will not happen . I be see hopeful sign that indicate thing will change , ' ' Mr Muscat tell Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant . Leo Varadkar , Ireland ' S taoiseach , say this week : ` ` I still hope that it [ Brexit ] wo n't happen . when it come to my work in Brussels , work with other European prime minister and president , it ' s part of my remit to keep the door open . ' ' Sir Vince Cable have also predict that Brexit will not , in the end , happen , despite the British Government ' s insistence that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' .
finally the UK can get on board the global economic upswing
this year be not the economic disaster for the UK predict by some of the more excitable pundit . it be not quite a fun-filled year either . with luck , next year will be well now that the UK and the EU have make enough progress on the Brexit divorce to move on to what count for the economy - post-Brexit trade . pardon the imagery but , until now , the Brexit divorce have act like a kidney stone , prevent the UK from enjoy its usual healthy economic vigour . now the stone be pass , with some considerable political pain , the outlook seem bright . what do we learn in @card@ ? first the positive news : the major downside risk to growth do not manifest in a major way . despite the hit to real wage from rise import price cause by the fall in sterling , household have use their balance sheet , which be strong than a decade ago , to smooth their consumption . similarly , business have continue to hire and invest to meet the grow demand at home and abroad . that household have simply open up their wallet more as price have rise , and firm have continue to expand production despite heightened uncertainty , reflect a healthy underlie confidence in the economy . we can be less nervous about future shock . now the negative news : although growth have hold up OK , slow only a little to 1.5pc this year , compare to the post-Lehman average of 1.9pc , the UK have miss out on the building global upswing . after enjoy one of the fast post-Lehman recovery of the major advanced economy , the UK should have be ride high this year as the rest of the advanced world enjoy the strong synchronise upswing in a decade . instead , hold back by its Brexit nerve , the UK have sit on the sideline . yesterday ' s breakthrough in the Brexit negotiation lower the chance that the UK could exit the EU in March @card@ without an agreement for post-Brexit trade . as firm and household begin to discount this risk too , confidence will rise and the global upturn can begin to rub off on the UK a bit more . as Brexit uncertainty be the major factor weigh on growth this year , reduce some of this uncertainty should be positive for growth . high business and household confidence from the low risk of a hard Brexit should underpin strong gain in long-lived consumption and investment . the UK ' S annual GDP growth rate could rise towards 1.8-1.9pc in @card@ and @card@ . the improve outlook for the economy also lower the risk that voter could eventually vote hard-Left Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn into Number @card@ . market worry that , if Mr Corbyn ' s Leftist policy be follow , the UK would risk repeat the painful mistake of the seventy . Labour be marginally ahead in the poll after Prime Minister Theresa May ' s botched election and mishandle of Brexit . a more moderate Labour leader would be much further ahead in the poll by now . there be a good chance that , if the economy pick up , Corbyn ' S lead will start to fade . Brexit be no different to other politically charge issue - the most extreme view tend to dominate the public debate . most of the time , such prediction be decidedly wrong . on its own , Brexit will not turn the UK into a land of milk and honey . it be not likely to be the end of the world either . the likely reality be that , unless the UK take step to improve its fiscal , supply-side and non-EU trade policy , it will see its long-term growth rate fall by a few tenth of a percentage point per year after Brexit , from its potential rate of 2.2pc while inside the EU . indeed , the fall in the value of sterling since the Brexit vote reflect just that : global market lower their expectation for long-run UK growth . the rebound in sterling on the news that the Brexit divorce have be settle reflect market reverse some of this pessimism . unless the UK change its approach to economic policy , expect it to be less of a magnet for foreign capital and talented foreign worker . the UK might have to start live more within its mean , dedicate more of its income to saving and investment , and less to consumption . with the right policy , the UK could rise back towards the top of the growth league for advanced country . hopefully , now the sensitive Brexit divorce have be mostly settle , the UK can begin to focus not just on Brexit but also a bit more on other key economic policy area . the policy path the UK follow over the next year will have a decisive impact on its long-term fortune . a strong commitment to sound economic policy and budgetary discipline would underpin a rise in business and household confidence . the UK could finally get its public finance in order while pursue supply-side reform - think housing - to make the economy more productive and raise potential growth . today , the UK continue to profit from the indispensable reform of the Thatcher era . firm still benefit enormously from the UK ' S highly flexible labour and product market . indeed , the big testament to these policy be that the Blair/Brown Labour government do not do much to alter them . with the country still split on Brexit , the UK ' s New year resolution ought to be to find a policy direction that a majority of the country can get behind , even if it be an old one . Kallum Pickering be the senior UK economist at Berenberg ' Brexit will not turn the UK into a land of milk and honey . it be not likely to be the end of the world either '
do not try to block Brexit , May warn opponent ; Miliband and Clegg join force to demand a vote on the Prime Minister ' s deal for leave the EU
Theresa May have warn Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg that they will not be allow to ` ` thwart the will of the British people ' ' by block Brexit . Mr Miliband , the former Labour leader , and Mr Clegg , the former deputy prime minister and liberal Democrat leader , be demand a vote in Parliament on Theresa May ' s Brexit deal . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , be back the move which be likely to be debate by MP this week . however , Mrs May have rule out a parliamentary vote on the term of her Brexit deal . she will today travel to Holland and Denmark for talk before visit Spain on Thursday for a meeting with Mariano Rajoy , the prime minister . a Downing Street source say : ` ` Parliament vote by a margin of six to one in favour of the referendum . ` ` while Labour be look for way to stop Brexit we be focus on deliver on the people ' S verdict - and make a success of it . of course Parliament will have a role in the exit process , but this suggestion be simply an attempt to find another way to thwart the will of the British people . ' ' it come as Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , signal that Britain be likely to leave the single market by say there would be a ` ` full Brexit ' ' . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have suggest that the government might have to compromise on immigration control to secure free market access . Mr Fallon appear to adopt a hard tone on BBC one ' S Andrew Marr Show yesterday . ` ` this be Brexit , this be full Brexit . we be go to be outside the European Union but we still want to maximise our trade with it . we be all Brexiteers now , we be respect the decision of the British people . we have get to make a success of it , ' ' he say . Mr Miliband , the former Labour leader , be plan to table an urgent question in the Commons demand that Mrs May clarify the role of Parliament in Brexit . he have join force with Mr Clegg as well as the SNP and the green . Mr Miliband tell the Observer : ` ` have claim that the referendum be about return sovereignty to Britain , it would be a complete outrage if May be to determine the term of Brexit without a mandate from Parliament . ' ' Mr Clegg tell the same newspaper : ` ` my great worry be that while there will be a vote on repeal the @card@ European Communities Act , which be about the decision to leave the EU , it will be leave to the executive alone to decide the term of Brexit . that would not be remotely acceptable . ' ' Sir Keir Starmer , Labour ' S shadow Brexit secretary , say the party would support the move . ` ` there have to be democratic grip of the process . and , at the moment , the Prime Minister be try to manoeuvre without any scrutiny . ` ` that be why the term on which we be go to negotiate absolutely have to be put to a vote in the House . ' ' the move come after leader of the Confederation of British Industry express alarm at the apparent direction of government policy , which they say could see tariff impose on @card@ per cent of British export . business chief have demand that Mrs May rule out the ` ` bad option ' ' , such as not have arrangement which allow easy access to European market for the financial service industry .
May offer medicine without sugar-coat ; Letters to the editor
she be n't optimistic , she be n't charming , she be n't inspiring : all true of the Prime Minister in her botched election campaign . but for the sake of completeness we ought to mention another fail : Theresa May be too honest . she pride herself on be serious . she do n't want to spin nonsense at the electorate , like David Cameron sell his EU renegotiation . she launch her leadership bid before a wall of book . she enter government with a reputation for make decision tediously , after listen and learn . the public like it , or think they do . Mrs May ' s impressive authority instantly disperse the sense of chaos follow the Brexit vote . there be no reason , it seem , why she could n't win an early election too . I be among those who think it a good idea . except ! except it turn out her gravitas be just a side effect of her commitment to brutal honesty . Mrs May do n't lose because she be an inauthentic person . she lose because she try to be honest and , when that fail , have no capacity to spin . so she fall back on robotic obfuscation . the honest truth be that after seven year of austerity , the book still be n't balance . Britain be still spend too much . real wage be stagnant or fall , worsen by the weak pound , debt be high and the population be age . Brexit , meanwhile , be an unknown quantity . while ride high , Mrs May use her political capital to be straightforward with voter . she admit that Britain ca n't afford benefit for all , like social care and bus pass for the wealthy . she make few guarantee on Brexit . her proposition for public service be more of the same : gradually fall standard until the nation ' S finance be repair . the dirty truth of campaigning , though , be that it involve sugarcoat . this be not impossible . employment be at a record high . the deficit be down to @card@ per cent of GDP and set to fall very slowly , allow for a less austere mood . Brexit inspire million of new voter to turn out and Mrs May might have capture that mood . instead , she be sweep over by the tidal wave of jam and custard serve up by Jeremy Corbyn . the Corbynista vision be n't sugar-coat : it be honeycomb all the way through . during a Question Time hold just after the election , one man declare that Mr Cameron have be a ` ` reassuringly dishonest ' ' chap . Mr Corbyn be , to some , a reassuringly optimistic fantasist . to be neither dishonest nor delude , as Mrs May find out , can be a tough sell . over the weekend , I be on the radio with a member of the hard-left activist group call Momentum , when the poor fellow be ask what kind of Brexit Labour would support . ` ` a people ' S Brexit ! ' ' be the splutter reply - as if the rest of us would prefer a dog ' s Brexit . ` ` what ' S a people ' S Brexit ? ' ' ask the bemused presenter . the answer , as far as I could make out , be that it might be a Brexit with lot of socialist bell and whistle sew on . naturally , Labour do n't much fancy talking about Brexit during the election , other than to condemn ` ` the Tory hard Brexit ' ' . confusingly , its manifesto endorse an approach very similar to ` ` the Tories ' hard Brexit ' ' by state that Labour would take us out of the EU single market and then obtain ` ` tariff-free access ' ' . John McDonnell repeat this position on Sunday , only to be contradict by Keir Starmer on Tuesday . labour voter apparently choose whatever stance they like good , with the young decide Labour would stop Brexit , and the old Labour working class convince the party would implement it . Mr Corbyn would no doubt love to get Britain out of the single market , not in order to curb immigration , but so that he could ditch the EU ' s rigorous state aid rule and bail out whatever industry he like . his MP might have other idea . if , as look likely , the government have to negotiate Brexit with the other party in Parliament to get any legislation through , perhaps we will finally find out what exactly a ` ` people ' s Brexit ' ' be mean to be . some male dolphin court female by balance sea sponge on their forehead , scientist have discover . this sound absurd until you consider human mating ritual . be it any silly for a dolphin to put a sponge on his head than it be for a man to wear painfully tight jean or bang on about existentialism ? be bower bird who amass array of coloured object to woo female any more quaint than the friend of mine who carefully edit the movie Thor so that it contain a marriage proposal ? be flirt flamingo , who copy each other ' every move , any more clueless than flirt couple who unconsciously mirror one another ' s body language ? of course not . a friend and I go separately to an exhibition of David Hockney ' s work last month . I come out elate by his joyful painting of nature . she , to my astonishment , declare it all horribly bleak , allude to all sort of family or relationship problem behind his sterile portrait and LA scene . both of us be right . this be exactly the sort of tension we stand to lose by barricade ourselves inside bubble of self-affirming political news and culture . the good disagreement come from share knowledge , not partition it . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Merkel victory wo n't help Brexit , claim rival ; FDP candidate warn that talk will not accelerate after election - and that a special deal be ' unrealistic '
the British government should not expect Angela Merkel to break the deadlock in the Brexit talk if she join force with the pro-business Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) after this weekend ' S election , a lead figure in the party have tell the Daily Telegraph . the warning come after David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , predict that the talk would ` ` accelerate ' ' after the German election , with UK minister privately hope that a German coalition government with the FDP could lead to a more flexible approach from Berlin . but Michael Theurer , a senior FDP candidate who have argue publicly for a more pragmatic approach to Brexit and be a strong candidate to become economy minister in such an FDP coalition government , caution against raise British expectation . ` ` it be my initiative to call for a Brexit cabinet ... because Brexit be be under-estimated at the ministerial level in Berlin - but I do n't believe , actually , that the room to manoeuvre will be so big , ' ' he say , while campaigning in Blumberg in the southern German state of Baden-Württemberg . Mr Theurer , who be set to win a seat in the Bundestag , report that small and medium-sized German company be express fear about Brexit , but warn those fear be unlikely to translate into effective political pressure on Mrs Merkel , who resist pressure from the business sector before impose sanction on Russia . ` ` Our machinery and tool industry be badly affect by sanction . business complain , but they be tell by the government that for security reason it be necessary to accept [ them ] , ' ' he say . ` ` so German company be use to accept political deci-sions . they will just find new market . ' ' his comment will come as a blow to UK minister who have be promise that a newly elect Mrs Merkel could break the current Brexit deadlock . ` ` the FDP be likely to be in the coalition , and they will not allow Mrs Merkel to ignore German industry , ' ' one senior government minister say . Mr Theurer ' s comment on the limited ` ` room to manoeuvre ' ' echo the German government ' s private line to minister , and the warning of senior figure in Mrs Merkel ' S Christian Democrat ( CDU ) party . a senior aide to Mrs Merkel say that German Brexit policy would be the ` ` same old soup ' ' after the election , while a senior CDU politician , who ask to remain nameless , be equally vehement . ` ` I be seriously worry that London be get this wrong , ' ' he warn . ` ` as much as Brexit play a role in the UK , Merkel never talk about Brexit . the future of the EU be just so much more important to her . ' ' Mr Theurer add that Germany feel somewhat sore about Brexit , since it leave Germany ` ` overload in organise everything in continental Europe ' ' and suck up large amount of political energy at a time when Germany be focus on re-energising the EU . ` ` there be so much work to do to stabilise the euro , get back on a growth path , to integrate refugee , stabilise eastern Europe , there be so many question - we be busy , but now instead of develop a better-functioning Europe , we be now deal with Brexit . ' ' Mr Theurer say the UK government should accept the binary choice be present by Brussels - to stay close in a Norway-style arrangement , or be treat like any other non-EU country , add there will be no ` ` special deal ' ' to accommodate Britain . ` ` why be it so difficult for the UK to understand that the EU have agreement with Switzerland and Norway , and they can be the blueprint . it should be clear that a deal would be on Swiss/ Norway term , ' ' he say . ` ` expecting anything else be unrealistic . ' '
Remainers miss the point : the big blow be unrelenting boredom ; Sketch
the Remain campaign must be kick themselves . all that time they waste , bang on about how Brexit would mean economic ruin , mass redundancy and loss of global influence . what a blunder . only now , @card@ month too late , do they realise what their message should have be . the trouble with Brexit , they should have say , be that it will be monumentally tedious . so tedious , in fact , that beleaguered voter will actually beg their MP to make the medium shut up about it . such have be the experience of Tracey Crouch , Tory MP for Chatham & Aylesford . ` ` people come up to me in the street , ' ' she reveal in an interview yesterday , ` ` and say , ' can you ask the BBC to stop reporting on Brexit ? ' ' ' for many voter , explain Ms Crouch , the whole subject have become overpoweringly dull . even though they themselves have vote for Brexit , they be sick to the back tooth of hearing about it . we shall never know , of course , but I wonder what the result of the referendum would have be if , rather than threaten voter with penury , David Cameron have simply say , ` ` look . if you vote leave , you ' re never go to hear the end of it . literally . never . every time you turn on the TV or open a paper , it ' s go to be BREXIT-BREXIT-BREXIT-BREXIT . and that mean wall-to-wall , unadulterated , 24-carat solid-gold boredom . ferocious boredom , tyrannical boredom , savage , suffocate , spirit-crushing boredom : day after day , week after week , month after month , year after year . at every turn you ' ll be subject to news about monotonous negotiation , insufferable debate , exhaust amendment and impenetrable in-fighting . ` ` and unless you destroy your TV , radio , phone and laptop , lock your door and cut yourself off from all human contact , there will be no escape . you ' ll be trap . your family will be trap . we ' ll all be trap . trap , in the 24-hour Brexit news cycle . tomorrow , the day after , and very possibly the rest of our life . ` ` Vote Remain : for a different story lead the six O'Clock News at Least Every once in a while . ' ' now that ' s what I call Project fear . personally , I do sympathise with Ms Crouch ' S constituent , but at least they can switch off the TV when anything about Brexit come on . I actually have to turn up and sit through this stuff , and , with all due respect and deference , dear people of Chatham & Aylesford : you do n't know you ' re bear . yesterday , for example , I have to go to a Brexit-themed conference in London , at which David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , give a speech say nothing of interest and then take no question . the most memorable moment come when he say goodbye , turn away from the lectern , miss his step , and almost fall flat on his face . in the nick of time , he catch himself , regain his balance , and hasten out . if only he ' d fall over . even the long-suffering denizen of Chatham & Aylesford would have tune in for that .
Scotland May unleash fire at Europe ; the Telegraph Election @card@ ; keep out of our election , angry PM tell Brussel with accusation of plot to undermine Brexit talk
Theresa May cast herself in the role of Britain ' S new Iron Lady yesterday with a blister attack on the EU for try to interfere in the General Election and ` ` run over us ' ' in Brexit talk . the Prime Minister accuse European politician and official of plot to ` ` deliberately affect ' ' the result of next month ' s poll by issue threat against Britain . she say bureaucrat have misrepresent the UK ' s position on Brexit , add that some of them ` ` do not want these talk to succeed ' ' . on a day in which the glove come off in Mrs May ' s negotation with Brussels over the Brexit deal , she stand outside the door of Number @card@ and invoke the spirit of Margaret Thatcher in her battle with those who ` ` do not want Britain to prosper ' ' . she be speak hour after Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , have tell Britain to pay an ` ` incontestable ' ' Brexit divorce bill of up to £92billion ( ( Euro ) 100billion ) - double the previous estimate - or face be take to court . Mrs May speak in measured but forceful tone that hint at an underlie anger that have be build since a highly partial account of her meeting with Mr Barnier and Jean-Claude Juncker last week be leak to a German newspaper . since that meeting , she have be criticise , mock and brief against by senior figure in the EU . she have initially dismiss the report as ` ` Brussels gossip ' ' but could contain herself no longer after Mr Barnier ' S browbeatelection ' ing comment . although she be careful not to accuse anyone by name , her speech be clearly aim at Angela Merkel , who say last week Britain have ` ` illusion ' ' about the outcome of Brexit , as well as Mr Barnier , European Commission president Mr Juncker and Mr Juncker ' s chief of staff Martin Selmayr , the man accuse of leak damaging report to the German press . Mrs May ' s extraordinary - and unscheduled - speech also take aim at Jeremy Corbyn , tell voter ` ` we will all pay the price ' ' if he become Prime Minister and take over the Brexit talk . critic say that while the speech might help win over voter - particularly those who vote Ukip in the last - attack Brussels ' most senior figure would make the Brexit negotiation far harder . speak after meet the Queen to mark the dissolution of Parliament , Mrs May say : ` ` Britain ' s negotiate position in Europe have be misrepresent in the continental press . the European Commission ' s negotiate stance have harden . threat against Britain have be issue by European politician and official . all of these act have be deliberately time to affect the result of the General Election . ' ' she say she want the EU to succeed , but add : ` ` there be some in Brussel who do not want these talk to succeed , who do not want Britain to prosper . ' ' Mr Selmayr last night appear to offer Mrs May an olive branch by say Mr Juncker regard her as ` ` an impressive woman and a very impressive negotiator ' ' which would be ` ` good for negotiation because we need a very strong negotiator , someone who unite the entire nation behind her ' ' . however , he add : ` ` Brexit will never become a success , of course , because it be a sad and sorry event , but it can be manage in a professional and pragmatic way . ' ' he also suggest Mr Juncker would only spend half an hour each week on Brexit , give an insight into where it lie in his priority . Mr Barnier have earlier suggest that Britain could be force through the court to pay the Brexit bill . however , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , insist there be no legal obligation for the UK to pay anything at all . Germany , France and Poland have insist extra payment be add to the bill , almost double the cost from £50billion to more than £90billion . Mr Davis reply : ` ` we will not be pay @card@ billion euros ... in the walkaway circumstance , there be nothing to be pay . ' ' Mr Corbyn accuse Mrs May of ` ` play party game with Brexit ' ' , while Nicola Sturgeon , Scotland ' S First Minister , suggest the Prime Minister have ` ` poison ' ' the Brexit talk . report : page @card@ Allister Heath : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ Farron ' s close encounter of the Brexit kind Pages @card@ ' Threats against Britain have be issue by European politician and official . all of these act have be deliberately time to affect the result of the General Election ' Theresa May OUTSIDE Number @card@
Brexit migration cut may push state pension age up ; Hard Brexit effect could force people to work longer
Briton may have to work longer if immigration be cut in the wake of Brexit , the government ' s pension adviser warn today . John Cridland , a former CBI director review the state pension age for the government , say the ` ` Brexit Factor ' ' have make the future of the state pension uncertain . the government ' s decision on pension change , due in May , will be inform by Mr Cridland ' s report to be publish one month earlier . new calculation reveal a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' in which migration be greatly reduce , could push up retirement age , potentially force people to work well into their mid-70s . Mr Cridland ' s forthcoming report will be base on the late office for Budget Responsibility forecast , which do not take Brexit into account , mean it could quickly become outdate . however , he tell an audience at an International Longevity Centre conference that the future ratio of pensioner to work age people - a major factor affect the cost of the state pension - be now ` ` unpredictable ' ' due to three factor : life expectancy , fertility and post-Brexit migration policy . projection calculate by actuary at Hymans Robertson show a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' could result in the state pension age need to be raise by @card@ month for people currently under @card@ . the calculation be base on projection by researcher at King ' S College London which assume national insurance number registration by migrant fall after ` ` extreme ' ' Brexit migration policy from around @card@ to @card@ in three year . eventually this would lead to over a million few under @card@ pay the pension of over a million more over @card@ . Prof Sarah Harper , director of the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing , say : ` ` the state pension may well have to be revise and this will come as a nasty surprise to many . ' ' Law firm Eversheds Sutherland , which be research the effect of Brexit on the state pension age , have warn that if the government fail to raise state pension age amid fall migration , it will have to raise tax instead . Francois Barker , a director at the firm , say : ` ` all the sign be that Brexit be likely to reduce the number of people of work age come into the UK from the EU and , unless this shortfall be make up elsewhere , the UK ' s old-age dependency ratio look set to rise even further than currently project . this may force the government to increase state pension age , reduce the rate of the state pension or raise tax . ' ' a spokesman at the Department for Work and Pensions say : ` ` we be commit to review the state pension age each parliament and take into account the most up to date projection at the time . ' ' Grey pound pensioner outearn young worker Pensioner household income have overtake work age one for the first time , a study have find . elderly spending power have be boost by a new wave of pensioner who tend to still be in work , own a home and receive generous pension pot , the Resolution Foundation for the Intergenerational Commission report show . its as Time Goes by study state , after housing cost , typical pensioner household be now £20 a week well off than typical work age one . in @card@ typical pensioner income be £70 worse off . the proportion of senior household in which at least one person work have grow from one in eight in @card@ to nearly one in five . some @card@ per cent of pensioner own their home , up from @card@ per cent in @card@ .
Brexit delay MP accuse of subvert the will of the people
a coalition of Europhile MP planning to delay Brexit by force commons vote on the issue be ` ` subvert the will of the British public ' ' , a Cabinet minister have say . Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary , hit out at Brexit opponent include Ed Miliband , Nick Clegg and senior figure in her own party attempt to force a Commons vote before Mrs May trigger Article @card@ . the MP , who include a number of senior Tory , want to use the Commons to force Mrs May to abandon plan to pull out of the European single market as part of the Brexit process , something she have hint that she intend to do . they will attempt to table a vote call on Mrs May to set out a detailed ` ` Brexit plan ' ' in Parliament . Mrs May have say she will trigger Article @card@ - which begin the formal Brexit negotiation - by March next year . however , speak on the BBC ' S the Andrew Marr Show , Mr Clegg , the former Lib Dem leader , say his plan to force a Commons vote could delay the trigger of Article @card@ , effectively pause Britain ' s withdrawal from the EU . ask what would happen if the government lose the vote on the ` ` Brexit plan ' ' , Mr Clegg say : ` ` [ Mrs May ] would have to go back and improve her negotiate stance . ' ' Mrs May only have a majority in the commons of @card@ , mean that a small group of Tory rebel could lead to her lose a Brexit vote . Ms Patel criticise the MP plot vote in the commons design to destabilise the government . she say : ` ` I ' d say respectfully that the job of the government be to deliver the result of the referendum . ' ' she add : ` ` the British people have speak and we ' re go to deliver for them . this be not about use Parliament as a vehicle to subvert the democratic will of the British public . ' ' Nicola Sturgeon , the SNP leader , say that Mrs May do not have a ` ` mandate ' ' to take Britain out of the single market . she say her MP in Westminster will back a vote force Mrs May to come forward with a Brexit plan . ` ` I do n't believe there be a majority in the House of Commons for a hard Brexit , ' ' she say . Ms Sturgeon add that Mrs May ' s refusal to present a plan for Brexit in the commons be ` ` untenable ' ' and ` ` unacceptable ' ' . she add : ` ` the House of Commons and the wide public have almost be tell to butt out and mind their own business . ' '
what to watch ; Television Wednesday @card@ June Body : Brexit Means Brexit BBC Two , 9.00pm ; Scotland , 11.15pm Bafta-winning documentary maker Patrick Forbes follow up last year ' s superb fly-on-the-campaign film Brexit : a Very British Coup with another that follow player in the ongoing Brexit debate over the turbulent @card@ month since Britain vote to leave the EU . ` ` in the last film we be watch the Brexit comet smash generation old certainty to piece , ' ' say Forbes . ` ` this be about the establishment struggle to its foot and try to ride that comet . ' ' Forbes spend time with people from all side , from Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer to Anna Soubry , Nicholas Soames and Jacob Rees-Mogg and capture some extraordinary moment . he be at ` ` ordinary citizen ' ' Gina Miller ' s side as she drag the government to the supreme court over the trigger of Brexit and he be in the USA with Nigel Farage as he ` ` go off as Donald Trump ' S very special friend to the inauguration ' ' . and he be film right up to , and after , the recent general election . ` ` one thing I be clear about , ' ' say Forbes , ` ` be that ' Brexit mean Brexit ' be not just an empty slogan . it be a genuine moment in history that ' s go to test the British establishment as it have never be test . ' ' Gerard O'Donovan Love your Garden ITV , 8.00pm ; NI , 10.40pm Alan Titchmarsh ' s series return to help transform more people ' S garden . it begin in Plymouth , where Titchmarsh and the team create a contemporary outdoor space for former Marine Mark Ormord , who lose three limb while fight in Afghanistan . Ackley Bridge Channel @card@ , 8.00pm there ' s plenty of warmth and humour to be find in this comedy drama about two Yorkshire school - one predominantly white , the other mostly Asian - merge into one . in episode three , Nas ' S ( Amy-Leigh Hickman ) love life take an awkward turn . the Met : police London BBC One , 9.00pm who need script crime dramas when you have the real thing right here ? this week in the fly-on-the-wall series the hunt for one of Ealing ' s most-wanted burglar end in a high-speed car chase and a crucial lead come through regard the case of an elderly man murder in north London . Fargo Channel @card@ , 10.00pm the third season of Noah Hawley ' s excellent - and very loose - adaptation of the Coen brother ' black comedy continue to find Emmit ( Ewan McGregor ) and Sy ( Michael Stuhlbarg ) try to figure out what they ' ve get themselves into . Catherine Gee
Scotland Sturgeon rap Brexit ' xenophobe ' ; SNP leader claim there be a Tory intolerance towards foreigner that ' shame the party ' Unilever point the finger at ' negative impact ' of Brexit
Nicola Sturgeon will today claim that Conservative Right-wingers be use Brexit as a ` ` licence for xenophobia ' ' and pledge to build a cross-party coalition to prevent Theresa May take Britain out of the EU ' s single market . the First Minister will use her opening address to the SNP conference in Glasgow this morning to argue that the Tory Right wing be attempt to hijack Brexit and be use the vote to promote a hostility to foreigner ` ` that have long lie under the surface ' ' . she will claim they have no democratic mandate for a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit , which would see the UK clamp down on EU immigration and leave the single market , but they be ` ` determined ' ' to impose one ` ` regardless of the ruinous consequence ' ' . leave voter do not back Brexit to give Boris Johnson , Liam Fox and David Davis carte blanche to ` ` throw economic rationality out of the window ' ' and lower live standard , she will say . Ms Sturgeon will confirm that SNP MP will vote against Mrs May ' s great repeal bill , but she will also pledge to try to build a coalition in the commons against a hard Brexit with Labour , the Liberal Democrats and moderate Tory . in a direct warning to the Prime Minister , who command a work majority of only @card@ , she will say : ` ` if the majority in the House of Commons stand up for what they know to be right , she will not get away with do it . ' ' but the First Minister be expect to come under fierce pressure from her rank-and-file member to set out a clear timescale for a second independence referendum after Alex Salmond predict she will stage it in autumn @card@ , follow confirmation Britain be leave the EU single market . the Conservatives last night say she should use the three-day conference to ` ` dump her threat ' ' of a rerun of the @card@ vote after opinion poll show a majority of Scot oppose it and would reject separation again . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , point out that the UK single market be four time more important to Scottish exporter and confirm that Brexit will lead to more power be devolve to Holyrood . Ms Sturgeon ' s stance on the EU single market put her on a collision course with Mrs May , who have make clear that cut European immigration be her priority in Brexit talk . a series of Cabinet minister use last week ' s Tory conference to set out plan to curb migration , although the Government later abandon proposal that would force business to disclose how many foreign staff they employ . Ms Sturgeon will today claim the Conservative conference display an intolerance towards foreigner that be a ` ` disgrace ' ' and ` ` shame the Tory party and all who speak for it ' ' . ` ` but make no mistake - the Right wing of the Tory party be now in the ascendancy and it be seek to hijack the referendum result . Brexit have become Tory Brexit , ' ' the SNP leader will tell her party member . ` ` they be use it as licence for the xenophobia that have long lie under the surface - but which be now in full view . they be hold it up as cover for a hard Brexit that they have no mandate for - but which they be determine to impose , regardless of the ruinous consequence . ' ' she will argue that many leave voter be oppose to the ` ` action and rhetoric of the Tories ' ' and be think ` ` that ' s not what I vote for . ' ' in particular , she will say they do not want business to face EU tariff , holidaymakers to require visa or ` ` the scapegoate of foreigner . ' ' exit from the EU . Mr Davis warn of a ` ` blame Brexit festival ' ' as he reject demand from a cross-party coalition of MP that backbencher be allow to vote on the term of Britain ' s exit from the EU . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , also attack MP not ` ` accept ' ' the Brexit vote , tell the commons : ` ` we be side with the British people who vote to leave the European union . ' ' a series of senior Conservative MP face a barrage of criticism from their colleague as they join a cross-party coalition attempt to stop a so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' and ensure that Britain remain a member of the single market . there be grow anger last night over Unilever ' s attempt to increase the price of its brand , which also include Colman ' S , Flora , Comfort and Knorr . ahead of the EU referendum , Unilever say the firm would be ` ` negatively impacted ' ' by Brexit . Unilever say that the ` ` way we run the company may be fundamentally different if the decision be take to leave the EU ' ' . ahead of the referendum Paul Polman , Unilever ' S CEO , say that a Brexit would force up the price of ice cream . he say : ` ` let ' s take our ice cream for example , one of our Walls product - a Magnum ; undoubtedly if the UK will leave the condition will not be as good as if they stay in . ' ' Dave Lewis , Tesco ' s chief executive who join to steer the turnaround of Britain ' s big supermarket in @card@ , be the former head of Unilever ' s personal good range , credit with help to revive the dove soap range . at Tesco ' s interim result last week Mr Lewis say that he be not ` ` comfortable ' ' with supplier ' effort to reclaim cost when sterling drop , when they fail to pass on currency benefit to shopper . go from shelf Brands remove from Tesco website ? surf washing powder ? Persil washing powder ? comfort fabric conditioner ? Hellmann ' S , mayonnaise ? pot Noodle Ben & Jerry ' S Ice Cream ? Knorr stock cube ? Bertolli spread ? dove soap product ? Colman ' s mustard ' the Right wing of the Tory party be in the ascendancy and be seek to hijack the referendum result '
mutiny in the Commons blow up storm for May ' s Brexit talk ; Conservative rebel win battle for ' meaningful ' vote on leave EU in embarrassment to Government ' Tonight Parliament take control ' boast Tory rebel
Theresa May last night suffer a major Conservative mutiny against her Brexit plan after @card@ of her own MP refuse to back the government and boast that Parliament have ` ` take control ' ' . the Prime Minister lose a key vote in the commons despite senior conservative plead with the self-styled ` ` rebel alliance ' ' to back Mrs May or risk a disorderly Brexit . follow chaotic scene in Parliament , the rebel defy their party by voting through an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill demand a ` ` meaningful ' ' vote on Brexit . in a sign of the ongoing bitter recrimination , one of those behind the mutiny be last night sack as vice-chairman of the Conservative Party . the disunity in her party threaten to undermine Mrs May on the eve of a crucial Brussels summit at which she be hope to receive backing from other European leader to move on Brexit talk to begin discuss trade . Whitehall source fear that some European politician may seek to use the problem face by the Prime Minister in Parliament to secure further concession or legal guarantee . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator , last night hail the government ' s defeat as a ` ` good day for democracy ' ' . Getty TAYLOR/ Jack he say : ` ` British Parliament take back control . European and British Parliament together will decide on the final agreement . interest of the citizen will prevail over narrow party politics . a good day for democracy . ' ' the dispute arise over the status of the vote on the Brexit deal before March @card@ , which the rebel have insist must be guarantee in law . minister have pledge to give Parliament a proper vote but warn that the rebel amendment demand that a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' should be enshrine in law risk derail a ` ` smooth and orderly ' ' Brexit . what have be see as a technical row yesterday erupt into a major political embarrassment for no @card@ . last night , Brexit-supporting Con-servative MP round on their colleague - who be lead by former minister Dominic Grieve , Anna Soubry , Ken Clarke and Nicky Morgan - warn that they have undermine Brexit and boost Labour ' s chance at the next election . Nadine Dorries say : ` ` Tonight , the Tory rebel have put a spring in Labour ' S step , give them a taste of winning , guarantee the party a weekend of bad press , undermine the Prime Minister and devalue her impact in Brussels . ` ` they should be deselected and never allow to stand as a Tory MP , ever again . I ' ve be a rebel myself , but never when a Marxist government be knock at the door . ' ' Michael Fabricant , another Tory MP , say : ` ` Labour ' s cheer in the Chamber should have be cause for deep reflection by the likes of Anna Soubry and Dominic Grieve . a shallow victory for the Remainers , but a victory for Labour morale and polling . ' ' Stephen Hammond , who be sack as Conservative vice-chairman last night , be one of @card@ Tory MP include Sir Oliver Heald , Bob Neill , Antoinette Sandbach , Sarah Wollaston , and Jonathan Djanogly who join Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats in the anti-Brexit move . the government say it be ` ` disappointed ' ' and senior conservative raise concern the vote could be use to frustrate or block Brexit entirely . Labour MP punch the air in jubilation as the result of the vote be announce , while Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , say that the result be ` ` humiliate ' ' for Mrs May . the rebel accuse the government of be ` ` stupid ' ' for fail to make more concession ahead of the vote as they vow to defeat the government again next week in a rebellion on plan to enshrine the date of Brexit in law . Ms Soubry , a former business minister , say : ` ` it be a stupid fight the government fight and they fight it very badly . I ' m afraid they do themselves no favour . ' ' Nicky Morgan , a former education secretary , say : ` ` Tonight Parliament take control of the EU withdrawal process . ' ' the government have make a series of last-minute climbdowns in a bid to appease rebel over the amendment , which be table by Dominic Grieve , a Tory MP and former attorney general . at 5.30am David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , send Tory MP a letter promise Parliament a vote on the Brexit deal ` ` as soon as possible ' ' . throughout the day the Prime Minister call the rebel into Downing Street one by one in an attempt to win them over . less than half an hour before the vote Dominic Raab , the justice minister , pledge to commit to a meaningful vote at the next stage of the EU Withdrawal Bill . however , Mr Grieve say that the climbdown be ` ` too late ' ' . it come after a day of extraordinary clash between the Government and pro-European Tory MP in the run-up to the vote . Julian Smith , the Chief Whip , threaten to sue pro-European MP for defamation as he strongly deny claim that he have ` ` bully ' ' a female MP and reduce her to tear . Tory MP also clash in the commons where one pro-Brexit MP be heckle by rebel Tory and tell to ` ` sit down ' ' as he make an intervention . Philip Davies , a Brexit-supporting MP , say : ` ` the problem with ( Mr Grieve ' S ) amendment be it could be , and no doubt be design to be , use to try to overturn and frustrate that meaningful vote ... it ' s a shame he have n't get the courage of his conviction to admit that that ' S what his game be . ' ' Oliver Letwin , a former Cabinet minister , warn in the debate : ` ` you either exit without a deal or you exit with a deal . if the deal be reject but the government be tell it can not leave without a deal then it can not leave . ' ' Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , say : ` ` my contempt for career politician know no bound . ' '
Labour plan raise prospect of second Brexit referendum
labour will today unveil plan to frustrate Brexit by scrap the Tories ' great repeal bill , raise the prospect of a second European Union referendum . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , will commit Labour to a new EU Rights and Protections Bill to ensure there be no change to worker ' right , consumer right or environmental protection . a Labour government will also scrap the Tories ' Brexit White Paper , which set out the government ' S plan for Brexit , and ` ` replace it with fresh negotiate priority that have a strong emphasis on retain the benefit of the Single Market and the Customs Union ' ' . Conservative Eurosceptic MP say the scale of the plan would make it difficult for Jeremy Corbyn , as prime minister , not to agree to hold a second referendum . Iain Duncan-Smith , the former Tory Cabinet minister , say : ` ` the truth be that Labour be run scared that the Liberal Democrats will steal their vote . ` ` it be clear and obvious that they be in the bad of all world - they be in effect oppose Brexit and raise the prospect of a second referendum but have n't get the gut to say so . ' ' Jacob Rees-Mogg MP add : ` ` clearly what he want to do be scrap Brexit . he be use code for this by reference other issue . the only person this will please be Tony Blair as the Labour Party abandon all its voter outside London . ' ' Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have already pledge a new Great repeal Bill to repatriate EU regulation into UK law to ensure that Brexit be implement with as little upheaval as possible . Sir Keir will say an EU Rights and Protections Bill ` ` will make sure that all EUderived law - include workplace law , consumer right and environmental protection - be fully protect without qualification , limitation or sunset clause . ` ` we will work with trade union , business and stakeholder to ensure there be a consensus on this vital issue . a Labour approach to Brexit will ensure there can be no roll back of key right and protection . ' ' Sir Keir will also say : ` ` a Labour government will set out a new Brexit strategy . we will scrap the government ' S Brexit White Paper and replace it with fresh negotiate priority that reflect Labour value and our six test . ` ` the White Paper will have a strong emphasis on retain the benefit of the Single Market and the Customs Union , as Labour know that be vital to protect job and the economy . ` ` and we will approach negotiation in a completely different way to a Tory Brexit : negotiate for the many , not the few . ' ' Sir Keir will say that - unlike Mrs May - Labour will not walk away from the EU without any agreement , say it ` ` will not accept ' no deal ' as a viable option ' ' . Labour will seek to settle transitional arrangement early in the negotiation and will ` ` unilaterally guarantee legal right for all EU national live in the UK and seek reciprocal right for UK citizen in the EU ' ' . Dominic Raab MP , a Conservative member of the Exiting the European Union Select Committee , say : ` ` there be a real risk of Jeremy Corbyn - with the support of the SNP and Lib Dems - become Prime Minister and being in charge of the Brexit negotiation . he be a weak leader of a divide party who could n't get the right deal for the United Kingdom . ' ' ask what Labour ' s position on Brexit be , Lord Mandelson tell the BBC ' s Newsnight : ` ` Search me . ' ' in a day of further turmoil for the party yesterday , Andrew Gwynne , Labour ' s election campaign chief , contradict his leader and say he would kill Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( Isil ) leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi if offer the chance . on Sunday Mr Corbyn refuse to answer the question . it come as Nia Griffith , the party ' s shadow defence secretary , also contradict Mr Corbyn and promise that Trident renewal will be include in Labour ' s manifesto after the Labour leader hint it might not be on Sunday . it have emerge that hard Brexit supporter include Iain Duncan Smith , Theresa Villiers and Kate Hoey have be place on an ` ` attack list ' ' of @card@ MP by a pro-EU group that will attempt to oust them by mobilise @card@ supporter . Open Britain , the successor organisation to the Remain campaign , whose board include Lord Mandelson , believe it can unseat MP even where they have large majority by target them . it want to redraw the balance between Leavers and Remainers in Parliament . ' a Labour government will set out a new Brexit strategy - negotiate for the many , not the few '
Bank Governor be enemy of Brexit , say Rees-Mogg
Jacob REES-MOGG have label Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , an ` ` enemy of Brexit ' ' and accuse the BBC of bias . the MP for Somerset North say Mr Carney have be ` ` consistently wrong ' ' on the economy and condemn the negative attitude of many , include the radio show on which he be appear . Mr Rees-Mogg say : ` ` Mark Carney be one of the enemy of Brexit , he have attack it consistently . ' ' he also attack the ` ` anti-Brexit ' ' BBC , tell Radio @card@ Live : ` ` it ' S the constant refrain of the BBC - in spite of Brexit there ' s some good news ; because of Brexit there ' s some bad news . ' ' he dispute claim that Brexit be harm the economy , say that the ` ` fall of the pound have help the economy ' ' and that the drop in GDP be because of growth last year . editorial comment : page @card@
Scotland exit deal catch between the Rock and a hard place
Spain ' S effective veto over whether the Brexit deal will apply to Gibraltar could be illegal under EU law and face be overturn by the European Court of Justice , the Daily Telegraph can reveal . MEPs and legal expert have warn that the veto over Gibraltar ' s future after Brexit would give Spain special status among EU nation , which be suppose to be equal . the EU ' s Brexit negotiating guideline , draft on behalf of the remain @card@ country , state that the Brexit deal will not apply to Gibraltar without an ` ` agreement between the kingdom of Spain and the UK ' ' . it lead to accusation that Spain be use Brexit to mount a ` ` land grab ' ' for the Rock . Spain ' s right to a veto over Gibraltar ' s post-Brexit future must be base on EU treaty law . however , it be uncertain if Article @card@ , which trigger Brexit , be legally watertight enough to give the guarantee . expert suggest that the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) could rule that the veto be in breach of EU law and force it to be change . Isabella de Monte , a socialist MEP from Italy , have demand clarification over the issue in a European parliamentary question . she ask if Article @card@ be strong enough to support the special treatment of the Spanish and , if not , if there be still legal basis for the veto . Bart Van Vooren , of global law firm Covington and Burling , say : ` ` could such a legal issue become an obstacle to the withdrawal agreement with the UK ? that certainly can not be exclude . ' ' ` ` nothing be clear about the legal issue arise from Article @card@ , ' ' say Steve Peers , expert on EU law and professor of law at the University of Essex . a legal challenge to the Spanish veto could hand British negotiator leverage in Brexit talk , and help push back against Spanish sovereignty claim over the Rock . such a challenge would risk throw the already tight timetable for the Brexit negotiation into disarray . if there be no EU-UK agreement by March @card@ , Britain will leave the EU in what have be call ` ` the hard of Brexits ' ' .
Blair ' s blueprint to block Brexit brand ' delusional ' ; why should n't we think again about Brexit , say former PM
tony Blair yesterday unveil his blueprint for stop Brexit , set out his plan to use the NHS , job and live standard to make the case for a second referendum or fresh general election . the former prime minister publish a 32-page document claim that Brexit be already damage the economy by hit productivity , increase food price and deter investment . it be likely to form the basis of a carefully orchestrate campaign by Mr Blair and other lead Remain-supporting politician to secure a second referendum on Brexit as the exit date of March @card@ , @card@ approach . however , Lord Lamont , the former Conservative chancellor and prominent Eurosceptic , say that Mr Blair be ` ` delusional ' ' and brand his blueprint as ` ` Project Fear mark two ' ' . several of the document ' s key assertion be contradict yesterday . Mr Blair ' S report , entitle ` ` Brexit - what we now know ' ' , examine the impact of Brexit on @card@ aspect of the economy since the referendum , include financial service , agriculture , construction and the car industry . it highlight the government ' s ` ` concession and chaos ' ' over Brexit , and criticise every potential outcome range from leave the EU without a deal to adopt a Norway model . the former Labour leader ' S claim be challenge yesterday morning by John Humphrys , the BBC Radio @card@ presenter , in an interview in which he accuse Mr Blair of be ` ` tendentious ' ' , ` ` elitist ' ' and ` ` undemocratic ' ' . he be accuse of ` ` conflate two thing ' ' after claim there be ` ` significant staff shortage ' ' in the NHS in the wake of the EU referendum vote . official figure show that the number of EU national work in the NHS increase by @card@ per cent in the year after the Brexit vote . Mr Blair ' S also directly challenge by over his claim that Brexit be damage the UK ' S productivity . Humphrys highlight that fact that productivity have be a consistent issue in the UK since Mr Blair ' s time in office . he tell Mr Blair that his plan to give voter the chance to reverse Brexit with another referendum or even a special election risk provoke ` ` civil disobedience ' ' . Mr Blair'sisted that there be nothing wrong with continue the ` ` democratic debate ' ' . Humphrys reply : ` ` if you do n't like the result of the referendum you have another one ? ' ' the former prime minister say : ` ` the common sense [ approach ] would be to say if the circumstance change and [ we ] decide on reflection that that new relationship do not offer us a good way forward for the future ' of the country , why should n't we be entitle to think again ? ' ' Lord Lamont accuse Mr Blair on the today programme of ` ` attempt to sabotage the result of the EU referendum ' ' . he say : ` ` this be not about examine the term of a deal . it ' S about oppose withdrawal at all cost . the giveaway be that within hour of the referendum result , people have a petition ask for a second referendum . be we to have a third , a fourth referendum ? when do it stop ? he ' s delusional ' . this be ` ` Project Fear mark two ' ' . and the plan for sabotage the referendum Senior Labour MP describe Mr Blair ' s intervention as ` ` utterly unhelpful ' ' . Mr Blair'said he disagree with the Labour Party ' S stance , say it be mistake tactically : ` ` First , because the Labour Party be say that we too would do Brexit , we can not attack its vast distractive impact . ` ` Labour could mount such a powerful assault on the government ' s ` ` cord from the appalling state of the NHS to crime , which through neglect and failure to support the police be on the rise again , if we be say to the country : here ' s the agenda which could be deliver for the people be it not for the fact that all the energy of government and substantial amount of cash be devote to Brexit . ` ` and , second , it put us in a vulnerable position when the government ' s ` ` conludes ' the deal ' some time in @card@ . ' ' u Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , be to meet the EU ' s Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier on Monday so he can represent ` ` the view of the @card@ million ' ' . Mr Farage write on Twitter that he want people to send in their question for Mr Barnier and promise to pick the ` ` good three ' ' . the anti-Brexit pressure group Open Britain deride the decision , say it be ` ` like send an arsonist to put out a house fire ' ' .
UK can not cherry-pick trade deal , warn EU ; Britain must be free to go its own way after Brexit , Prime Minister will be tell as she face Cabinet row
Theresa May will today face a Cabinet row over Brexit after the EU warn that there be ` ` no way ' ' that the Prime Minister would be able to strike a bespoke trade deal with Brussels . Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say that Britain must ` ` face the consequences ' ' of Brexit and could not ` ` cherry-pick ' ' and still enjoy the benefit of the Single Market after Brexit . ally of Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , say Mr Barnier ' S comment significantly boost their case for Britain to be free of EU regulation and law after Brexit . Eurosceptics in the Cabinet , who also include David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , want Britain to diverge from the EU so it be free to strike trade deal with other country . however , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , and Greg Clark , the Business Secretary , want to ensure the UK remain closely align with the EU to reduce the impact on the economy . the Prime Minister will today insist that the UK will be free to negotiate and sign trade deal during a two-year transition period after Brexit . there be confusion last week when the EU ' s negotiating guideline say that Britain must comply with the bloc ' s trade policy during the transition . however , Brussels source subsequently confirm that the UK will be able to sign deal with other country as long as their implementation do not take place until @card@ . in an interview with Prospect magazine , Mr Barnier say the UK would not be able to ` ` mix up ' ' the benefit of Norway , which be a full member of the Single Market , and Canada , which have trade and service agreement with the EU . he say : ` ` they have to realise there wo n't be any cherry picking . ` ` we wo n't mix up the various scenario to create a specific one and accommodate their wish , mix , for instance , the advantage of the Norwegian model , member of the Single Market , with the simple requirement of the Canadian www.one.No way . they have to face the consequence of their own decision . ' ' Mr Johnson and Mr Gove ' S ally say that Brussels have effectively ` ` torpedo ' ' Mr Hammond ' S hope of secure a close alignment with the EU after Brexit . however , a government source insist that Mr Barnier ' S intervention be a negotiating ` ` bluff ` ` . it come after Mr Johnson warn in an interview at the weekend that the UK must not become a ` ` vassal state ' ' of the EU after Brexit . the Prime Minister will today try to address criticism of the two-year transition she be attempt to negotiate with the EU after Brexit in March @card@ . Eurosceptics have warn it will effectively delay Brexit until @card@ because Britain ' s relationship with the EU will be virtually unchanged during that period . address the Commons , the Prime Minister will say that the UK will be able to negotiate and sign new trade deal during the transition period , although they will not come into force until it end . she will also announce plan to register new migrant during the transition , who will be subject to control after the UK leave the European Union . she will say : ` ` as I propose in Florence , during this strictly time-limited implementation period which we will now begin to negotiate , we would not be in the Single Market or the Customs Union , as we will have leave the European Union . ` ` but we would propose that our access to one another ' S market would continue as now , while we prepare and implement the new process and new system that will underpin our future partnership . ` ` during this period we intend to register new arrival from the EU as preparation for our future immigration system . and we will prepare for our future independent trade policy by negotiate - and where possible signing - trade deal , which could come into force after the conclusion of the implementation period . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
Scotland May dare rebel to defy her on Brexit ; EU date to be set in law as PM shore up Eurosceptics in Cabinet with Mordaunt
Theresa May today warn pro-European Tory rebel that she will not ` ` tolerate ' ' any attempt to undermine Brexit as she unveil plan to enshrine in law the date that Britain leave the EU . the Government last night table an amendment to commit Britain formally to leave the European Union at 11pm on March @card@ @card@ ahead of a debate and vote in the Commons next week . the amendment will effectively force pro-European MP to declare publicly if they oppose leave the EU in March @card@ . write in the Daily Telegraph , the Prime Minister warn MP that they must not use the passage of the EU Withdrawal Bill through Parliament over the next month to try to ` ` slow down or stop ' ' Brexit . the Prime Minister be also attempt to reassert her authority after lose two Cabinet minister in the space of a week while Brexit talk with Brussels remain deadlock with no sign of a breakthrough . she yesterday bow to the demand of Eurosceptic Tory MP by appoint Penny Mordaunt , a Brexit supporter who serve as a Royal Naval reservist , to replace Priti Patel as International Development Secretary . Mrs May say in her article : ` ` we will not tolerate attempt from any quarter to use the process of amendment to this bill as a mechanism to try to block the democratic wish of the British people by attempt to slow down or stop our departure from the European Union . ` ` the British people have be clear Parliament itself vote for Article @card@ - and for this bill at its second reading . we be leave the European Union on March @card@ @card@ . ' ' she say that the government ' S amendment , which have cross-party backing , will set out in ` ` black and white ' ' that Britain will leave the EU . the comment will be see as a direct challenge to Tory rebel , who have say that they be prepare to defeat the government by siding with opposition party to secure a legally-binding vote on the final Brexit deal . the UK will leave at 11pm - an hour earlier than previously think - because the timing of Brexit under the term of Article @card@ be determine by Brussels . the Prime Minister say that while she be prepare to work with MP to ` ` improve ' ' the bill , they must ultimately ` ` come together ' ' and help the UK secure the good deal for Britain as it leave the EU . she say : ` ` let no one doubt our determination or question our resolve , Brexit be happen . ` ` it will be there in ` ` black and white ' ' the front page of this historic piece of legislation . the EU Withdrawal Bill be the single most significant piece of legislation in this Parliament because it be fundamental to deliver a smooth and orderly Brexit . ' ' EU leader be say to be prepare for the fall of Mrs May ' s government ' after Brexit I might have to relocate to Frankfurt ' within week after scandal and division threaten her grip on power . Mrs May ' s appointment of Ms Mordaunt , @card@ , follow a backlash over her decision to appoint Gavin Williamson , the former Chief Whip who back Remain , as Defence Secretary . the Prime Minister also appoint Victoria Atkins as a Home Office minister . ally say that the promotion of the two woman show that Mrs May want to bring in ` ` fresh blood ' ' ahead of a full reshuffle later this year . the promotion of Ms Mordaunt come after Ms Patel be force to resign over secret meeting with Israeli politician . she be expect to make a series of intervention from the backbenches during the debate over the EU
May ' S Big Speech must offer a Big Tent Brexit ; the PM ' s tendency to freeze out those who criticise or disagree with her will do her no favour
like so many modern political habit , the tradition of the Prime Minister ' S Big Speech come from Tony Blair . whether to stamp authority on an issue , answer critic allege a lack of leadership , or distract from some other problem , Mr Blair would offer a Big Speech , an act of oratory intend to dominate the agenda , capture headline and frame political debate . whether such speech actually work be an open question , not least since most people barely notice them . but politician always enjoy the idea that they can change the world through the power of their word alone . Gordon Brown and David Cameron like Big Speeches too . Theresa May resist for half a year , but she will soon give her first Big Speech , about Brexit . next month , she will ` ` set out more about our approach and about the opportunity I think we have as a country to use this process to forge a truly global Britain ' ' . sound grand . that ' s a problem of Big Speeches : they raise hope . just ask Mr Cameron . he make a Big Speech about Europe just three January ago and it destroy him . he do n't just announce the EU referendum , he cast it as a choice between leave and stay on radically different term . the expectation he raise mean the reform he finally offer could only disappoint voter . that leave him offer them a choice between Brexit and a status quo he have admit be unacceptable . in this respect , Mrs May will come to her speech with a certain advantage : no one will expect the exquisite detail of her negotiate strategy . the message-free message of ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' have sink in , at Westminster and among EU leader . Mrs May ' s glacial opacity be now accept as a fact of life . yet she still need to learn from Mr Cameron ' S mistake . her speech need to balance hope and disappointment . more delicate still , her optimism and pessimism must be offer to the same audience : leave voter and the politician who speak for them . the optimism they need be this : Brexit will happen . Britain will leave the EU . that need to be say , loud and clear and often , to lift the curious gloom afflict many Leavers . despite a decisive referendum victory and the appointment of a Prime Minister who know her job depend on it , many Brexiteers remain oddly timid , fearful of political opponent whose strength and resolve they exaggerate : despite the magical power some Tories ascribe to him , Mr Blair will not bewitch Britain out of Brexit . nor will a few dozen refuseniks in Parliament block Article @card@ if the court force Mrs May to legislate ; she will win there , easily . yet even as she reassure the Brexiteers , Mrs May should ready them for disappointment , a Brexit that take longer than they ' d like and may include more Europe than they ' d hope . she should build on the hint of recent week to confirm that in the government ' S view , neither a ` ` transitional ' ' deal after our formal exit nor some participation in either the single market or the custom union be incompatible with honour the referendum result . there be two reason to prepare the ground for a Brexit that fall short of the Brexiteers ' dream . first , bar a failure of talk that really be n't in anyone ' S interest , the term of our exit and our new relationship with the EU will be a compromise , fall somewhere between Britain ' s ideal outcome and the EU ' S . second , Brexit will also be a compromise between different British position : it need to be accept not just by Leavers but by Remainers too . most of the latter , Contra Mr Blair , accept that Brexit be inevitable ; argue to stay in the single market be n't a plot to stop Brexit , merely an opinion about how to achieve it . the referendum result do not end political debate : the @card@ per cent may be in the minority , but they have vote , and voice . Mrs May should make clear she seek a Brexit for the @card@ per cent , or as many as possible , to make sure she go to the negotiate table with the broad support . the more aggressive player on the EU team , notably Guy Verhofstadt of the European Parliament , be openly try to exploit difference between Leavers and Remainers . Mrs May ' s good answer be to eliminate those difference , bring as many reasonable Remainers as she can into partnership with Leavers . instead of leave George Osborne to plot on the backbenches , she should make clear there be a place for him in what amount to a national coalition for Brexit . that do n't have to mean a ministerial job , just the chance to be hear , respectfully , within the government . Mrs May ' s unfortunate tendency to freeze out those who criticise or disagree with her will do her no favour either in the Brexit negotiation or the effort to sell the outcome of those talk to Britain . Mrs May would probably rather die than admit she owe any political debt to Mr Blair , much less draw inspiration from him . but since she ' S follow his pattern with her big speech , she might as well learn from his habit of cast his political net as widely as possible : time for Big Tent Brexit . follow James Kirkup on Twitter @ jameskirkup ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Trump chide May : I would be tough with EU on Brexit
Donald Trump have criticise Theresa May over her Brexit strategy and say that he would have take a ` ` tough ' ' approach with Brussels . the US president say the European Union be ` ` not crack up to what it ' s suppose to be ' ' and claim he be unsurprised by the result of the Brexit referendum because Briton ` ` do n't want people come from all over the world into Britain ' ' . the comment will be seize on by Brexiteers who be urge the Prime Minister to take a tough approach with the EU and pursue a clean Brexit . in an interview broadcast on ITV last night , Piers Morgan ask Mr Trump if Mrs May be in a ` ` good position ' ' in Brexit talk . the president reply : ` ` Would it be the way I negotiate ? no , I would n't negotiate it the way it ' S ( being ) negotiate ... I would have have a different attitude . ' ' he go on : ` ` I would have say that the European Union be not crack up to what it ' s suppose to be . I would have take a tough stand in get out . ' ' Mr Trump also suggest that he predict Brexit . the president say : ` ` I say ( that ) because of trade , but mostly immigration , Brexit be go to be a big upset . and I be right . ' ' the US president also hint that he be prepare to enter into a trade war with the EU . he say : ` ` the European Union have be very , very unfair to the United States . and I think it will turn out to be very much to their detriment . ' ' he criticise the transition period after Brexit , but say he be commit to do a free trade deal with the UK as soon as possible . he say : ` ` as you know , you ' re somewhat restrict because of Brexit . and when that restriction be up , we ' re go to be your great trading partner . it ' S a tough restriction to have . you know , for a couple of year you have a very strong lack of be able to do thing . ` ` no @card@ decline to comment , but Baroness Evans , leader of the conservative in the Lords , say : ` ` I think Donald Trump tend to think he can do way good than most people in most sense . ' ' Trump clash with Jay-Z : page @card@
Tories and Labour hold secret talk on soft Brexit ; the Telegraph Election @card@ Cross-party commission offer way forward , say Hague
senior Cabinet minister be engage in secret talk with Labour MP to secure cross-party backing for a soft Brexit , it have emerge . some of the most senior member of Theresa May ' S team have be plot how to force the Prime Minister to make concession on immigration , the custom union and the single market . there have also be discussion of a cross-party Brexit Commission to agree common ground between the party and ensure an orderly withdrawal from the EU . Labour be expect to use the talk as leverage to demand an end to the public sector pay freeze among a series of concession in next week ' s Queen ' s Speech at the State Opening of Parliament . Mrs May be understand to have be ` ` aware ' ' of the plot for several day but so far have do nothing to stop it . Ruth Davidson , the increasingly influential leader of the Scottish Conservatives , tell Mrs May in a meeting yesterday that she must ` ` reach out ' ' to other party and ` ` work with other on Brexit ' ' . she add that there should be ` ` change in the offer on Brexit as we go forward ' ' - a direct challenge to the Prime Minister ' S authority . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary and staunch Brexiteer , say it be vital that the government can ` ` achieve a deal that can command the wide possible support ' ' . last night Mrs May be cheer at the first meeting of the @card@ committee of backbench Tory MP since lose her majority as she tell them : ` ` I get us into this mess and I ' ll get us out of it . ' ' in other development : Senior conservative suggest Mrs May will be allow to continue as Prime Minister until @card@ ; the start of Brexit talk be delay after the EU say the election result have cause uncertainty in Brussels ; Downing Street announce that the Queen ' S Speech could be delay by the need to reach an agreement with the DUP about what will be in it ; Theresa May will fly to Paris tonight to meet the French president , Emmanuel Macron , to discuss counter-terrorism and Brexit ; Labour ' s policy on Brexit descend into chaos as two of Jeremy Corbyn ' s most senior frontbenchers contradict the Labour leader . Brexit will dominate whatever remain of Mrs May ' S premiership , and the conservative behind the talk with Labour MP believe the Prime Minister will have no choice but to accept their demand in order to ensure her Brexit plan be not block by Parliament . MP who favour a soft Brexit or oppose it altogether , largely comprise those who back Remain in the EU referendum , outnumber hard Brexiteers in the Commons . the two opposing side forge alliance when they campaign side by side in the EU referendum , and last night senior Conservative and Labour source confirm that talk be ongoing and look set to intensify over the come week as negotiation with EU leader begin . one senior Tory source say the election have make clear that the conservative be ` ` no long in control of the Brexit process ' ' and add that the party must listen to ` ` all side ' ' . Conservative MP fear that lose akey vote on Brexit would weaken Mrs May ' S position so much that she could be force to stand aside , trigger a leadership contest or bad - a second election . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Lord Hague , the former Tory leader , put forward a plan for how a crossparty commission would work . he suggest that the election result require ` ` a change both of style and substance ' ' in government , and should be treat as ` ` an opportunity and a duty to tackle intractable issue in new way ' ' . gain cross-party support , he say , will require a change in ` ` the emphasis give to the UK ' S objective , with a clear indication that economic growth will have priority over control the number of people enter the country for work ' ' . a commission would include business leader , the first minister of devolve government and ` ` the leader of all the opposition party - yes , even Corbyn ' ' to agree common ground . he also suggest that Britain could join the European Economic Area , like Norway , for two year as a stage post to full Brexit . Yvette Cooper , one of Labour ' s most senior and credible figure on immigration , also call for cross-party talk on how a deal be strike . write in the Guardian she say : ` ` we should set up a small cross-party commission to conduct the negotiation , and have a clear and transparent process to build consensus behind the final deal . ` ` it should be accountable to Parliament but avoid get catch up in the inevitable hung parliament political row . ' ' Jeremy Corbyn be work on plan to amend the Queen ' s Speech , in which the government will set out its plan to push Brexit through Parliament , to include his ` ` jobs-first ' ' plan for leave the EU . Senior Labour source say conversation have take place to allow backchannels between the two party to negotiate amendment to Brexit bill which would soften the exit . if there be no agreement to set up a Brexit commission , one alternative would be for Labour backbencher to table amendment , with agreement from pro-Remain Conservatives , which would be easy for Tory MP to support than if they come from Mr Corbyn ' s own team . the shadow cabinet would then ` ` fall in behind ' ' the same amendment , the source say , make it look like the change have not be win by Mr Corbyn himself . the source add that Labour would urge the Prime Minister to change her tone and strategy on Brexit to focus on job and the economy rather than curb immigration .
Scotland Starmer plan to scrap great repeal Bill raise prospect of second Brexit referendum
labour will today unveil plan to frustrate Brexit by scrap the Tories ' great repeal bill , raise the prospect of a second European Union referendum . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , will commit Labour to a new EU Rights and Protections Bill to ensure there be no change to worker ' right , consumer right or environmental protection . a Labour government will also scrap the Tories ' Brexit White Paper , which set out the government ' S plan for Brexit , and ` ` replace it with fresh negotiate priority that have a strong emphasis on retain the benefit of the Single Market and the Customs Union ' ' . Tory Eurosceptic MP say the scale of the plan would make it difficult for Jeremy Corbyn , as prime minister , not to agree to hold a second referendum . Iain Duncan-Smith , the former Tory Cabinet minister , say : ` ` the truth be that Labour be run scared that the Liberal Democrats will steal their vote . it be clear and obvious that they be in the bad of all world - they be in effect oppose Brexit and raise the prospect of a second referendum but have n't get the gut to say so . ' ' Theresa May have already pledge a new Great repeal Bill to repatriate EU regulation into UK law to ensure that Brexit be implement with as little upheaval as possible . Sir Keir will say an EU Rights and Protections Bill ` ` will make sure that all EUderived law - include workplace law , consumer right and environmental protection - be fully protect ' ' . Sir Keir will also say : ` ` a Labour government will set out a new Brexit strategy . we will scrap the government ' S Brexit White Paper and replace it with fresh negotiate priority that reflect Labour value and our six test . Labour will seek to settle transitional arrangement early in the negotiation and will ` ` unilaterally guarantee legal right for all EU national live in the UK and seek reciprocal right for UK citizen in the EU ' ' . Sir Keir will add : ` ` it be shameful that the Prime Minister reject repeated attempt by Labour to resolve this before Article @card@ be trigger . ' '
May tell civil servant to get on with Brexit ; Hammond plan to protect car industry after Brexit
Theresa May have give pro-EU civil servant their ` ` march order ' ' , tell them they must get on with the job of deliver Brexit . Senior government source have complain that Europhile mandarin be attempt to sabotage Brexit by frustrate the work of minister . Lord O'Donnell , the former Cabinet secretary , add to fear of a ` ` stitchup ' ' by pro-EU civil servant by warn Brexit be ` ` not inevitable ' ' and that Britain could end up remain in a reform EU . however , a Downing Street source say : ` ` the Prime Minister have be very clear that the government will deliver on the Brexit vote and make a success of it . ` ` Those be the march order and the civil service will be expect to deliver . ' ' the Prime Minister will use a meeting of her Cabinet at Chequers on Wednesday to demand action plan for how Brexit can work . Mrs May will tell the meeting at her official country residence that how to make a success of Brexit and ` ` the opportunity for the UK ' ' be at the ` ` top of her in-tray ' ' . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be expect to suggest Britain could leave the Single Market but retain access for the financial sector continue on Page @card@ Jeremy Warner : page @card@ Editorial Comment Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ and car industry . the approach , if successful , would enable Britain to impose restriction on free movement of EU migrant while ensure that key part of Britain ' s economy be protect . it follow report that Mr Hammond have clash with senior conservative , who say he be restrict their plan to pull out of the Single Market . a source close to Mr Hammond insist he be not ` ` operate a block mechanism ' ' . a former governor of the Bank of England have say Britain could be good off outside the EU , the Times report . Lord King of Lothbury tell Central Banking magazine that in the wake of the drop in the value of Sterling : ` ` we be now in a good position to rebalance the UK economy . ' ' he add that government forecast ahead of the referendum ` ` inevitably be highly speculative ' ' . meanwhile , Sigmar Gabriel , Germany ' s economics minister , warn the EU could go ` ` down the drain ' ' if it give in to Britain ' s Brexit demand . he say : ` ` Brexit be bad but it wo n't hurt us as much economically as some fear - it ' s more of a psychological problem and it ' S a huge problem politically . ` ` if we organise Brexit in the wrong way , then we ' ll be in deep trouble so now we need to make sure that we do n't allow Britain to keep the nice thing , so to speak , relate to Europe while take no responsibility , ' ' he also say free trade negotiation between the EU have fail but ` ` nobody be really admit it ' ' .
Adonis say May ' be voice of Ukip ' as he quit as tsar
lord Adonis , the Europhile Labour peer , have resign as the government ' s infrastructure tsar , accuse Theresa May of become ` ` the voice of Ukip ' ' in her Brexit policy . the former transport secretary under Gordon Brown use his resignation letter to tell Mrs may she be put Europe ' S peace and security at risk , compare the ` ` isolation ' ' of Brexit to the policy that precede the First World War - something he remove from the version he later publish . he describe Brexit as ` ` a dangerous populist and nationalist spasm worthy of Donald Trump ' ' . Whitehall source say his belief that Brexit can be stop be so far against government policy it effectively mean he ` ` jump before he be push ' ' . it be understand he be plan to resign in the new year but bring it ahead when the Daily Telegraph obtain a draft of his letter to Mrs May . although as a peer Lord Adonis be unelected , he lecture Mrs May about pursue a Brexit policy for which she have ` ` no mandate ' ' , while say he will ` ` relentlessly ' ' oppose the EU Withdrawal Bill in the House of Lords . Lord Adonis , who serve in the Labour government of @card@ to @card@ , be make chairman of the National Infrastructure Commission by Mrs May in April , with the task of draw together policy on road , rail , HS2 and broadband . but he have attract more attention for his stance on Brexit . he describe it as ` ` self-mutilation ' ' and in October be accuse of try to thwart Brexit when he go to Brussels with fellow Europhiles Nick Clegg and Kenneth Clarke to meet Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator . in his letter , Lord Adonis say he be step down because of ` ` fundamental policy difference which simply ca n't be bridge ' ' . he say : ` ` the European Union Withdrawal Bill be the bad legislation of my lifetime , ' ' add : ` ` after the narrow referendum vote for an undefined proposition to ' leave the EU , ' it could have be attempt without rupture our essential European trade and political relation . ` ` however , by become the voice of Ukip and the extreme nationalist Rightwing of your party , you have take a different course , for which you have no parliamentary or popular mandate . ' ' he predict that Britain return to the EU would become ` ` the mission of our child ' S generation , who will marvel at your wanton destruction ' ' . in his draft letter , he go on to claim that Russian aggression , the rise of nationalism in Poland and Hungary , and British isolationism be create condition similar to those that come before the First World War . he warn : ` ` no one can doubt the resonance with the past or the danger ahead . ' '
this rebellion remind the PM that Leaving be about Parliament too ; a great many power be be repatriate from Brussels and MP be keen to have a say in their use
as a handful of Tory rebel share a bottle of wine in the Pugin Room after defeat the government over Brexit on Wednesday night , the real party be be hold at the other end of the parliamentary estate . after the vote , some Labour MP glide back to Jeremy Corbyn ' s office for an early Christmas celebration that last well into the night ; there be report of them toast their new Tory accomplice . and this be why so many conservative have be so angry : they sense not just rebellion but outright betrayal . as happen so often in politics , temper be run high because the stake be now low . Brexit be not in danger - in fact , it have never look more secure . and this be precisely why the Tories feel more at liberty to start fight . as MP tell me after the rebellion : ` ` the Brexit deal be pretty safe , so we can now afford to murder each other . ' ' so far , this part of the plan be go rather well . Prime Minister Theresa May do not much mind her parliamentary defeat on Wednesday . those who speak to her afterwards say she be relax and joke that it be the least of the problem she have have to deal with this year . at lunchtime today , the European Council will say that the first - and , politically , the tough - stage of the Brexit talk be complete . it be , in the end , all about money . we offer the equivalent of about four year ' membership fee and they accept . complicated trade talk will soon start , but there be now not much chance of negotiation collapse entirely . it be not too great an exaggeration to say that the Brexit deal be mostly do and the panic over . and Parliament ? its full permission for a Brexit have already be give and no other vote be require . that be what the fuss with the Supreme Court be all about . the vote for Article @card@ be the big one , and it serve to eject the United Kingdom from the European Union by March @card@ @card@ whether or not there be a deal - and whether or not Parliament like it . what have change , now , be that MP have make sure they will have the chance to vote on whether to approve whatever deal the Prime Minister negotiate - but it be all a bit tokenistic . if they do not approve , then Britain leave with no deal at all . you can see why MP be feel a little aggrieve about all this . what they think about leave the EU do not really matter anymore , which be why they be fight to get back in the conversation . and revel in the new role that Brexit have allot to them . once , it be hard to think of a more obedient minister than Nicky Morgan or a more establishment figure than Dominic Grieve - yet both be now play at be rebel , and quite enjoy it . on the other side we have Bernard Jenkin talk about the need for discipline and loyalty , to the amazement of the MP who remember him collect signature call for David Cameron ' S resignation just after the near-miraculous Tory majority of @card@ . not so long ago , Nadine Dorries would denounce Mr Cameron as an ` ` arrogant posh boy ' ' ; now , she be call for the deselection of MP who undermine the Prime Minister . the punch-up have be a long time in come . a few week ago , this newspaper identify the new Tory mutineer , and we can expect to hear quite a lot from them in the next few week . but how much damage might they really do ? only two , Ken Clarke and Anna Soubry , be genuinely out to thwart Brexit but lack the opportunity to do so . most have no coherent agenda at all , they just think they ought to make life difficult for the government . they be pick their battle - and , I have to admit , make some fairly decent argument in the process . a great many power be be repatriate from Brussels and it ' S not entirely clear that the government know what to do with them . one of the rebel ' main theme be that Parliament be need to scrutinise these new power . for example : bad , fractured regulation be one of the main cause of the financial crash of @card@ . if Brexit end up create a financial regulatory monster , with the wrong power in the wrong hand , then the condition for the next crash will be set . with this in mind , the Tory rebel can argue that stand up to the government be not about subvert Brexit , but rather about secure the good kind of Brexit . some of the rebel say that their real concern be Jeremy Corbyn . it ' S one thing allow the Conservative government to acquire huge , unchecked power as a result of Brexit . but what happen if Labour end up in charge ? John McDonnell would be delight if , as Chancellor , he have power to direct a massive post- Brexit financial regulator without anyone in parliament to hold him back . so in most case , this be see as a kind of loyal mutiny : make sure that Brexit do not deform British government . much of the rebellion be just about put down a marker , to remind the government that it need to keep be afraid of Parliament . so the more trivial the law , the more likely the rebellion . when there ' s a pointless , symbolic amendment - such as ask Parliament to set an exact date for Brexit - then the government might well lose the vote . but the important Brexit vote be all go rather well . the government have be win them by a majority of about @card@ seat , twice its actual majority . so we be not , really , look at a dirty-dozen Tories hell-bent on stop both Brexit and the Prime Minister . there be maybe one or two in that camp , a number so low that Mrs May should take it as an insult : Mr Cameron always have at least a dozen Tory dedicate to his destruction . but , in most case , MP be still work out when to obey , when to rebel and how good to shape the great many power now on their way back to Westminster . it will be raucous , unedify at time , and involve much more parliamentary drama - but this be precisely what Brexit be all about . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Brexiteers warn that @card@ million voter must not be betray
Theresa May have be warn she ` ` must deliver on Brexit ' ' or she will betray the 17million people who vote last month for Britain to leave the European Union . Eurosceptic Cabinet minister include Boris Johnson , the former Mayor of London , and Owen Paterson , a former Environment Secretary , say it be ` ` vital ' ' that Mrs may ` ` respect the will of the people ' ' . Owen Paterson , a former Environment Secretary and supporter of Andrea Leadsom , say : ` ` if she fail to deliver on Brexit there will be massive disillusionment in the political class as a whole . she must deliver a Brexit for the 17.4million people who vote for it . ' ' Boris Johnson , one of the lead voice in the Vote leave camp , say : ` ` I have no doubt Theresa will make an excellent party leader and prime minister and I ' m encourage that she ' S make it clear that Brexit mean Brexit - that we will leave the EU . ` ` it be vital that we respect the will of the people and get on with exploit new opportunity for this country . ' ' Mrs May insist yesterday that she be ` ` go to make a success ' ' of Brexit . she say : ` ` Our country need strong , proven leadership to steer us through this time of economic and political uncertainty and to negotiate the good deal for Britain as we leave the EU and forge a new role for ourselves in the world . ` ` because Brexit mean Brexit , and we ' re go to make a success of it . ' ' the new Tory leader have campaign for the UK to remain inside the EU but do not make any high-profile appeal earn her criticism for her lacklustre approach . but she have vow not to trigger Article @card@ , the formal mechanism to begin a Brexit , until the UK be ready to negotiate a new deal . Mrs Leadsom , her former opponent , have promise to do so more quickly in order to speed up the process of leave . Mrs May say there be no ` ` absolutely deadline ' ' for her to trigger the formal talk , add the most important thing be to secure a good deal . she add : ` ` we should n't invoke Article @card@ immediately , I ' ve say it should n't be before the end of the year , we need to set our own negotiation position . ' ' Other pro-Brexit MP call for Mrs Leadsom to be give a position in Mrs May ' S cabinet and back the Tory leader ' s promise to put a Brexiter in charge of plan to leave the EU . Nigel Evans MP , who campaign for the UK to leave , say : ` ` there be no sidestep , there be no second referendum , we be go to respect the wish of the British people ... that ' S exactly whats go to happen and Theresa do give a guarantee that a Brexiteer would be in charge of that withdrawal . it have to be someone who vigorously campaign for us to leave the European union . ' ' Politicians in Brussels concede that Mrs May be a tough negotiator and will battle to get the good deal for the UK and one Italian newspaper describe Mrs May as the English equivalent of Angela Merkel . EU source be say to be please with Mrs May ' s appointment as Prime Minister because she be a known quantity follow her numerous talk and discussion during her time as a Cabinet minister .
Brexit price row over Marmite ; Tesco stop stock Unilever product after it demand 10pc increase on everyday item Unilever be take advantage of Brexit , say minister
one of Britain ' s big supermarket be run low on everyday household item such as Marmite and PG Tips after it refuse to bow to demand from a major conglomerate to raise price in the wake of the Brexit vote . Tesco be last night lock in a standoff with Unilever , which campaign against Brexit , after the company demand price rise of @card@ per cent , blame the fall value of the pound . Unilever , which earlier this year post profit of more than £2 billion , be understand to have stop delivery to Tesco branch , lead to shortage of product include mayonnaise , Ben & Jerry ' s ice cream , toothpaste and soap . many of the item have be remove from Tesco ' s online store , with report that stock could start run out in shop throughout the country . it be believe that a series of British supermarket be in dispute with Unilever . Conservative MP and industry insider last night accuse Unilever of ` ` exploit consumer ' ' in the wake of Brexit . one minister describe Unilever as ` ` reprehensible ' ' and say the company be ` ` use Brexit as an excuse ' ' . it come as David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , face down a grow Tory rebellion in the commons by say that Parliament must not be allow to ` ` thwart ' ' Britain ' s exit from the EU . Mr Davis warn of a ` ` blame Brexit festival ' ' as he reject demand from a cross-party coalition of MP that backbencher be allow to vote on the term of Britain ' s exit from the EU . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , also attack MP not ` ` accept ' ' the Brexit vote , tell the commons : ` ` we be side with the British people who vote to leave the European union . ' ' a series of senior Tory MP face a barrage of criticism from their colleague as they join a cross-party coalition attempt to stop a so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' and ensure that Britain remain a member of the single market . there be grow anger last night over Unilever ' s attempt to increase the price of its brand , which include Colman ' S , Flora , Comfort and Knorr . before the EU referendum , Unilever say the firm would be ` ` negatively impacted ' ' by Brexit . it say the ` ` way we run the company may be fundamentally different if the decision be take to leave the EU ' ' . ahead of the referendum Paul Polman , Unilever ' S CEO , say that Brexit would force up the price of ice cream . he say : ` ` let ' s take our ice cream , for example , one of our Wall ' s product - a Magnum ; undoubtedly if the UK will leave the condition will not be as good as if they stay in . ' ' Dave Lewis , Tesco ' s chief executive who join to steer the turnaround of Britain ' s big supermarket in @card@ , be the former head of Unilever ' s personal good range , credit with help to revive dove soap . at Tesco ' s interim result last week , Mr Lewis say that he be not ` ` comfortable ' ' with supplier ' effort to reclaim cost when sterling drop , when they fail to pass on currency benefit to shopper . the Tesco boss say that he would try to offset any cost increase bring on follow the post-Brexit slump in the pound by boost productivity and negotiate with supplier . Sir Gerald Howarth , the Conservative MP , say : ` ` I think it will be very damaging to the reputation of Unilever if they seek to use the fall in the pound to exploit the consumer . ` ` clearly product which be not dependent upon import into the United Kingdom will not be affect by the fall in the value of the pound . ` ` consumer will switch to other product where company be n't seek to fleece the consumer . ' ' Iain Wright , the Labour chairman of the business select committee with oversight of the retail sector , say : ` ` the last thing consumer need be a stand-off between Tesco and its supplier , where shopper ca n't buy their regular favourite and staple grocery off the shelf . ` ` this be exactly the kind of dispute which the Grocery Code Adjudicator be set up to intervene in and I trust they will be pay close attention to get this situation resolve quickly . ' ' a Tory minister say : ` ` this be really quite reprehensible , they should n't be take advantage in this way . they be use Brexit as an excuse , Tesco be to be applaud . ' ' the pound have fall @card@ per cent since Britain vote to leave the EU . Bryan Roberts , a retail analyst at TCC Global , say : ` ` a lot of supplier be seek to pass on price increase to retailer but in the current environment retailer be increasingly reluctant to take it . they want to keep price as low as they can to increase their affordability against the competition . ' ' a Tesco spokesman say : ` ` we be experience availability issue on a number of Unilever product . we always work to ensure customer get the well possible price and we hope to have this issue resolve soon . ' ' Tesco last night say the issue be mostly affect its online operation , insist that most shop would be unaffected . Unilever last night refuse to comment . it come amid warning that Britain face a ( Euro ) @card@ billion ( £18 billion ) bill from Brussels as it leave the EU . accord to an analysis by the Financial Times , British taxpayer could be force to pay the ` ` divorce settlement ' ' because of unpaid budget contribution and pension contribution . vanish act brand remove from Tesco website ? surf washing powder ? Persil washing powder ? comfort fabric conditioner ? Hellmann ' S mayonnaise ? pot Noodle Ben & Jerry ' s ice cream ? Knorr stock cube ? Bertolli spread ? dove soap product ? Colman ' s mustard
rebel Tory must explain Brexit stance Body : if it be Theresa May ' s intention to flush out anti-Brexit rebel on her own backbenches with her article in last week ' s Telegraph , she have certainly succeed . in announce plan to fix legally the date of Brexit to March @card@ @card@ , she make it clear that she would not tolerate wrecker on her own side use parliamentary process to undermine , or attempt to reverse , our departure from the European Union . now a group of at least @card@ Conservative MP have emerge , defy her . it be always clear that an opportunistic , flip-flop Labour Party would , despite its promise and the clear wish of many of its own supporter in the election campaign , put every obstacle in the path of Brexit . but at least Jeremy Corbyn can offer the feeble defence that he and his colleague be in opposition . such shameless hypocrisy be to be expect . what equivalent excuse can rebel Tory MP offer - MP who vote in favour of trigger Article @card@ , yet now suddenly find they have insurmountable scruple about accept its inevitable consequence ? these be parliamentarian who choose to invoke a process with a clear two-year timeframe . so Brexiteers in the country may find themselves ask , with entirely legitimate scepticism , why their representative can not bring themselves to follow through now . despite the unprecedented strain of Brexit , parliamentary process have hold up well so far . but it be begin to fray . individual thread be split from the fabric . rebel must know that , by oppose the legal fix of Brexit ' S date , they can not stop Brexit itself . but they can weaken the government , and thus the hand that Britain can play in negotiation with the EU . so what be their actual aim ? this be not about a witch-hunt . Kenneth Clarke , the Father of House , be one of the group and have long make his opposition to Brexit clear . his position be establish , well-argued and principled . it be possible to disagree with his point of view , but it be hard to object . he make an excellent speech in the House yesterday , state his position once again and remind other member of its ` ` consistency ' ' . ` ` now I find I be the rebel , ' ' he joke . only up to a point . for he be consistent , and vote against invoke Article @card@ . his fellow ` ` rebel ' ' do not . so they must explain why they have suddenly change their mind . be it principle ? or be it anti-Brexit prejudice ?
UK economy would be seriously weaken by Brexit
it be a fact that the balance of the conclusion from the serious and detailed economic study of the medium-term consequence of Brexit for the British economy be overwhelmingly negative . the central estimate from the study be that the economic loss from Brexit be in the range of 5pc to 10pc of GDP per annum around @card@ or @card@ year from now , or around £1,500 to £3,000 per person per year ( I deliberately use round number here to avoid spurious precision ) . estimate of short-term loss to GDP from Brexit over the next few year be in the range 0.5pc to 2pc . examination in some way of these result be the duty of anyone take their vote seriously in the referendum . my purpose here be to offer some help in evaluate this evidence , something I have be do for much of my professional life though I write now in a personal capacity . evaluation must come by look at the argument , assumption and quality of work . it should not be base on personal attack or impugn motive , as have all too often be a feature of this referendum campaign . the seriousness of the decision require we do good than that . in evaluate the argument we should also ask whether the bias in any estimate of loss point to over or underestimate . I will examine the most prominent and carefully research of the medium-term study : her Majesty ' s Treasury , the OECD , and the Centre for Economic Performance at the LSE . I have have the opportunity to discuss these study with lead author of each one , but be not involve in the production of any of them . the three study pursue their task of estimate loss or gain from Brexit by examine effect on investment , trade and productivity . they do not all make the same assumption about how a Brexit world would work , but they be centre on the ` ` Canada ' ' example . Canada and the EU have be negotiate a deal to remove many trade barrier and low tariff ( it take seven year to negotiate and be not yet in force ) . effect on trade , investment and productivity be then calculate , broadly , on the basis of what the extra trade barrier in the Canada post-Brexit example might look like , what opportunity and risk be likely to be perceive by investor , and how competitive structure and opportunity be likely to influence productivity . in each case evidence be use from economic study of past experience or change as to how much trade barrier , perceive risk and so on be likely to influence the GDP and economic activity in the new post- Brexit state . these be not forecast in the sense of predict where we will be . they be assessment of how much bad off after Brexit we might be compare with wherever we think we would be in , say , @card@ . that be a central question : would we as a nation , relative to the single economic measure of our output as capture by GDP , be bad off ? and we find , as I describe above , very serious loss . in my assessment of the quality of the work , the plausibility of the assumption and the use of evidence be as good as they could be in this kind of exercise . do they offer over or underestimate of the cost of Brexit ? my view be clearly the latter for the follow reason . first , they do not take into account the likely undermine of the stability of the EU of a UK exit and the feedback on the UK economy . second , they probably assume a ` ` too easy ' ' bargain from the EU in any new trade deal . the EU have a clear incentive to ` ` warn ' ' any other potential exiteer that the cost will be high . third , the study be quite conservative in their assessment of policy uncertainty and its effect on investment . my experience as chief economist of the World Bank be that magnitude of such effect be often underestimate . fourth , there can be large and lasting effect of short-run shock on medium-term outcome , as we have see from the financial crisis . Fifth , over the medium term the positive effect on productivity of be in a large and competitive market can be very substantial ( the CEP-LSE study with its large cost estimate of Brexit , rightly in my view , have a strong focus here ) . and , sixth , the dynamic effect of investment , innovation , learning and growth be , modern growth theory tell us , likely to be strong and important , magnify short and medium-term loss . my conclusion therefore be that these study represent the good we can do in these circumstance and , on balance , be likely to be underestimate of the loss from Brexit . within any set of assumption there be large margin of error . nevertheless , we surely should not go into a decision of such importance without do the good we can to assess the economic cost . the assessment of the medium-term cost point clearly and strongly one way : the economic cost of Brexit be high . of course , economic life , trade and investment would go on under Brexit . but the conclusion be that they would be seriously weaken . the change in the short term , not my focus here , have be clearly , plausibly and professionally set out by the Bank of England , the IMF , the Institute for fiscal study and other . their conclusion be that the shortterm cost be high too . whilst this crucial decision be about more than economics , the conclusion from the careful quantitative economic study be clear . Brexit be likely to be a very costly option . Nicholas Stern be IG Patel Professor of Economics and Government , LSE and President of the British Academy ' the conclusion from the careful quantitative economic study be clear . Brexit be likely to be a very costly option '
the UK must not lose its nerve on Brexit Body : Philip Hammond have have a roller coaster of a week . on Wednesday he say he be unwilling to spend the big money now to prepare for a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit . on Thursday , Lord Lawson , a prominent Eurosceptic , call for him to be sack . the Prime Minister be force to say that she have ` ` full confidence ' ' in the Chancellor . yesterday , Mr Hammond be record in an interview urge unity within the government , say that the real ` ` enemy ' ' be the EU . a few minute later , Mr Hammond tweet an apology . his use of the ` ` e ' ' word be wrong , he write , and he regret it : ` ` # noenemieshere ' ' . the Chancellor ' S misfortune be symptomatic of political failure . the government simply be n't sell Brexit correctly ; its message be confuse . it ought to prepare seriously for a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit , if only because the threat of Britain walk away from the negotiate table be one of the strong card it have to play . but while Theresa May promise readiness and have name Steve Baker as minister for ` ` contingency planning ' ' , the necessary money be not forthcoming . likewise , Brexit be suppose to mean Brexit , which we be reassure be what the government want , and yet this week the Prime Minister fail to say how she would vote on Brexit now if she have to . one day , Mrs May make concession . the next she declare that the ball be in the EU ' S court . the EU , however , be in no rush to act . yesterday , Jean-Claude Juncker say that while Europe be grateful for Britain help to rescue it in the forty , it now have a bar tab to pay - and that be the way that many Eurocrats see these negotiation . why hurry ? why move on to talk trade when they can hold their position , panic the British into overreaction and wring them for every penny they can get ? no doubt Brussels be listen to the militant Remainers who be convince that Britain do n't really have the political acumen or the gut to go through with Brexit . if Europe wait long enough , they calculate , the Brexit coalition will collapse and the UK will return to the fold . if that happen , the Tories will take the blame . it be the Tories who bungle the general election and be thus return without a majority . it be Tory rebel MP who now threaten the EU Withdrawal Bill - necessary to avoid a legal catastrophe the day after Brexit - with death by amendment . and it be a Tory Cabinet that appear divide , with some member still ambivalent in their attitude towards the referendum result they be put in office to effect . do n't they realise that if they bungle this , they will be defeat at the ballot box ? that mean Jeremy Corbyn become Prime Minister , a disaster that both Britain and the EU would live to regret . order in government come from the top : Mrs May have to pick a side in her Cabinet dispute and back it to the hilt . the country crave a return to the kind of firm leadership show before the general election , accompany by parliamentary skill and compelling diplomacy . the Europeans and Remainers must be show that the British people want Brexit - and they be go to get it .
minister and the City require the same Brexit vision
consider how much they rely on each other , it ' s surprising how often the City of London and the government seem to be talk at cross-purpose - particularly when it come to Brexit . whichever way you look at it , the City of London be a British success story . the financial service sector employ more than a million people , pay roughly 10pc of all tax receipt , and run a big trade surplus with the rest of the world . London be the dominant financial centre in Europe and the lead international financial centre in the world : in many sector of the financial market , around two third of all activity in the rest of the EU actually take place in London . and whichever way you look at it , Brexit will have a big impact on the www.City.No , the City be n't about to decamp to Paris , and Frankfurt be n't about to overtake London as a financial centre ( roughly the same number of people work in the City as live in Frankfurt ) . however , between a quarter and a third of the City ' S business involve the EU , and on the other side of Brexit , that ' s go to be a problem . the late example of this disconnect be the breathless warning from the City over the past few month that unless the government agree a so-called Brexit ` ` transition period ' ' with the EU by the end of this year ( or , at the late , the end of March @card@ ) , then hundred of firm will have to start move thousand of staff to the continent . at first glance , it look like the City and the government be read different word from the same script . the City talk about a ` ` transition period ' ' , the government prefer the phrase ` ` implementation period ' ' . while the two term be often use interchangeably - roughly , they both mean a period of two year ( perhaps more ) after Brexit for both side to adapt - they mean different thing , be base on different assumption , and have profoundly different consequence . the key difference be time . an ` ` implementation period ' ' would first require reach a trade deal with the EU to implement and be base on what many people think be an optimistic assumption that the UK can negotiate such a deal by March @card@ . a ` ` transition period ' ' would need to be agree before a trade deal be reach . it explicitly accept that the chance of clinch a deal in the next @card@ month be slim , and be in effect an extension to the negotiation process . it would mean that regulation and market access would remain unchanged for a few year after Brexit , give politician more time to negotiate a good deal , and enable firm to wait until the detail of that deal be clear before have to move staff and operation to the EU . this be more than just semantics : by link an implementation period to a trade deal , the UK Government be reduce the chance of achieve either , miss out on the opportunity to agree a deal that would buy everyone more time , and increase the risk of a messy ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit . a similar effect be on display with discussion about what sort of longer-term relationship the UK want to have with the EU on the other side of Brexit . in her speech at the party conference in October last year and at Lancaster House in January , Theresa May leave no room for doubt that Brexit mean leave the single market . for the City , that mean lose the EU passport that allow so much business to be do in London . yet the City be still ask for the moon : in this newspaper recently the former city minister Mark Hoban call for an ambitious free trade deal with the EU base on mutual recognition of standard . the Bank of England have float the idea of an enlarged European area of shared common standard for financial service cover the UK and the EU . and to confuse thing further , the government be still talk about carve out a special deal for the city that have be repeatedly reject by the EU . as Michel Barnier say : ` ` on financial service , UK voice suggest that Brexit do not mean Brexit . Brexit do mean Brexit - everywhere . ' ' to be clear , these idea have merit . they would be an excellent potential solution in the long term . but anyone who think such a complex deal for financial service can be agree in a little more than a year can , in the Foreign Secretary ' S word , ` ` go whistle ' ' . the late big piece of market regulation from the EU - Mifid @card@ - will have take eight year of consultation and negotiation by the time it come into force at the beginning of next year . of course , if you want the moon , it ' S well to start by ask for the star . but it would be well still for the City and the government to start talk the same language . William Wright be the manage director of New Financial , a capital market think-tank Square Mile ' s patience wane , page @card@ ' anyone who think such a complex deal for financial service can be agree in a year can , in the Foreign Secretary ' S word , go whistle '
two third of people think Brexit would not leave them any poorer ; fear of Brexit trade loss fail to register with voter
two third of Briton believe they would not be bad off in the event of a Brexit vote , in a blow to the assemble force of ` ` Project Fear ' ' . the finding come despite warning issue by the Treasury , the Bank of England , the International Monetary Fund , and OECD , all of which have caution on the economic repercussion of a Brexit vote to some degree , and suggest that most voter have be leave unconvinced . some 58pc of the public believe that their living standard would stay the same in the five year after a UK withdrawal from the EU , accord to an Ipsos Mori survey of more than @card@ Briton . a further 11pc expect that their financial wellbeing would actually improve if voter decide to leave the political bloc behind on June @card@ . the polling company ' S analysis also reveal that concern about the economy be most likely to affect the decision of swing voter , for whom the financial consequence of a Brexit vote be feel more keenly than question over British sovereignty or the migration debate . Bobby Duffy , manage director of Ipsos Mori , say : ` ` the twin issue of immigration and the economy have dominate the referendum campaign so far . ` ` the receive wisdom have be that message about control border and continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ sovereignty be the one which resonate with people who want to leave the EU , but this study show that the issue of how Brexit could affect individual financially be more likely than immigration to cause uncertainty in how they would vote . ' ' yet attempt to convince the electorate that the UK would certainly be on bad term with the rest of the world after a decision to leave the EU have fail to win over the British public . more than four in @card@ - 44pc - believe that Britain would be in a strong position to negotiate free trade agreement after a Brexit vote , compare with just 27pc who think the opposite . ask if they would consider switch their position if Brexit make them £500 a year well off , 13pc of Remain voter say that they would vote to leave the EU . around four in @card@ say that they would be unsure about how to vote if this be the case . ` ` so whilst the rhetoric in the leave campaign have focus on more abstract concept of self-determination , the argument about cash in pocket seem more likely to impact on Brexit voter , ' ' say Mr Duffy . supporter of Brexit be less likely to waver . when ask if they would change side if remain in the EU make them well off by £500 each year , only 7pc say that it would prompt them to vote to stay in the EU . 7pc Proportion of Brexit supporter who say they would switch side if remain in the EU make them £500 a year well off
@card@ job to go by day one of Brexit ; more company expect to move City role by March @card@ , with emphasis on front office , say EY
the City will have lose @card@ job to rival financial centre by ` ` day one ' ' of Brexit after a fifth of bank , broker and asset manager confirm their plan to open hub or relocate staff once the UK leave the EU . double the number of company now plan on move job post-Brexit compare to this time a year ago , accord to accountant EY , although the number of role think to be affect have shrink by @card@ . the firm , which track @card@ financial institution during November , warn that ` ` many ' ' of the @card@ role at risk will be client-facing , front-office job and not the back office role originally expect . its estimate , which echo the @card@ figure make by senior Bank of England official Sam Woods last month , come day after the European Commission announce that there have be ` ` sufficient progress ' ' in the Brexit talk , allow the discussion to move onto trade . the announcement ` ` send a wave of relief across the City ' ' as it signal an intention to agree to a post-Brexit transitional period early next year , EY ' s UK financial service leader Omar Ali say . financial institution have be call for a transitional period for month over fear that they will lose the right to access EU client with no time to adjust . more firm be expect to press the firing gun on their contingency plan if an agreement be n't table early next year . the finance sector , which make up 10.7pc of the UK economy , be already start to disperse . Goldman Sachs ' boss Lloyd Blankfein tell French newspaper Le Figaro last month that Brexit be force the bank to decentralise . he also publicly air his Brexit concern and support for Frankfurt and Paris on Twitter . Dublin and Frankfurt be the two financial centre likely to benefit the most from the Brexit move , EY say , with the two city attract @card@ financial institution since the Brexit vote last June . however , the relocation of role to these city be unlikely to have an impact on London in the short-term , Mr Ali add . the industry be keen to keep any move to a minimum , with the investment banking boss of one large bank say they want the number to be as low as possible . headhunter claim they be still busy fill City-based job , as area such as merger and acquisition be expect to remain active . ` ` we remain very busy in M & A , financing and structuring , ' ' say Richard Hoar , a director of finance at Goodman Masson . ` ` my client seem to remain positive that they can keep the number [ of exit ] low . ' ' 20pc the proportion of bank , broker and asset manager that have confirm plan to open hub or relocate staff after Brexit
Juncker support speed up Brexit talk ; PM battle to end deadlock with dinner for EC president and a charm offensive against leader
Theresa May ' S hope of break a deadlock in Brexit talk appear to be give a boost last night after she and Jean-Claude Juncker agree to ` ` accelerate ' ' negotiation . the Prime Minister yesterday fly out to dinner with Mr Juncker , the president of the European Commission , in a bid to break the deadlock in Brexit negotiation . it come after a Brexit charm offensive that see her speak to Emmanuel Macron , the French president , Leo Varadkar , the Irish taoiseach , and Angela Merkel , the German chancellor . and in an apparent sign of more cordial relation , Mr Juncker give David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , a ` ` bear hug ' ' after the dinner , while earlier joke that there would be an ` ` autopsy ' ' in the wake of the meeting . but while Mrs May and Mr Juncker hail the talk as ` ` constructive and friendly ' ' , the EU appear to be harden its position ahead of Thursday ' S European Council summit . it yesterday emerge that EU leader will formally demand that the European Court of Justice must oversee the right of European citizen live in the UK after Brexit . the line be reportedly add to a leak draft of conclusion for the summit at the request of Germany and France . the UK have say the court can have no oversight after Brexit . EU source tell the Daily Telegraph that while there be an ` ` appetite ' ' to move on with negotiation ` ` there be just nothing to eat ' ' . a source say that the dinner be a pre-arrange ` ` courtesy ' ' that ` ` nobody want to attend ' ' but there be concern that fail to do so would represent ` ` the bad of both world ' ' . the Prime Minister be unwilling to make further concession after commit to pay Brussel up to ( Euro ) 20billion ( £18billion ) during a two-year transition period after Brexit . the European Union be demand that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' must be make towards a Brexit divorce bill , the right of EU citizen and Northern Ireland before talk can move forward . a senior EU diplomat tell the Daily Telegraph that the ` ` only game-changer would be money ' ' , in a reference to the bill . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , suggest that it be ` ` silly ' ' for the European Union to get ` ` hang up ' ' over issue of process . he say it be ` ` blindingly obvious ' ' that it be in the interest of both the EU and the UK to move on to discussion about a future trade deal . it come as Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say that the EU must ` ` stop let the grass grow under our foot ' ' . Mr Johnson , speak ahead of a summit of foreign minister in Luxembourg , say that it be ` ` time to head for the open sea ' ' and move talk on . he urge negotiator to ` ` put a tiger in the tank ' ' and push discussion forward . he say : ` ` and people say to me , look , we want to reassure the 3.2million EU national in the UK and the one and a bit million UK national in the EU , and so do we . ` ` we ' ve make a very good offer , we ' ve make a very fair ( offer ) . ` ` let ' s give them that reassurance , let ' S put a tiger in the tank , let ' s get these conversation go and stop let the grass grow under our foot . ' '
out camp reveal its blueprint for Brexit ; Boris and Gove set out law to end power of Europe - but Osborne warn of £30bn cut Brexit will leave us less money , warn Osborne
Boris Johnson and Michael Gove will today set out new law that the leave campaign plan to implement immediately after a Brexit in an attempt to end the EU ' s influence on Britain . vote leave will announce its intention to curtail the power of European court , divert money save by quit the EU into the NHS and halt the free movement of migrant . the blueprint be design to address concern that leave the EU could take up to a decade of negotiation , during which Britain would still be under the influence of Brussels . however , their manifesto coincide with a warning by George Osborne , the Chancellor , that a vote to leave the EU would force him to make up £30 billion from cut and tax rise in an emergency ` ` Brexit budget ' ' . he will say that the shock of a Brexit could force him to raise tax by £15billion , include 2p on the basic rate of income tax , 3p on the high rate and a 5p rise in inheritance tax rate on the middle class . he be immediately accuse of plan a ` ` punishment budget ' ' and be warn he will be force to consider his position as Chancellor . last night , Tory Eurosceptics be say to be in talk about vote down any ` ` Brexit budget ' ' . one say : ` ` there be meltdown in the party over this . Osborne wo n't be allow to get away with it . ' ' last night , Mr Johnson use his appearance at the Daily Telegraph ' s EU debate to say that a Brexit will be a ` ` fantastic prize ' ' for Britain . he also accuse David Cameron and Mr Osborne of use ` ` extreme ' ' tactic to ` ` scare ' ' voter , and rule out a second referendum if Britain vote to remain in the EU , say it should be a ` ` generational issue ' ' . in the debate , co-hosted with the Huffington Post and broadcast by YouTube , Mr Johnson also say the VW emission scandal would never have happen if Britain be out of the EU . his remark come as £30 billion be wipe off the FTSE @card@ in a sign that the market be increasingly predict a Brexit vote . and it be claim that Downing Street be consider make a major pledge to curb EU freedom of movement amid fear the country be head for a Brexit because of their failure to deal with the issue . Mr Osborne will today risk intensify the Tory civil war by use an appearance alongside Lord Darling , the former Labour chancellor , to suggest his ` ` Brexit budget ' ' would lead to alcohol and petrol duty rise by @card@ per cent . a further £15 billion worth of cut would have to be make to public spending , he will claim , which could see spending on NHS , education and defence slash by @card@ per cent . he will warn that other area , include the Home Office , transport and local government , will face a @card@ per cent cut . in his most stark economic outlook to date , Mr Osborne will add : ` ` Far from free up money to spend on public service , as the leave campaign would like you to believe , quit the EU would mean less money . billion less . it ' S a lose-lose situation for British family and we should n't risk it . ' ' Mr Darling will say that he be ` ` even more worried ' ' about the economic impact of a Brexit than he be in @card@ in the wake of the global financial crisis . in recent day a series of poll have give leave the lead , with source in Mr Cameron ' s camp admit there be ` ` panic ' ' at the prospect of a Brexit . both Mr Johnson and Mr Gove have insist that they want Mr Cameron to stay on as Prime Minister if Britain vote to leave the EU . they will demand that the government come forward with their six new bill , argue that a Brexit vote would give them a mandate from the British people , it be understand . issue their ` ` manifesto ' ' ahead of the referendum also allow them to go before Parliament and tell MP that the public back the law at the ballot box , reduce the prospect of pro-EU MP and peer attempt to defeat the legislation . other new law will include a new Finance Bill to abolish the @card@ per cent rate of VAT on household energy bill , a Free Trade Bill to restore the government ' s power to control its own trade policy and a Bill to repeal the @card@ European Communities Act . the repeal of the @card@ Act will mean that all EU treaty will no longer form part of UK law and the European Court ' s jurisdiction over the UK ` ` will come to a permanent end ' ' . pledge leave ' s new law @card@ . deport criminal the campaign pledge an EU Law ( Emergency Provisions ) bill to allow more foreign criminal to be deport . 2 . end VAT on energy bill a special finance Bill would end @card@ per cent VAT on household energy bill , introduce before @card@ . 3 . fund the health service NHS ( Funding Target ) Bill would enable a ` ` transfusion ' ' of a weekly £100 million . 4 . control immigration an asylum and immigration control Bill will end EU citizen ' right to enter the UK , use an Australian-style point system . 5 . free trade Bill Britain would leave the EU ' s ` ` common commercial policy ' ' and start negotiate new trade deal . @card@ . European Communities Act @card@ ( repeal ) Bill A Bill to end the European Court ' s power over UK law .
Corbyn accuse of plot to wreck Brexit ; Labour MP launch attack on leadership amid fear its new ' soft ' policy will lead to grassroots backlash
Jeremy CORBYN have be accuse by Labour MP of plot to ` ` wreck ' ' Brexit after unveil plan to keep the UK in the European single market and custom union indefinitely . labour risk alienate its own Eurosceptic voter after Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , yesterday reposition it as the party of ` ` soft Brexit ` ` . he announce that under a Labour government , the UK would stay in the single market and custom union during a transition period after Brexit . he say that if a deal could be strike with the EU over reform free movement this could be extend indefinitely . a Labour source say that the policy have be the subject of intense debate in the shadow cabinet in recent week amid fear that it will ` ` close the door ' ' on voter who back Brexit . many of the party ' s traditional stronghold in the North overwhelmingly vote leave . the new policy come despite both Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , and John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , previously make it clear that the UK will leave the single market . Frank Field , a Eurosceptic Labour MP and lead figure in the leave campaign , say there be a plot to ` ` wreck ' ' Brexit . he say : ` ` there be a lot of people around who be wolf in sheep ' S clothing - their main intention be to keep Britain in the EU . they be pretend to help the process while seek to wreck Brexit . a lot of Labour voter want us out of the custom union and the single market . they be go to get very angry with people who they begin to see be intent on mess up that process . ' ' however , the change of policy be dismiss by pro-European Tory MP , who point to Mr Corbyn and Mr McDonnell ' s history of Euroscepticism . Nicky Morgan , a Tory MP and chairman of the Treasury select committee , tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` Corbyn and McDonnell wo n't stick to it because they do n't believe it . ' ' Anna Soubry , another pro-European Tory MP , say : ` ` Labour ' S play a cynical game , the EU wo n't abandon free movement . Corbyn and McDonnell be hard-left Bennite Eurosceptics . they ' ve not change their mind , they ' re playing politics . ' ' Mr Corbyn say yesterday that he do not know how long any transitional period would last , say it would be ` ` as long as be necessary but time-limited ' ' . ask whether the UK would continue to accept free movement and make payment into the EU budget after March @card@ under Labour ' S plan , he say : ` ` obviously , we have get to work out what the arrangement be during the transition period and make sure we reach agreement on that . ` ` Quite clearly , the priority have to be protect job and also understand the need of EU national that be live here . ' ' a Tory spokesman say : ` ` the truth be Labour have no idea what they want and this be a weak attempt to kick the can down the road . ` ` their leader ca n't say they would end unlimited freedom of movement , they ca n't decide whether we be leave the single market and they have no vision for what Britain should look like outside the EU . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
Scotland Pension age could rise due to Brexit ; Hard Brexit effect could force people to work longer
Briton may have to work longer if immigration be cut in the wake of Brexit , the government ' s pension adviser warn today . John Cridland , a former CBI director who be review state pension age for the government , have say the ` ` Brexit Factor ' ' have make the future of the state pension uncertain . already worker retire after @card@ face be tell they will need to work longer , possibly beyond age @card@ , under Government plan to make the state pension more affordable . the decision , due in May will be inform by recommendation be draw up by Mr Cridland which will be publish one month earlier . but now calculation reveal ` ` hard Brexit ' ' policy , in which migration be greatly reduce , could be use to further push up people ' S retirement age , potentially force them to work well into their mid seventy . Mr Cridland ' s upcoming report will be base on the late office for Budget Responsibility forecast , which do not take Brexit into account , mean it could quickly become outdate . but he say that Brexit be ` ` one factor that could have an effect ' ' on the retirement age due to the change it could bring in migration . he tell an audience at an International Longevity Centre conference that the future ratio of pensioner to work age people - a major factor affect the cost of the state pension - be now ` ` unpredictable ' ' due to possible post-Brexit migration policy . he say : ` ` the reason this be a very unpredictable dependency ratio now , be because the third swing factor be migration . ' ' other factor affect this ratio be life expectancy and fertility . speak to the Daily Telegraph about the factor affect state pension age , he say : ` ` one of the thing that be in play be the number of economic migrant its just a statement of fact - its an issue as part of a judgement . ` ` Brexit be an issue which I be not responsible for or report on ... it be one factor that could have an affect in many year time . ' ' projection calculate by actuary at Hymans Robertson show a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' where UK immigration be reduce by @card@ people a year until @card@ , could result in the State Pension age need to be raise by @card@ month for people who be now under @card@ . the calculation be base on projection by researcher at King College London which assume the number of national insurance number registration by migrant fall from around @card@ in @card@ to @card@ by @card@ in the event of a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . eventually this would lead to over a million few under 70s pay the pension of over a million more over 70s . to keep the ratio , and the cost to the government the same , the state pension age would need to rise by @card@ month . Jon Hatchett , a partner at Hymans Robertson , say : ` ` the fast the net drop in work age migrant , the quick the dependency ratio will rise , and the more pressure it will put on an increase state pension age , or a low state pension . ' ' Prof Sarah Harper , director of the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing , say she have calculate similar projection , but believe an @card@ month rise in state pension age could be on the card for old worker currently in their forty and fifty . the state pension may well have to be revise and this will come as a nasty surprise to many . ' ' Law firm Eversheds Sutherland , which be research the effect of Brexit on the state pension age , have warn that if the government fail to raise state pension age amid fall migration , it would have to raise tax instead . Francois Barker , a director at the firm , say : ` ` all the sign be that Brexit be likely to reduce the number of people of work age come into the UK from the EU and , unless this shortfall be make up elsewhere the UK ' s old-age dependency ratio look set to rise even further than currently project . this may force the government to increase state pension age , reduce the rate of the State Pension or raise tax . ' ' a spokesman at the Department for Work and Pensions , which will decide any state pension age rise in May , say : ' ' we be commit to review the State Pension age each parliament and take into account the most up to date projection at the time . each review be forward look , to ensure that the State Pension remain affordable , fair and sustainable for generation to come . ' ' Grey pound pensioner outearn young worker Pensioner household income have overtake work age one for the first time , a study have find . elderly spending power have be boost by a new wave of pensioner who tend to still be in work , own a home and receive generous pension pot , the Resolution Foundation for the Intergenerational Commission report show . the proportion of senior household in which at least one person work have grow from one in eight in @card@ to nearly one in five . some @card@ per cent of pensioner own their home , up from @card@ per cent in @card@ . its as Time Goes by study state , afterhousing cost , typical pensioner household be now £20 a week well off than typical work age one . in @card@ typical pensioner income be £70 worse off .
I ' m in control , insist May , as she slap down ' backseat ' Boris ; PM maintain that she be drive talk after Foreign Secretary split Cabinet with his vision for Brexit
Theresa May insist yesterday that she be ` ` drive from the front ' ' as she seek to reassert her authority by strengthen her grip on Brexit negotiation . the Prime Minister rebuke Boris Johnson after he set out his own vision of Brexit in a 4,000-word article in the Daily Telegraph last Saturday . she also refuse to endorse the Foreign Secretary ' s claim that the UK would be able to ` ` take back control ' ' of £350million a week after Brexit and divert some of the money to the NHS . she make her comment , while on a trip to Canada , as it emerge that she have appoint Britain ' s most senior Brexit official as her own EU adviser . Oliver Robbins have leave his role as permanent secretary at the Department for Exiting the European union after a series of clash with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . he will continue in his role as the UK ' s EU sherpa in the Cabinet Office , where he will report directly to Mrs May in what be see as a significant blow to Mr Davis . yesterday , Mr Johnson refuse to deny categorically that he could resign Brexit amid mount speculation about his future . ask if he could quit as Foreign Secretary , he pause before say that the interviewer be ` ` bark up the wrong tree ' ' . he add : ` ` when the burden of office be lift from my shoulder I will of course look back with great pride on my time do all sort of thing . ' ' it come after Mr Johnson ' s article on Saturday , in which he set out a grand vision for Britain ' s ` ` glorious ' ' post-Brexit future , provoke significant Cabinet split . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary who be view as a future candidate for the Tory leadership , subsequently accuse Mr Johnson of behave like a ` ` backseat driver ' ' in Brexit negotiation . Mrs May move to make clear that she - and not Mr Johnson - be in charge of the government ' s overall policy on withdrawal from the bloc . ask if she could ` ` truly ' ' guarantee that she be lead the Brexit process , the Prime Minister say : ` ` this government be drive from the front and we be all go to the same destination . ' ' Mrs May fail to answer a direct question of whether she think Mr Johnson would resign over the row . she say : ` ` we be all agree as a government on the importance of ensure that we get the right deal for Brexit , the right withdrawal arrangement but also the right deep and special partnership for the EU and the UK in the future . ` ` we be all optimistic about what we might be achieve as the United Kingdom in the future . ' ' she also brush off suggestion that she be ` ` frustrated ' ' with Mr Johnson , add : ` ` Boris be Boris . ' ' Mr Johnson ' S father , Stanley , say yesterday that the Foreign Secretary would be ` ` happy , happy , happy ' ' to quit over Brexit if he feel it be necessary . meanwhile , Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary who last year end Mr Johnson ' s leadership ambition , publically back the Foreign Secretary ' s position on Brexit . he say : ` ` in the debate on EU contribution it ' s important people look at what Boris actually write in his Telegraph article - not headline . ` ` [ The ] debate should be forwardlooking on how to make the most of life outside EU - not refighting the referendum . ' ' speak as he attend the UN General Assembly in New York , where he meet Donald Trump , Mr Johnson reiterate his support for Mrs May . he say : ` ` as far as backseat drive honesty there be only one driver in this car and it be Theresa . what I be try to do be sketch out the incredibly exciting landscape of the destination ahead . ' ' Mrs May be yesterday ask about Mr Johnson ' s controversial claim Britain would ` ` take back control ' ' of £350million a week that be send to Brussels . she stress that any decision on spending priority have to be take by the whole government . she say : ` ` by definition if we be curover rently pay money into the European Union and at a point in the future we wo n't be pay that money into the European Union , we will have to decide as a government how to spend that money and at the time we will look to see where we think it be appropriate and good to spend that money . ` ` that will be a decision take at the time , it will be take by the government . ' ' Mrs May be also draw into an extraordinary row between Mr Johnson and Sir David Norgrove , the head of the UK Statistics Authority , over whether Britain would gain £350million a week from Brexit . the statistic watchdog rubbish the claim when it be make by the Vote leave campaign last year , complain that rebate and EU subsidy mean the net figure be far low . ask ` ` who she trust to do sum ' ' , Mrs May appear to side with Sir David by point out that Britain ' s net contribution to the EU change from year to year . she deny that the change in Mr Robbin ' S position show that Brexit negotiation be a ` ` shambles ' ' . she say : ` ` no , not at all . what it be a sign of be that the negotiation be get into a more detailed and more intense phase . ` ` as a result of that I think it ' S right that Olly Robbins concentrate on that and obviously a different structure will be put in place in term of the running of the management of the Department for Exiting the European Union and the permanent secretaryship there . ' ' Timetable Crucial day ahead for Mrs May Today annual meeting of UN General Assembly in New York . expect to hold bilateral meeting with Donald Trump and other world leader tomorrow address the assembly to stress the need for UN reform Thursday Arrives back in Downing Street Friday Flies to Florence to set out her vision of post-Brexit Britain Monday @card@ next round of Brexit talk kick off in Brussels Sunday Oct @card@ - Wednesday @card@ Conservative Party conference in Birmingham
this be like a Hitchcock thriller , say EU ' S tusk ; election announcement welcome in Europe as lead to a stable base for further Brexit negotiation
European leader react to Theresa May ' s shock election announcement by compare Brexit to a Hitchcock thriller - but insist negotiation would not be affect . Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , comment on the news by tweet : ` ` it be Hitchcock , who direct Brexit : first an earthquake and the tension rise . ' ' the joke be a reference to director Sir Alfred Hitchcock ' s famous quote that ` ` a good film should start with an earthquake ' ' and be follow by increase tension . critic claim the bemuse tweet be a suggestion that the political ramification for the UK from the Brexit vote be only begin to be feel . but Mr Tusk also say he have a ` ` good phone call ' ' with the Prime Minister about the early election , during which Mrs May underline the UK ' s ` ` deep and special partnership ' ' with the EU . EU leader also move to calm concern about how the election could impact Brexit by say preparation for talk would not be affect . a Brussels source say : ` ` this be a domestic matter for the UK . but we have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us with strong backing by the electorate . this do not change thing . we be ready . Early June be always the calendar [ to start the negotiation ] . ' ' a spokesman for Mr Tusk insist that the snap election would not affect the EU ' S attempt to come up with a position on Brexit talk . ` ` the UK election do not change our EU27 plan , ' ' the spokesman say . ` ` we expect to have the Brexit guideline adopt by the European Council on April @card@ and , follow that , the Brexit negotiating directive ready on May @card@ . this will allow the EU27 to start negotiation . ' ' a diplomat from an EU member state say that Mrs may ` ` be completely right to call these election now ' ' , as she could benefit from a favourable political backdrop . ` ` the good news on the European side be that she will be less weak to make all the concession she will have to make ' ' in the talk , the diplomat say . Mrs May indicate that she choose a snap election for June because it would leave Brexit talk as unaffected as possible , give political event in the EU . she say : ` ` we need a general election and we need one now , because we have at this moment a one-off chance to get this do while the European Union agree its negotiate position and before the detailed talk begin . ' ' her reference to a ` ` one-off chance ' ' be believe to refer to the timing of European election in the come month that effectively stall any major progress on Brexit talk . the final round of the French election will be hold next month , while Germany will find out in late September whether Angela Merkel will be re-elect as Chancellor . Senior Tory believe that until the French and German leader be know no major decision on the Brexit deal can be take , despite a two-year countdown have be trigger in March . other EU politician say that Mrs May ' S decision be ` ` understandable ' ' and predict that the Tories would win . Gonzalez Pons , a Spanish MEP for the European people ' S Party , say : ` ` May call for UK election , which mean either undoing Brexit or make it harder by shorten time . I wish the UK all the good . ' ' Mrs May talk to Donald Trump , about her early election yesterday during a string of conversation with world leader . she also discuss the decision with Ms Merkel , Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the European Commission , and Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny . ' we have some hope that this will lead to a strong leader in London that can negotiate with us '
Scotland MP accuse BBC of fall short of impartiality with Brexit coverage
the BBC risk undermine Brexit and damage the UK ' s reputation with its ` ` pessimistic and skewed ' ' coverage , MP have warn . more than @card@ MP from across the political spectrum have write to Lord Hall of Birkenhead , the director-general of the BBC , accuse the corporation of portray the UK as either a ` ` xenophobic ' ' nation or one that regret the vote to leave the EU . they say that the corporation have fail to ` ` break out of pre-referendum pessimism ' ' and accept the ` ` economic good news ' ' which the UK have enjoy since the referendum . the MP ' letter on the BBC follow month of mount anger in the Conservative party about the corporation ' s coverage of Brexit in the wake of the EU referendum . Tory MP argue that while the corporation ' s coverage during the referendum itself be even-handed , it have since become ` ` partisan ' ' and anti-Brexit . in their letter , the MP put the corporation on notice that its future will be in doubt if politician and the public no longer see it as an ` ` impartial broker ' ' which they can trust . the signatory include several Tory MP who vote for Britain to stay in the European union amid concern about the economic impact of Brexit but be now ` ` delighted ' ' that the forecast have be prove wrong . the letter say : ` ` it particularly pain us to see how so much of the economic good news we ' ve have since June have be skew by BBC coverage which seem unable to break out of pre-referendum pessimism and accept new fact . ` ` some of the signatory of this letter share many of the concern about the economic impact of Brexit , but all be delight to find forecast of immediate economic harm be at good misplace . ` ` so-called ' despite Brexit ' reporting may be expect of a partisan press , but licence fee-payers have the right to expect well . ' ' the letter add that ` ` we fear that , by misrepresent our country either as xenophobic or regretful of the leave vote , the BBC will undermine our effort to carve out a new , global role for this country . ' ' the conflict between Conservative MP and the BBC over Brexit be the late in a series of clash . during the @card@ election campaign , senior conservative declare themselves ` ` furious ' ' at the BBC ' S coverage and accuse it of an ` ` unforgivable Labour bias ' ' . Tory MP have become very critical of the BBC since the referendum . in October last year , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , hit out at the corporation ' s ` ` infuriate ' ' and ` ` shamelessly anti-Brexit coverage ' ' . an analysis of a series of programme on BBC Radio @card@ find that listener be two-and-ahalf time more likely to hear a pro-EU speaker than an anti-EU one . a total of @card@ MP have sign the letter , include three Labour MP , eight DUP MP and Douglas Carswell , Ukip ' s only MP . a BBC spokesman say : ` ` the BBC be cover the political and financial event follow the referendum vote in a responsible and impartial way . the BBC be also one of the great export of this country and make a significant contribution to the UK creative sector . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
Sturgeon and May clash as Brexit talk turn acrimonious
Theresa May warn Nicola Sturgeon that she risk ` ` undermine ' ' Brexit negotiation after a Downing Street summit descend into acrimony . the Prime Minister host a meeting at no @card@ yesterday with the leader of Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland about the progress of Brexit . Ms Sturgeon , who have say she be prepare to hold a second referendum on Scottish independence unless Britain remain part of the single market , say that there have be a ` ` frank exchange of view ' ' and accuse the Prime Minister of drive Scotland ` ` over a hard-Brexit cliff edge ' ' . Mrs May use a Commons appearance yesterday to say there be ` ` no suggestion ' ' that she be push for a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' add that Britain would strike a series of free-trade deal while still gain control of its border . the Prime Minister say she want ` ` the maximum possible opportunity for British business to be able to trade within the single market , to operate within the single market and trade with it in both good and service ' ' . Mrs May stop short of offer a vote to MP over Brexit although she say there would be a ` ` series of general debate ' ' on the UK ' s future relationship with the EU before and after Christmas . however , her clash with the Scottish First Minister suggest that the Prime Minister will struggle to secure agreement with the devolve administration during her Brexit negotiation . in a pointed criticism of Ms Sturgeon ' s referendum threat , Mrs May say that the ` ` great Union ' ' have be a ` ` cornerstone of our prosperity in the past ' ' and will be ` ` absolutely vital ' ' but Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` I do n't know any more now about the UK Government ' s approach to the EU negotiation than I do before I go in to the meeting . I ca n't speak for the other devolve administration but I think there be a degree of frustration share by all of us about that . ` ` I ' m not seek to undermine anyone . I do n't know what the UK ' s negotiate position be , so there ' S nothing there that I can see to undermine . ' ' Ms Sturgeon say she be not prepare to ` ` sit back and see Scotland drive over a hard-Brexit cliff edge ' ' . the SNP leader also insist that she be ` ` not bluff ' ' or ` ` game-play ' ' with her threat to hold a second independence referendum . however Downing Street say that the devolve administration must work with one voice to help secure a successful Brexit . ` ` we have be very clear that we should be work together to secure the well possible deal for the whole country , ' ' the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman say . Carwyn Jones , the Welsh First Minister , say there have be no detail about what happen next , and warn ` ` time be not on our side ' ' . Martin McGuinness , Northern Ireland ' S Deputy First Minister , say there be a ` ` joint responsibility ' ' to manage the Brexit process . he tell reporter : ` ` as this process move along , we need to be at the heart of it . ' ' William Hague : page @card@ business : page @card@ Nicola Sturgeon say yesterday ' S Downing Street talk have fail to clarify the government ' s position on Brexit
after the border issue come trade . that ' S when thing get really tough
steadily but surely , and sometimes in big , apparently unscripted jump , Theresa May , the Prime Minister , keep on cede ground in her Brexit negotiation , just as she have on much of the rest of her political agenda , from grammar school to social care . First come European Court of Justice jurisdiction over the right of EU citizen live in Britain ; then it be concede we ' d need a lengthy transition ; then come the money ; and now to the disgust of Northern Ireland ' s Democratic Unionist Party , the Irish border issue . May ' s negotiate refrain , ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' , be expose as no more than the unconvincing bluff it always be . it now transpire that almost any deal , however bad , be good than no deal , and EU negotiator know it . or just to give what ' S happen a slightly more positive spin , any Brexit be good than no Brexit , for such be the sense of political crisis hang over virtually all aspect of May ' s government that there must be some doubt about whether Brexit can be deliver at all . leaver can feel the prize slip away , and must therefore back whatever form of Brexit the politics allow . perhaps there be method in the madness . the issue seem to have become ever more intractable ; by demonstrate this harsh reality , the PM may hope to take the hardliner with her on the soft Brexit now apparently envisage . the EU can not simply be tell to ` ` sod off ` ` , as propose by the former Cabinet member Priti Patel ; even leave aside whether a hard Brexit would be an economically viable way forward for the UK , it could never command a parliamentary majority , and as we can now see , would stand a high chance of resurrect ` ` the Troubles ' ' in Northern Ireland . from all these perspective , no deal have come to be see as an unconscionable choice . it be therefore necessary to address the question of how many other red line must now be cross in order to win a satisfactory deal on trade . the divorce settlement be in a sense the easy bit . next come much more tortuous negotiation on trade . already it be obvious that a Canadianstyle deal , but with free trade in service add on top , be unrealistic . the problem could of course be solve simply by stay in the single market , much like Switzerland , Norway and other member of the European Free Trade Association . by the way , this would also substantially solve the Irish border issue , as regulation would then automatically be align between Northern Ireland , Great Britain , the Irish Republic and the rest of the EU . but both membership of the single market and the custom union have be rule out by the government , which seek instead a unique ` ` deep and special ' ' relationship with the EU . be these red line to be cede too ? it be hard to see how it would be ` ` take back control ' ' if they be . Britain would become a rule and trade agreement taker , with very little say in their construction - not so much take back control as abject surrender . the rest of the EU account for roughly half of British export , or around 13pc of our GDP - sometimes a bit more , sometimes a bit less depend on erratic such as nonmonetary gold . tariff-free trade in good and non-subsidised agricultural produce such as fruit and veg should be a relatively easy thing to agree . last year , we export £145.5bn in good to the rest of the EU , and they export £242bn in good to us , so it be overwhelmingly in the EU ' s interest for this trade to continue unimpaired . the awkward bit come in the service sector , where so-called non-tariff barrier be the main impediment to trade . unlike good , our export of service to the rest of the EU have be grow almost continually ever since the UK join the common market back in the mid-Seventies , reach a record £90.4bn last year . what be more , we enjoy a substantial surplus in these service export , again unlike good . this be a great position to be in , for despite the nostalgia we have for the day of British manufacturing supremacy - actually we today manufacture more than at any stage in our history , but no matter - the fact be that the price of manufacture good relative to service have be fall for decade , and with progressive automation will no doubt continue to do so . in other word , the term of trade with Europe have shift decisively in our favour . it ' S true that Europe also export a lot of service to us , but these be substantially in the form of overseas holiday ; if we all ` ` staycationed ' ' , our surplus in service trade would be even big . and so to the point ; the big driver of service sector export growth be finance . unfortunately , there be no free trade agreement in existence that give a free pass to finance . Britain owe this privilege when it come to the rest of the EU entirely to its membership of the single market . it be naive to believe Europe be about to set a precedent by cede free trade in finance . with careful persuasion and diplomacy , and by agree European jurisdiction in all such matter , it may eventually be possible to convince Europe that it be in its own interest to sustain the high level of liquidity London be able to offer , but I would n't bet on it , and in any case , such concession be likely to be quite limit in scope . roughly speak , around £40bn annually of City fee income come from the continent , activity that be entirely base on permission access . this in turn directly generate around £15bn a year of tax revenue , ignore income tax , national insurance and other spillover benefit from this business . it ' s quite a hole to be punch in our already stretch public finance . more trouble still , over and above the trade surplus , the City play a key role in fund the UK ' s overall current account deficit by act as a magnet for international capital . if this position be put at risk , the pound would need to fall quite a bit further to reach its equilibrium level , push up inflation and interest rate . tell the EU just to ` ` sod off ` ` be never really an option . even as a negotiate ploy , our affair be too intermingle to have make the threat believable . when he become leader , David Cameron make it his ambition to stop the Tory obsess about Europe ; in the end , the EU destroy him , just as it destroy Thatcher and Major . May scarcely look like break the habit . ' already it be obvious that a Canadianstyle deal , but with free trade in service add on top , be unrealistic '
Parliament could bypass court over Brexit ; Brexit turmoil ; Ministers suggest push through a one-line bill trigger Article @card@ before legal ruling make
the government could pass a law pave the way for Britain to leave the EU within week and not wait for the Supreme Court , minister suggest . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , admit that legislation could go through Parliament before the Supreme Court decide on whether to uphold a High Court ruling that MP and peer should have a vote on when to trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty that start the UK ' s withdrawal from the EU . Mr Davis hit out at attempt by Labour MP to secure a second referendum and claim that they be attempt to ` ` wreck ' ' Brexit . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have admit that the Supreme Court could dictate the degree of scrutiny MP and peer will have if the government lose its appeal . MP put pressure on Mr Davis to speed up the Brexit process in the wake of the High Court ruling . Nicky Morgan , the former Education secretary , urge Mr Davis in a Commons debate to agree to a ` ` one-line bill authorise the trigger of Article @card@ ' ' . Mr Davis say he be ` ` very tempt ' ' , before add : ` ` we do have to complete the test in the court that be necessary to establish the law . ' ' Oliver Letwin , the former Cabinet Office minister , also ask if Mr Davis ` ` agree that in light of that it would be possible for both Houses of Parliament to amend their procedure in such as way as to bring forward an Act and Bill , and to pass that long before the Supreme Court judgment ' ' . Mr Davis reply : ` ` Yes . ' ' source close to Mr Davis stress afterwards that he and the government remain focus on win the appeal to the Supreme Court . there be some confusion after Labour change its position three time in three day on whether it would support the start of the Brexit process without any condition . on Saturday , Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , say the party will vote to trigger Brexit talk as long the government agree to a series of ` ` bottom line ' ' , include access to the EU single market . but on Sunday , Tom Watson , Mr Corbyn ' S deputy , insist that ` ` ultimately when the vote come , Labour will support Theresa May to trigger Article @card@ ' ' . by yesterday , Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , appear to change Labour ' S position again , say that minister have to set out their plan for Brexit before any Article @card@ vote . ` ` we be absolutely clear that before we get to that stage the government must put its plan before Parliament , ' ' he say . the prospect of Labour voting down attempt to start the Brexit process be fuel speculation Mrs May might opt for a general election next year . speak in India , she appear to soften her language on hold an early vote , tell the BBC that ` ` the next general election should be in @card@ ' ' . in an interview last month , Mrs May be firm , insist it be ` ` right that the next general election be in @card@ ' ' . William Hague : page @card@
French revolt open door to EU climbdown on Brexit ; French Brexit transition deal ' could break impasse '
France and other EU nation have signal they be willing to begin Brexit trade talk as early as October in a move that open the door to a climbdown by the EU , the Daily Telegraph have learn . Senior French diplomat have make clear they want to see the deadlocked Brexit talk make progress , in the first sign of split emerge in the EU . under the term of a proposal set out by France , the UK be be encourage to request a three-year transitional deal if it continue to pay into the EU Budget and accept EU law . this position put Paris at odd with hardliner in Brussels and Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , who be insist there can be no trade talk until the Brexit divorce bill be settle . it represent a significant boost for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who today travel to Brussel for face-toface talk with Mr Barnier . Mr Davis will tell Mr Barnier that Brussels must show more ` ` flexibility and imagination ' ' as he seek to break the deadlock in negotiation . he say : ` ` for the UK , the week ahead be about drive forward the technical discussion . we want to lock in point where we agree , unpick where we disagree , and make further progress on a range of issue . but in order to do that , we require flexibility and imagination . ' ' it come as the German chamber of Industry and Commerce urge the EU to push ahead with discussion on a future trading relationship amid concern that Brexit will have a ` ` major negative impact ' ' on business . the French overture on a transition deal be confirm by two separate senior UK source and point to underlie crack in EU unity . British minister be adamant the UK will not write any cheque unless payment be link to a future trade deal , while Mr Barnier insist there can be no trade talk until the money question be settle . tension between the two side increase further last week after Brussels official accuse Theresa May ' s government of ` ` magical thinking ' ' over Brexit . EU official have warn they be ` ` increasingly doubtful ' ' that talk can progress onto future relationship question in October as originally envisage , while British official be demand ` ` more flexibility ' ' and accuse the EU of ` ` drag its foot ' ' . however the French position on transition arrangement offer the potential to break the impasse , lead EU analyst say last night , and reflect grow concern among EU member state that time be run out to achieve a non-disruptive Brexit . accord to information see by the Daily Telegraph , the French version of transition would see the UK continue accept EU law for a fix two or three year period after Brexit while pay ( Euro ) 10billion ( £922.8 million ) a year . the payment would fill the immediate ( Euro ) 10billion-a-year ` ` black hole ' ' leave by Brexit in the EU ' s seven-year budget cycle after @card@ and satisfy moderate voice in Brussels . Charles Grant , director of the Centre for European Reform , say : ` ` many top official in the EU and in government would welcome an offer of ( Euro ) 10billion-ayear for three year as part of a transitional deal that would move the talk process forward . ` ` if the British get their act together and make a serious offer on the money to their partner they will not only put the EU on the defensive , they will also expose the division in the EU on how to respond to the money deadlock . ' ' official believe that the ( Euro ) 10billion-ayear payment will make it more difficult for Brussels hardliner to claim that Britain be not prepare to commit to make substantial payment towards a divorce bill . ` ` there be actually a large number of member state that want to start talk about future trade relation , ' ' say Mujtaba Rahman , chief EU analyst at the Eurasia Group political consultant , though add that no one be prepare to break rank for now .
what to watch Body : Brexit Means Brexit BBC TWO , 9.00PM ; Scotland , 11.15PM ? Bafta-winning documentary maker Patrick Forbes follow up last year ' s superb fly-onthe-campaign film Brexit : a Very British Coup with another that follow player in the ongoing Brexit debate over the turbulent @card@ month since Britain vote to leave the EU . ` ` in the last film we be watch the Brexit comet smash generation old certainty to piece , ' ' say Forbes . ` ` this be about the establishment struggle to its foot and try to ride that comet . ' ' Forbes spend time with people from all side , from MP Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer to Anna Soubry , Nicholas Soames and Jacob Rees-Mogg and capture some extraordinary moment . he be at ` ` ordinary citizen ' ' Gina Miller ' s side as she drag the government to the supreme court over the trigger of Brexit and he be in the USA with Nigel Farage as he ` ` go off as Donald Trump ' S very special friend to the inauguration ' ' . and he be film right up to , and after , the recent general election . ` ` one thing I be clear about , ' ' say Forbes , ` ` be that ' Brexit mean Brexit ' be not just an empty slogan . it be a genuine moment in history that ' s go to test the British establishment as it have never be test . ' ' Gerard O'Donovan
Scotland Labour refuse to kill off prospect of second referendum on leave EU ; confusion continue over Corbyn ' s stance as SNP press for ' chance for Britain to change its mind '
Jeremy CORBYN have refuse to rule out a second EU referendum if he become prime minister . during a press interview , the Labour leader say his party be ` ` not advocate ' ' another vote on EU membership , but he stop short of actually kill off the prospect . it come as Scottish Nationalists invite Labour to join force with other opposition party to keep Britain in the single market and custom union . Ian Blackford , SNP leader at Westminster , appeal for cross-party cooperation to prevent the ` ` catastrophic damage ' ' of an ` ` extreme ' ' Brexit . Labour ' S ill-defined Brexit policy mean Labour Remain voter be convinced it be ` ` completely against Brexit ' ' , while Labour leave voter be convinced it be ` ` completely in favour of Brexit ' ' , accord to a YouGov survey . Mr Corbyn continue to keep all option open in his interview with the i newspaper , in which he be ask about remark make recently by Tom Watson , his deputy , that nothing should be rule out . he say : ` ` he do indeed say that , but our position be that we be not advocate a second referendum . we have have a referendum which come to a decision . the negotiation be still ongoing , albeit well behind schedule and we have set out the kind of relationship we want to have with Europe . ' ' so , Mr Corbyn do not categorically rule out a second referendum - something that Tory rebel Lord Heseltine predict will happen . nine backbench Labour MP this month support an amendment by the Liberal Democrats to the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill - which transfer European law into UK law - which seek a second referendum on the term of the Brexit deal . a group of @card@ London-based Labour councillor have also write to ask Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , to commit to provide a chance for ` ` people to change their mind ' ' . ask why the party have such a confusing message on Brexit , Mr Corbyn say : ` ` I do n't think it ' s confusing . what we be say be ... we be formally leave the European Union , of course - that be the position - [ but want to ] develop a good economic relationship with Europe and recognise the interdependence of our industry . ' ' Mr Blackford be to invite opposition leader to a Brexit summit on Jan @card@ when MP return to Westminster after the Christmas break . he say : ` ` Extreme Tory Brexit plan to drag Scotland and the UK out of the single market would cause catastrophic damage to the economy - cost hundred of thousand of job , and hit people ' S income , livelihood and live standard for decade to come . ` ` it be time for MP of all party to put politics aside and work together , in the national interest , to protect our place in the single market and the custom union . as we see with the successful amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill , when opposition party work together effectively it be possible to secure a parliamentary majority and deliver change in the national interest , ' ' he add . meanwhile , Mr Corbyn have insist that he will be fit and ready to fight the next general election , even if he have to wait until @card@ , when he will be @card@ . the Labour leader say he have ` ` load of energy ' ' , and add : ` ` I eat porridge every morning ; porridge and energy bar ; and I keep off alcohol and meat . ' ' Sir Vince Cable , the Lib Dem leader who will be @card@ in @card@ , admit in an interview that his hope for the new year be to be able to ` ` work less and sleep more ' ' .
Scotland Mutiny in the Commons blow up storm for May ' s Brexit talk ; Conservative rebel win battle for ' meaningful ' vote on leave EU in embarrassment to Government
Theresa May last night suffer a major Conservative mutiny against her Brexit plan after @card@ of her own MP refuse to back the government and boast that Parliament have ` ` take control ' ' . the Prime Minister lose a key vote in the commons despite senior conservative plead with the self-styled ` ` rebel alliance ' ' to back Mrs May or risk a disorderly Brexit . follow chaotic scene in Parliament , the rebel defy their party by voting through an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill demand a ` ` meaningful ' ' vote on Brexit . in a sign of the ongoing bitter recrimination , one of those behind the mutiny be last night sack as vice-chairman of the Conservative Party . the disunity in her party threaten to undermine Mrs May on the eve of a crucial Brussels summit at which she be hope to receive backing from other European leader to move on Brexit talk to begin discuss trade . Whitehall source fear that some European politician may seek to use the problem face by the Prime Minister in Parliament to secure further concession or legal guarantee . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator , last night hail the government ' s defeat as a ` ` good day for democracy ' ' . he say : ` ` British Parliament take back control . European and British Parliament together will decide on the final agreement . interest of the citizen will prevail over narrow party politics . a good day for democracy . ' ' the dispute arise over the status of the vote on the Brexit deal before March @card@ , which the rebel have insist must be guarantee in law . minister have pledge to give Parliament a proper vote but warn that the rebel amendment demand that a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' should be enshrine in law risk derail a ` ` smooth and orderly ' ' Brexit . what have be see as a technical row yesterday erupt into a major political embarrassment for no @card@ . last night , Brexit-supporting Con-servative MP round on their colleague - who be lead by former minister Dominic Grieve , Anna Soubry , Ken Clarke and Nicky Morgan - warn that they have undermine Brexit and boost Labour ' s chance at the next election . Nadine Dorries say : ` ` Tonight , the Tory rebel have put a spring in Labour ' S step , give them a taste of winning , guarantee the party a weekend of bad press , undermine the Prime Minister and devalue her impact in Brussels . ` ` they should be deselected and never allow to stand as a Tory MP , ever again . I ' ve be a rebel myself , but never when a Marxist government be knock at the door . ' ' Michael Fabricant , another Tory MP , say : ` ` Labour ' s cheer in the Chamber should have be cause for deep reflection by the likes of Anna Soubry and Dominic Grieve . a shallow victory for the Remainers , but a victory for Labour morale and polling . ' ' Stephen Hammond , who be sack as Conservative vice-chairman last night , be one of @card@ Tory MP include Sir Oliver Heald , Bob Neill , Antoinette Sandbach , Sarah Wollaston , and Jonathan Djanogly who join Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats in the anti-Brexit move . the government say it be ` ` disappointed ' ' and senior conservative raise concern the vote could be use to frustrate or block Brexit entirely . Labour MP punch the air in jubilation as the result of the vote be announce , while Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , say that the result be ` ` humiliate ' ' for Mrs May . the rebel accuse the government of be ` ` stupid ' ' for fail to make continued on Page @card@ Nick Timothy : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
the EU wo n't be defeat on Brexit , vow Tusk ; Council president say it be up to London whether exit talk end with ' good deal , no deal or no Brexit '
the European Union will not be ` ` defeat ' ' by Britain in the Brexit negotiation , Donald Tusk say yesterday as he insist Theresa May would fail in any effort to divide EU leader . ` ` no one can divide the @card@ in these negotiation , ' ' the president of the European Council say . ` ` Ahead of us be still the tough stress test . if we fail it , the negotiation will end in our defeat . ' ' speak in the European Parliament in Strasbourg with Jean-Claude Juncker , Mr Tusk suggest that if the EU remain firm , the British government could cancel Brexit . Mr Tusk , who lead meeting of EU national leader , tell MEPs : ` ` it be in fact up to London how this will end , with a good deal , no deal or no Brexit . ' ' the former prime minister of Poland admit he be obsess with the EU ' S painstakingly construct united front , before insist : ` ` we must keep our unity regardless of the direction of the talk . the EU will be able to rise to every scenario as long as we be not divide . ' ' at last week ' s EU summit , head of state and government say Britain have not make ` ` sufficient progress ' ' in the Brexit negotiation . the EU be refuse to talk trade or a transition deal until it judge sufficient progress have be achieve on Ireland , citizen ' right and the Brexit bill . Mrs may earlier this week issue a fresh threat to walk away from the talk with no deal unless a trade deal be agree by the summer . earlier , a humiliate leak from Brussels suggest she have ` ` beg ' ' EU leader for help . Mr Juncker , president of the European Commission , tell MEPs : ` ` the commission be not negotiate in a hostile mood . we want a deal . those who do n't want a deal , the ' no-dealers ' , they have no friend in the commission . ' ' ` ` we want a fair deal with Britain and we will have a fair deal with Britain , ' ' say Mr Juncker . the commission be lead Brexit talk on behalf of the EU . Syed Kamall , Britain ' s most senior Conservative MEP , call for more pragmatism from Brussels over Brexit . ` ` I hope we avoid become trapped by the sequencing of the negotiation , ' ' he say . ` ` let us be more pragmatic . ' ' Manfred Weber , leader of the centre-Right European people ' S Party , the large political group in the European Parliament , mock Brexiteers and say the business community in London be nervous . ` ` the Brexiteers have no common plan for the future of their country and especially not for the relationship with EU , ' ' the German MEP say . ` ` we can not accept that a country outside the EU can have the same condition and status as a country inside the EU . ' ' in her Florence speech , Mrs May ask for a two-year transition period after the March @card@ @card@ date for Brexit . Mr Weber later say that any transition period should be use to deal with the ` ` leftover ' ' from the Brexit negotiation spark by the trigger of Article @card@ and not as an excuse to extend the talk indefinitely . ` ` that will not fly . if there be no achievement then we be risk a hard Brexit , ' ' he tell reporter . ` ` we need an outcome in the next two year - specifically on the future relationship - otherwise we be risk further difficulty . ' the UK and the EU agree that any transition would mean Britain remain subject to EU law and the European Court of Justice for its duration . Ray Finch , a Ukip MEP , attack Mrs May and the government . ` ` what Mrs May be do be quietly surrender so that we will end up neither leave , nor sovereign , ' ' he say . ` ` we will remain subservient to the EU , both financially and legally , a nation condemn to serve it by its leader . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
Scotland May refuse to say if she would vote leave now ; No-deal UK could join American alliance
Theresa May have repeatedly refuse to say whether she would vote for Brexit in a second EU referendum . the Prime Minister , who back Remain during last year ' s Brexit vote , say she would ` ` look at everything ' ' and ` ` come to a judgment ' ' . it come as Donald Tusk have signal for the first time that EU negotiator be take a ` ` no deal ' ' outcome seriously after it emerge that Brexit talk will be put on hold today . the European Council President say that if the talk continue at a ` ` slow pace ' ' without sufficient progress be make , ` ` we will have to think about where we be head ' ' . the Prime Minister yesterday initially decline to answer the question about how she would vote , dismiss it as ` ` hypothetical ' ' because Britain will leave the EU in March @card@ . but after be press repeatedly on how she would vote she say : ` ` I could sit here and I could say I ' d still vote Remain or I ' d vote leave , just to give you an answer . I ' m be open and honest with you . ` ` what I do last time round be I look at everything and come to a judgment and I ' d do exactly the same this time round . ' ' she add : ` ` but we ' re not have another referendum . that ' S absolutely crucial . we be go to deliver on the vote of the British people , we be go to deliver Brexit . 29th March @card@ , we come out of the European Union . ' ' the comment risk antagonise Eurosceptic Conservative MP , who be already concern about the UK be bind by European Court of Justice ruling during a transition period after Brexit . it will also put pressure on other Cabinet minister who vote Remain in EU referendum . Damian Green , the First Secretary , say last night : ` ` my view on Europe be well know and I do n't resile from anything . ' ' meanwhile Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , snap that ` ` Brexit be not a game ' ' in an ill-tempered riposte to Mrs May ' s comment that ` ` the ball be in their court ' ' . Jeremy Corbyn will attempt to exploit the stand-off by visit Brussels next week , where he hope to conduct his own talk with EU official together with the shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer . Theresa May will arrive in Brussel continue on Page @card@ David Goodhart : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ next Thursday for a two-day meeting of the European Council , at which she be likely to be tell that insufficient progress have be make on Brexit for trade talk to begin . it be understand that Mr Corbyn could also be in Brussels on Thursday . he be likely to meet Labour MEPs and source say other meeting with EU official might be arrange . negotiator have be expect to talk about the so-called Brexit ` ` divorce bill ' ' during this week ' s round of talk , but it have emerge that after discussion on citizen ' right and the Irish border on Monday and Tuesday no talk on money will be hold today . David Davis travel to Brussels for lunch with Mr Barnier yesterday , and will return tomorrow for a press conference despite nothing happen today . ask whether the ball be in his court as he leave the lunch , Mr Barnier snap : ` ` Brexit be not a game . do n't forget . ' ' Mr Tusk , who lead the meeting of EU leader , say he hope the UK would make sufficient progress by December so trade talk could be approve when the European Council meet for the final time this year . it emerge yesterday that Britain may join a trade alliance with the US , Canada and Mexico after Brexit under plan be consider by minister . the Prime Minister also refuse to rule out suggestion that she be prepare to hold reshuffle , say that people can ` ` speculate to their heart ' S content ' ' . Mrs May say that EU citizen currently live in the UK will be able to stay regardless of whether there be a deal . however she raise question over whether they would enjoy the same benefit . ' we ' re not have another referendum . March @card@ @card@ , we come out of the EU '
Hiscox to set up EU hub in Luxembourg after Brexit
insurer Hiscox will set up an EU hub in Luxembourg follow Brexit , a move it say will not affect any of its @card@ UK-based staff . echo comment make by US insurer AIG when it unveil its post-Brexit plan earlier this year , the group say Luxembourg be choose because of its ` ` pro-business position , well-respect regulator , and be close to many of our major market ' ' . the decision be another win for Luxembourg as it compete with other European city to win business post-Brexit , with Hiscox follow rival AIG and property insurer FM Global in choose Luxembourg as its EU base . the insurance provider underwrite risk in a range of area include terrorism and kidnapping . it say that it would hire around @card@ people cover compliance , risk and internal audit on the ground - mean nobody would be force to relocate , a spokeswoman say . it be not know who will lead the new office , which will underwrite all of Hiscox ' s retail business on the continent . pressure be heat up for financial firm as they ready themselves for Brexit negotiation that could restrict the type of service they can provide to client on the continent . Lloyd ' S of London chairman John Nelson say earlier in the year that ` ` we have to assume risk of a hard Brexit ' ' after the insurance market announce that it would open a base in Brussels to weather any impact . Nicolas Mackel , the head of Luxembourg for Finance , the country ' s trade promotion body , say that he be ` ` delighted ' ' by Hiscox ' S decision , call it a choice which ` ` Luxembourg ' s international outlook and rich talent pool ' ' . Hiscox announce the location of its EU hub alongside its trading update for the three month to March , note that premium income rise 17.3pc to £751m follow a strong performance in its retail business . however chief executive Bronek Masojada sound a warning that its London Market unit ` ` continue to face challenging condition ' ' with double-digit decline in its marine , energy and US large property account and a trading environment he say be reminiscent of the ninety .
Scotland Scottish business do n't need a bespoke Brexit deal , say Mundell ; ' no evidence ' separate Brexit necessary for Scotland
Scotland ' S business do not want or need a bespoke Scottish Brexit deal , David Mundell insist yesterday . the Scottish Secretary say the Prime Minister be try to secure the good access to the single market for all British business , without any barrier , wherever they be base . although UK minister be still consider the Scottish Government ' s plan for a separate Scottish deal , say Mr Mundell , he have not see any evidence to suggest it would help Scottish firm . he criticise the SNP ' s plan as Nicola Sturgeon , the First Minister , harden her approach , tell MSPs she be determine to ` ` save ' ' Scotland from Brexit . Mr Mundell be speak after a meeting in London of the Joint Ministerial Committee of minister from the devolve administration and the UK Government . the committee discuss the Scottish Government ' S Alan Cochrane : page @card@ plan for a bespoke Scottish deal , but break up without agreement . Mr Mundell say afterwards : ` ` if there be evidence that , for some reason , there should be a differentiate Scottish arrangement , then of course that will be properly look at and consider . ` ` but at the moment I do n't have any evidence to suggest that Scotland would benefit from a differentiate arrangement from the rest of the UK . ` ` if we can get that access to the single market , without barrier and without tariff , then that ' s exactly what Scotland ' S business be look for . that ' s what Scotland ' s economy need . ' ' he add : ` ` that ' S why we should , in my view , all come together and focus on achieve that outcome for the United Kingdom . ' ' Ms Sturgeon say she would not dilute her demand for Scotland to remain in the single market . give perhaps her clear hint to date that she will call a fresh referendum on independence , she say : ` ` I be determine to ` ` save ' ' Scotland from Brexit . it ' S not just the case that the Tory be run towards Brexit , they want to drag Scotland kick and scream over that Brexit cliff-edge and I ' m determine they be not go to get away with this . ' ' she add : ` ` Time be fast run out for the UK Government to convince us that they care one jot about Scotland ' S interest , and if they do n't then Scotland do face a choice . ` ` do we go down the damaging path set out by Theresa May with all the impact that we know that will have and in the knowledge that our voice do n't matter within the UK , or do we decide to take our future into our own hand and take control of the future of our own country into our own hand ? ' ' Ms Sturgeon say she believe that decision should be take by the Scottish people . David Davis , the UK Brexit minister , stress the importance of use the exit process from the EU to bind the United Kingdom tighter together . speak after the meeting in London , he say the Scottish Government ' s proposal for a separate Scottish dealrepresented an ` ` important contribution ' ' , but that further discussion be need about the detail . ` ` as the Prime Minister make clear in her speech , Brexit be a chance for us to build a strong UK and strengthen the union between our four nation , ' ' Mr Davis say . ` ` it be only by us come together that we can fully grasp the opportunity that our departure present . we will use the late thinking and analysis share at today ' s meeting to inform our work to deliver an exit that work for the whole of the UK . ' ' he also stress that the UK Government would make sure the ` ` right power ' ' be devolve to Scotland after Brexit . Michael Russell , Scotland ' s Brexit minister , say after the talk that there be a ` ` great frustration build up ' ' over the UK ' s handling of Brexit . he say Mrs May ' s speech this week have ` ` pre-empt ' ' much of their discussion , but there be agreement the Scottish Government ' s paper on Brexit would be take forward by ` ` technical discussion and bilateral discussion ' ' .
transition deal would cost UK two more year of free movement ; Draft Brexit negotiating guideline reveal EU ' s tough new stance on trade , migration and fishing
freedom of movement in Britain could continue for up to two year after Brexit , if British negotiator cave to fresh demand from Brussel ahead of talk over an UK-EU transition deal . the bloc want EU citizen arrive in the UK before @card@ to be allow to live and work in the UK indefinitely as the price for a Brexit transition period . Theresa May must secure transition to reassure anxious business but agree to the demand risk the fury of Brexiteers who want March @card@ , @card@ to spell the end of freedom of movement in Britain . capitulation would mean an extra @card@ month to two year of unlimited EU migration , with people arrive benefit from the same protected status as EU citizen live in Britain before ` ` Brexit Day ' ' . draft instruction for Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , have reveal the bloc ' S toughen stance ahead of transition period talk . the transition agreement will come into force after Brexit Day , effectively ` ` deep-freeze ' ' the UK ' s membership of the single market and custom union for about two year , give business and the government valuable time to prepare for departure . in December , the UK and European Commission agree that EU citizen live in Britain before the cut-off date would have their residency right protect after Brexit . that deal , along with agreement on the so-called Brexit Bill and the Irish border , secure ` ` sufficient progress ' ' at December ' s EU summit . EU leader then give the go-ahead for talk on the transition period , Mrs May ' s next significant Brexit hurdle , to begin . the EU now want the cut-off date to be push back to the end of the transition period and the special status for EU citizen extend to those arrive in the UK before the last day of transition at the end of @card@ . people arrive in Britain after Brexit but before @card@ could stay and work in the UK indefinitely . central and eastern European country , include Poland , be behind the demand , accord to the Financial Times , which obtain the draft negotiate mandate . the EU have also demand strict term on trade agreement and fishing right , complicate negotiation . the document require the UK to seek Brussels ' permission to remain part of trade agreement strike by the EU after March @card@ @card@ . as thing stand , Britain would fall out of those agreement , include pact with Canada and South Korea . the diplomat strengthen language prohibit Britain from enter into new agreement with non-EU country to replace the lose deal ` ` unless authorise to do so by the union ' ' . they also move to underline that Britain ' s share of fishing catch in UK water be not open to negotiation . the share have be fix for decade under the relative stability ` ` quota arrangement ' ' .
the battle for Brexit be far from over - it need to begin again now ; great political shift be never final - the PM must start campaigning on the issue that will define her
there be no such thing as permanent victory in politics . history never end : triumph be fleeting ; majority can turn into minority ; and orthodoxy be inevitably build on foundation of sand . communism be suppose to be discredit forever after the collapse of the Berlin Wall ; yet many young people in Britain and America now call themselves socialist . progress be never guarantee in politics : there be just up and down and swing of the pendulum . this apply to Brexit too , of course : those who think that leave ' s victory on June @card@ somehow settle the question be delude . the good news be that it remain likely that we will leave the EU in @card@ . Theresa May be fully commit and will be canny and steely in her negotiation . but the Remainers be stage a fight-back which be begin to inflict serious damage on the Brexiteer cause . every piece of bad news be blame on Brexit ; an endless supply of report , economic ` ` forecast ' ' and article explain how leave the EU be self-evidently bind to hurt us , slash our GDP , make us the world ' s laughing stock and wreck our prosperity . even Ed Miliband and Peter Mandelson be back . remarkably , give that the insurgent be mean to have seize power , the propaganda war have be one-sided : the government be n't really take part , and the other Brexiteers have vacate the battlefield . unless Mrs May decide to change tack , and become much more aggressive in defence of the policy that will come to define her , the Brexiteers will have only one option left : reconstitute a version of Vote leave and relaunch a full-throttled , independent campaign . one thing be clear : concern be mount in Eurosceptic circle . it ' S not just the specific of how we leave the EU that be still up for grab . some Remainians still hope that withdrawal can be delay long enough for it never to happen ; other be discuss whether Article @card@ could be reverse once it ' S invoke . the High Court case about whether the government have the right to trigger the process itself , or whether Parliament need to vote on it , be be follow closely by the financial market . trader , to their great shame , be desperate for any scrap of information that they could interpret as signify that Brexit will be stop or at least that we will remain permanently in the custom union , the single market and just about everything else . the election - by more than half of the MP eligible to vote - of hard-core Remainer Hilary Benn to lead the Brexit Select Committee , defeat Brexiteer Kate Hoey , will be interpret by some as another sign of a grow anti-Brexit revolt in the Commons . the European elite can not believe their luck . they be make increasingly tough statement that be be take at face value by the Remainian echo-chambers in Britain . the plan be work : the aim be to demoralise the UK establishment , encourage the government to be unambitious in its negotiation and rattle the business and financial establishment , thus undermine popular support for leave . among the more idiotic claim that have be air in recent day be that we no longer need airport expansion : some supposed ` ` expert ' ' believe that the demand for aviation will now grow much less quickly after Brexit ( non-EU country never build new airport , of course ) . in any normal circumstance such claim would be shoot to piece by a pro-Brexit campaign within minute of their publication . but that ' S just it : there no longer be a pro-Brexit campaign . Liam Fox , Boris Johnson and David Davis be make good speech , and be build an extensive new administrative apparatus ; but the full might of the government be n't meaningfully behind the Three Brexiteers . there be no war room , no rebuttal unit , no 6:30am meeting , no coordinate counter attack . for every anti-Brexit economic prediction , there need to be a pro-Brexit one ; for every case make for the custom union , another must be make to end it . we need to see number , datum , argument and financial model , back by the full force of the state machinery . the real scandal be not that the Remainians be play this game . it be par for the course : general election do n't mean that the defeat opposition disappear for five year , and that the government ' S manifesto be nod through . political warfare do n't end on the day a new prime minister walk into Downing Street : the opposition ' S job be to derail the government at every opportunity to snatch power back . why should it be any different after a referendum ? no , the real problem be that the government be operate under the ridiculous assumption that the referendum somehow depoliticise a raw , passionate struggle , magically turn it into a technocratic , managerial question . yet government can never stop fight for their policy ; they need to sell their idea afresh every day and take the public and opinion-formers with them every step of the way . the fact that the May Government be entrust with one big mission - rather than have to choose one - do n't change this . it need to pretend that it invent the idea of Brexit , for that be what history and the electorate will eventually come to think . it must learn to believe passionately in it , and take all attack on it personally . the Prime Minister in particular need to own Brexit , not just in term of eventual delivery but in every other way too . unless she define it and control it , she will allow other to do so , to her and the country ' s great disadvantage . prior to the referendum , David Cameron have @card@ of the well civil servant camp out in the Cabinet Office , wage war against Brexit ; the Prime Minister need to create a similar body , make the opposite case . she need to hire a senior Eurosceptic campaigner to run it . her relationship with the Chancellor will also be key : she need to remind him that his job be to reach for greatness rather than merely to minimise damage . if the government do n't launch a new campaign for Brexit , somebody else will have to . they will need to set up a new campaign vehicle , hire some of the operative who mastermind the leave vote and go back to their donor for funding . this can not wait until after Christmas . the Battle for Brexit must begin - again - now . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland do the Brexit mutineer think that undermine Theresa May will help her get the good deal ? ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the Brexit rebel ( Letters , November @card@ ) claim to want Britain to negotiate a good deal . could they explain how undermine the Prime Minister will achieve this ? Barry Cook Rufford , Lancashire sir - the Brexit ` ` mutineer ' ' state : ` ` we have accept the result of the EU referendum and accept that our country be leave the European union . ' ' you could have fool me . Sid Davies Bramhall , Cheshire sir - only the most naive would believe the rebel ' claim that they want merely to improve the Brexit Bill , rather than delay it . this be simply not true . indeed , it seem clear that at least some of the rebel would sooner have a Corbyn administration than part with their beloved EU . what the government and the Conservatives need to realise be that if Brexit do n't happen soon then a justifiably furious electorate will sweep them away in disgust and the hard leave really will be in power . Terry Smith London NW11 sir - the signatory point out that ` ` many of us be lawyer ' ' . this may explain the lack of commercial perspective in term of adopt a negotiate position , as well as the failure to grasp the enormous opportunity for Britain once we have leave the EU . Adrian Johnson London SW19 sir - the letter would be more plausible if the list of signatory have not be head by Ken Clarke : a well-known Europhile , famous or infamous , depend on your point of view , for his anti-Brexit stance . Malcolm Francis Symonds Ashtead , Surrey sir - the MP say they be not be obstructive just for the sake of it ; but then , to adapt Mandy Rice-Davies , they would , would n't they ? I presume Mr Clarke would also argue that have private discussion with Michel Barnier behind closed door , without instruction to do so , be not be ` ` obstructive ' ' . their history suggest that pessimism about any Brexit result be their default position . maybe we should listen instead to people such as Sir James Dyson , who offer a much more upbeat message . Peter Thompson Sutton , Surrey sir - why do so many of our MP lack the confidence to assume their democratic responsibility ? they would rather cling to the skirt of the EU and have our law decide by unelected bureaucrat , who have tie us up in red tape , restrict our trade with the rest of the world , ruin our fishery , complicate our agriculture and change the cultural identity of our society - while overcharge us for the privilege . we be a successful sovereign nation for hundred of year . the majority of British voter have the courage to reclaim that sovereignty . yet our representative , while pay lip-service to Brexit , seek to frustrate this by complicate the process . Pauline Coleman Painswick , Gloucestershire sir - Theresa May ' s plan to enshrine a Brexit leave date in law ( report , November @card@ ) be all very well - but , should that date come and go without Brexit , who would address the failure and who would take the blame ? Bruce Denness Whitwell , Isle of Wight sir - it seem that poor Mrs May be in a no-win situation : she be castigate for fail to give clarity in the Brexit process and yet , as soon as she give clarity in the form of a definitive date for leave , she be roundly criticise . David Parsons Deepcut , Surrey
Scotland SNP veteran lambast Sturgeon ' s Brexit ' posturing '
a former deputy leader of the SNP have launch a stinging attack on Nicola Sturgeon , accuse her of mislead the public over Brexit and put the independence movement in jeopardy with her call for a new vote on breaking-up Britain . Jim Sillars describe SNP threat to block Brexit legislation or stop the great repeal bill as ` ` fantasy posturing ' ' . he also accuse the Scottish government of ` ` sloppy thinking ' ' , say it lack intellectual rigour and claim most independence supporter be guilty of ` ` docile ' ' acceptance of everything Ms Sturgeon say . the veteran nationalist add that her ` ` obsession with Brexit ' ' be play into the hand of the Tories and there be no appetite among the public for a vote at present . he say : ` ` an obsession with Brexit and a referendum be allow the Tories to gather large number of @card@ No voter into their fold to reject a referendum they do not want . ` ` Ruth Davidson must purr with pleasure every time Sturgeon speak or send a letter to Theresa May . ' ' he say that until the ink be dry on the final Brexit deal , and time be take to consider what that mean for Scotland ' s relationship with the rest of the UK , there could be ` ` no deployment of the case for independence and a second referendum ' ' . write in the Daily Record , he add : ` ` the voter grasp this basic truth . it ' S time Sturgeon and her cabinet do too . ' ' Mr Sillars say in the article that false and misleading claim could damage the goal of independence . the Great repeal Bill will allow the UK Parliament and devolve administration to repatriate European Union law follow Brexit . Ms Sturgeon have say any attempt at a ` ` power grab ' ' by diminish the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament in area such as farming and fishing would be ` ` unacceptable ' ' and her spokesman have suggest the Scottish government could withhold legislative consent if power be remove from Holyrood . but Mr Sillars say the Westminster Act that set up the Scottish Parliament , and the Supreme Court ruling that say the devolve administration do not have a legal veto on Brexit , make the position clear on any such intervention by Holyrood . he add : ` ` surely , our First Minister , a lawyer , have read and understand the Supreme Court ' S judgment . surely she know that talk of throw a spanner in the Brexit work be mislead , meaningless waffle . ' ' he add : ` ` since no rational Scottish government can believe their own propaganda on stop Brexit , what be really behind this exercise ? ` ` I suspect it be to engender feeling of anger in Scotland that we ' re be ignore and not treat as an equal in this United Kingdom , with a resultant surge in Scottish patriotism . ' ' he say : ` ` make no mistake , I too want a second referendum , but I do n't think manufacturing grievance by issue false and mislead claim be the way to achieve that goal . ' ' a spokesman for the SNP say Mr Sillars be ` ` wrong on several count ' ' , add : ` ` firstly , the SNP Government have not claim it could block the Brexit Bill - but we have make clear we would not vote for legislation which strip power away from Holyrood . ` ` secondly , a majority of people in Scotland believe Holyrood should have the right to decide on an independence referendum , and that Theresa May be wrong to try and block it . ' '
Scotland Trump ' want EU to break up in wake of Brexit vote '
Donald Trump support the breakup of the European union in the wake of Brexit , an outgoing US ambassador have suggest . Anthony Gardner , who be depart as ambassador to the EU , say that senior figure in the president-elect ' s transition team have be ask EU official which country will follow Britain in vote to leave the bloc . Mr Trump have make no secret of his support for Brexit and have repeatedly praise Nigel Farage . Mr Gardner be highly critical of Mr Trump ' s position on Brexit and the EU . ` ` to think that by support fragmentation of Europe we would be advance our interest would be sheer folly , ' ' he say . ` ` it ' S lunacy . ' ' he add : ` ` for us to be the cheerleader of Brexit and to be encourage Brexit Mark @card@ , Mark @card@ , be the height of folly . ' ' describe call to EU institution from Trump ' s aide in recent week , Mr Gardner say : ` ` that be the one question that be ask - basically , ' what ' S the next country to leave ? ' . which be kind of suggest that the place be about to fall apart . ` ` it ' S just reflective of the general perception , a misperception , a perception that Nigel Farage be presumably disseminate in Washington and it ' s a caricature . ' ' meanwhile , Mr Trump attack the former MI6 operative who prepare a dossier claim Russia have explosive intelligence on him as a ` ` failed spy ' ' . Mr Trump say Christopher Steele , who spend two decade with the Secret Intelligence Service , collaborate with his political rival to concoct ` ` phoney allegation ' ' . he dismiss the alleged conspirator as ` ` sleazebag political operative ' ' , note that Russia have deny collect compromise information about him . Theresa May be force to distance herself from the content after the Russian embassy in London suggest Mr Steele may still be work for the British government . the Prime Minister insist that the government have nothing to do with the ` ` dirty dossier ' ' . a rare bottle of whisky sign by Mr Trump have sell for £6,000 at auction in Glasgow - more than double the expect price . the 26-year-old Glendronach be bottle in @card@ to mark the opening of Trump International Golf Links in Aberdeenshire . the Trump Files : page @card@ and @card@ Charles Moore : page @card@ John Hughes-Wilson : page @card@
Scotland Sturgeon be accuse of use Brexit fear to ' muddy the water ' about Union dividend ; Brexit will be deeply damaging , say First Minister
Nicola Sturgeon be accuse last night of a ` ` cynical ' ' attempt to deflect attention from Scotland ' s multi-billion pound deficit by claim Brexit could cost the country billion every year . the analysis by the Scottish government of the cost of leave the EU be release @card@ hour before official figure that could reveal the big ever gap between what Scotland raise in tax and what it receive from Westminster . opponent say the First Minister be try to ` ` muddy the water ' ' and boost the case for another independence referendum while ignore Scotland ' s multi-billion pound ` ` Union dividend ' ' . one pro-Union group say Scotland ' s deficit for @card@ be expect to be even high than the £15 billion figure reveal in March , when opposition party say the datum have devastate the case for separation . the new Scottish government analysis of Brexit claim Scotland ' S GDP could be between £1.7 billion and £11.2 billion low per year by @card@ . it say Brexit would hit Scottish tax revenue by up to £3.7 billion annually . Ms Sturgeon claim the figure be evidence of the need to protect Scotland ' s relationship with Europe . she also reveal plan yesterday to appoint a Brexit minister to lead the Scottish government in talk with the UK Government . however , Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , say Ms Sturgeon be use Brexit to deflect from the ` ` underlie fragility ' ' of the Scottish economy . she claim the Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland ( Gers ) figure be publish today have be bring forward from their normal release date to avoid ` ` pre-election scrutiny ' ' next year . the datum , which will show the full scale of the collapse in oil revenue , have be release each March for the last five year . the Tories say that if the revenue figure be issue next March , as expect , that would fall during the parliamentary session and two month before council election in May . Ms Davidson add : ` ` the First Minister be in danger of lose the plot completely . her own government ' S figure will show that Scotland benefit from a multi-billion union dividend . ` ` and yet , in order to revive her independence obsession , she be try to pretend these fact do n't exist . Scotland benefit from be a member of the UK , and the UK benefit from our be there . it be time Nicola Sturgeon end this charade , take her threat of a second independent referendum off the table , and get back to the day job of sort out the mess her government have make of our public service . ' ' Alastair Cameron , director of the pro-UK organisation Scotland in Union , say the economic hit cause by continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Brexit would be far outweigh by the damage cause if Scotland be to leave the UK . he add : ` ` by rush out these speculative and selective Brexit figure in a cynical attempt to muddy the water ahead of the Gers report , Nicola Sturgeon have all but admit she have no answer to the economic question about independence . while there be evidence that Brexit could harm the Scottish economy , she have fail to recognise this would be vastly outweigh by the damage cause by turn our back on our big trading partner - the rest of the UK , a market nearly four time as big . ` ` Our membership of the UK have protect us from the sharp tax rise and deep spending cut to our school and hospital that would be an inevitable consequence of the fall in oil price if Scotland have be independent . ' ' but Ms Sturgeon claim at a press conference in Edinburgh that the ` ` old argument ' ' that the UK offer financial security for Scotland no longer held water . she add : ` ` Brexit will be deeply damaging to Scotland ' S economy and to our finance . ` ` if it turn out simply not to be possible to protect Scotland ' s interest through the UK , it must be open to the Scottish people to consider afresh , and in this very different context , the question of independence . however , I be very clear that we will enter these UK [ Brexit ] discussion in good faith . ' ' accord to the Scottish government paper , leave the EU could make European export more expensive , deter overseas investor , restrict labour , increase skill shortage and reduce productivity . a spokesman for the UK Government say the real uncertainty for Scotland ' S economy be due to talk of a second independence referendum .
Hammond loosen the purse string with £3 bn for Brexit ; Brexit ; Chancellor tell to spend now to show Europe that Britain be serious about walk away from talk
Britain will set aside £3billion on preparation for Brexit , include leave the EU without a deal , Philip Hammond announce as he face call from Conservative Eurosceptics to spend the money now . the Chancellor provoke Cabinet split last month by say that the UK should not spend money on prepare for leave the EU without a deal until ` ` the very last moment ' ' . however , he announce in his budget that the government be set aside money to prepare for ` ` all eventuality ' ' , include leave the EU without a deal . ` ` no one should doubt our resolve , ' ' he say . Conservative MP point out that the first half of the money will not be spend until next year , while the second half will not be release until @card@ - by which time the UK will already have leave the EU . Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , be among Eurosceptic MP who have repeatedly argue that Britain should invest in prepare for a no deal Brexit to show the EU that it be serious about walk away . David Jones , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , say : ` ` I be please to see the Chancellor have set aside £3billion for Brexit over the next two year . ` ` however , he should now actually be spend some of that money . we need to show the EU that preparation be be make and also need to give reassurance to business . ' ' Mr Hammond say : ` ` we be determine to ensure that the country be prepare for every possible outcome . we have already invest almost £700million in Brexit preparation . ` ` today I be set aside over the next two year another £3billion . ` ` and I stand ready to allocate further sum if and when www.needed.No one should doubt our resolve . ' ' he conclude his Budget speech by say that the ` ` big boost ' ' for business and family would be to make ` ` early progress ' ' to secure a deal on Brexit . however , Tory Eurosceptic MP raise concern after the Treasury suggest that the UK could continue to pay £3.5 billion a year after Brexit . Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` I can not believe that those wise figure in her Majesty ' S treasury could have make a schoolboy error of just assume that money pay out in one year would continue indefinitely . ` ` this be I feel rather like spot an error in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack - something that it be very rare to do and indicate an occasional fail . ' ' the government clarify that the Office for Budget Responsibility , the official forecaster , have include the EU spending in forecast because it have assume that after Brexit it would be ` ` recycle fully into extra domestic spending . ' ' the OBR say that it have only be able to make ` ` broad brush ' ' assumption about Brexit because the future relationship with the EU be subject to negotiation . it say : ` ` give the uncertainty regard how the government will respond to the choice and trade-off it face during the negotiation , we still have no meaningful basis on which to form a judgment as to their final outcome and upon which we can then condition our forecast . ' ' however , it do downgrade its forecast for net migration from @card@ in @card@ to @card@ in @card@ on the assumption that the government will go on to introduce tight immigration control . this will still fall short of the government ' s target of cut net migration to ` ` ten of thousand ' ' . the watchdog also assume that Brexit will result in slow import and export growth due to new friction in trade between the UK and EU . ' we need to show the EU that preparation be be make and also need to give reassurance to business '
House of Lords threaten with abolition if it delay Brexit
the House of Lords be yesterday warn it will face abolition if it frustrate Brexit , as it emerge that rebel Tory MP be plot to delay trigger Brexit until the end of the year . government source and Conservative MP tell the House of Lords that its existence will be call into question if it try to delay or frustrate plan to leave the European Union . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , urge peer to do their ` ` patriotic ' ' duty and support Brexit . however pro-European Conservative peer be prepare to defy the government whip and back three amendment which have the potential to derail Theresa May ' S plan for a clean Brexit . one of the motion be expect to demand that Brexit negotiation can not be trigger until after German and French election later this year . some Tory peer be also expect to back a liberal Democrat amendment call for a second referendum before Britain leave the European Union . a third amendment likely to be back by Tory peer will demand that the UK retain tariff-free access to the single market . around @card@ Tory peer be prepare to join Liberal Democrat , Labour and a number of cross-bench peer in a bid to delay Brexit . one Conservative peer tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` the commons need a reality check . we be drive off a cliff-edge and nobody be do anything about it . ' ' however Oliver Letwin , a former cabinet minister , yesterday say that a debate should be hold on abolition or full-scale reform of the House of Lords if peer try to frutrate Brexit . speak during the business statement , Mr Letwin ask Commons Leader David Lidington : ` ` Would he find time in government time for a debate , should the Lords seek to delay beyond the end of March the passage of our accession to Article @card@ , for this House to discuss the possibility of either the abolition or full scale reform of the Lords ? ' ' Mr Lidington say he be ` ` optimistic ' ' a debate would not be require , add he believe the Lords would be ` ` very cognisant ' ' of the will of the public show by the referendum result .
May call in Gove to save her from leadership challenge ; Prime Minister bring in former foe in reshuffle aim at shore up support for a hard Brexit
Theresa May attempt to head off a potential leadership challenge last night by hand Michael Gove an unexpected return to the Cabinet in a move design to shore up support for a hard Brexit . Mr Gove ' s appointment as Environment Secretary in the Cabinet reshuffle pave the way for him to become a key adviser on Brexit , as well as a powerful ally of the Prime Minister in get any Brexit deal through the Commons . the appointment suggest Mrs May be prepare to address complaint that she be too autocratic and unwilling to work with her critic . the move come as a surprise because she have have a frosty relationship with Mr Gove since they fall out over government policy on extremism in @card@ . with Brexit negotiation due to start next week , Mrs May appear to have be give a stay of execution by her party , who be desperate to keep the talk on track and do not want to risk any move that might lead to another general election . George Osborne , the former chancellor , say yesterday that Mrs May be a ` ` dead woman walking ' ' and several Tory MP indicate that a leadership coup in the summer remain likely . tonight , Mrs May will face the wrath of the backbench @card@ Committee of Conservative MP , who demand that their monthly meeting with the Prime Minister be bring forward by a day so they could vent their fury over the catastrophic election campaign . by bring Mr Gove back into the fold , Mrs May have send a signal to Boris Johnson and David Davis - the ` ` hard Brexiteers ' ' most likely to replace her in any leadership coup - that she remain commit to deliver their vision of Brexit . Mr Gove replace fellow Brexiteer Andrea Leadsom , who become Leader of the House , a key role in which she will be charge with work with the whip office to steer Brexit legislation through Parliament . Mrs May also appoint Damian Green - a high-profile Remain supporter - to the job of First Secretary of State . it come as : ally of Boris Johnson say it be a matter of ` ` when , not if ` ` he make a fresh bid to become Tory leader . Mrs May refuse to say whether she intend to serve a full five-year term . the DUP deal be mire in problem as Tory MP question its legitimacy and the Irish premier warn it could jeopardise the peace process . backbencher tell a weakened Mrs may she must drop key manifesto pledge from next week ' s Queen ' s Speech if she want it to be pass . Jeremy Corbyn predict he will be Prime Minister by the end of the year and say he be ready for another general election . Mrs May insist yesterday she be ` ` get on with the job ' ' despite widespread report of plot to oust her and announce she would be fly to France to meet President Emmanuel Macron tomorrow as she attempt to show that Brexit will not be affect by the loss of her majority . initially Mrs May have plan a widespread reshuffle if she win a large majority and want to replace Philip Hammond as Chancellor , as well as demote critic such as Liam Fox . but after lose her majority she have also lose much authority and have have to leave virtually all of the major Cabinet minister in place , with the notable exception of bring in Mr Gove . Mrs May have face call to soften her Brexit negotiating position , with Mr Hammond , Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , and the DUP all favour a ` ` job first ' ' Brexit with the emphasis on the economy rather than on cut migration . however , Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader and Brexit cheerleader , say : ` ` Gove have be bring back because he be a keen Brexiteer and so people do n't think we be abandon the Brexit process . ` ` there be no water down of Brexit . even Labour have say we be not go to stay in the single market . ` ` it help have Michael Gove in the Cabinet because he be very clear that we should take control of our border , our law and our money . ' ' Mr Gove ' S return be a remarkable turnaround for an MP whose relationship with Mrs May have be in a dire state . he have also make an enemy of Boris Johnson after he support his leadership bid last year only to ` ` betray ' ' him by run himself , take many of Mr Johnson ' s supporter with him . both end up pull out of the contest . yet Mr Johnson be among the first to welcome Mr Gove back into the Cabinet . he tweet : ` ` it ' s a government of all the talent . welcome back to Michael ! ' ' Mr Gove say : ` ` I ' m flatter Theresa May have ask me to rejoin her team . I be quite surprise , I have to say . ` ` I be down in Surrey enjoy the afternoon with a friend when suddenly the phone ring . there be an invitation to go to no @card@ . I know today be reshuffle day but genuinely do n't continue on Page @card@
market be breathless ( and clueless ) about Brexit
if Socrates be right and the only true wisdom be in know you know nothing , then the market be currently display their collective genius ; they clearly have n't get a clue whether the UK will vote to leave the European Union and what that will mean for investment if it do . yield on the UK ' s 10-year , 20-year and 30-year government bond all hit record low yesterday in reaction to poll and bet odd suggest that Brexit be now look more likely . but what this means be open to interpretation . the relationship between bond yield ( which move inversely to price ) and economic forecast be , to put it mildly , complicated . traditionally the price of government bond go up and their yield fall when investor be worry . but that be because government bond be see as low risk . so do the rally in UK gilt mean investor be concern about the health of the UK economy after Brexit or that they ' re sanguine about its safe haven status ? the UK Treasury and the Remain campaign have repeatedly say that the UK ' s borrowing cost will rise in the event of Brexit . the leave campaign have therefore seize on the fact that gilt yield have fall follow the publication of pro-Brexit poll as evidence that so-called Project fear be not work . yesterday morning Douglas Carswell , the UK Independence Party member of parliament and prominent leave campaigner , tweet : ` ` bond market look good . ` ` Lot [ sic ] of international investor happy to buy UK gilt ahead of Brexit . ' ' City analyst might argue that this view could be construe as a touch rose-tinted . it be more likely that investor have be persuade by the economic consensus , which have predict that Brexit might lead to some economic pain ( though no one really know how much ) , and believe this could result in Bank of England have to cut interest rate and maybe even restart the printing press with more quantitative easing . this would , in turn , push up the price of the current stock of gilt and hence result in low yield . some go as far as to point out that if the market think Brexit be a good thing , investor would be sell bond to invest in some of the asset , such as equity , that would well help them ride the upswing . in that case gilt yield would be rise . but they ' re not . ' the leave campaign have seize on the fact that gilt yield have fall ' in the meantime , the FTSE @card@ have fall through the @card@ mark with nearly £100bn wipe off the value of blue chip stock in the last four trading day . the FTSE @card@ , which be a good gauge of the UK economy , have tumble in June as the poll have narrow . but , equally , the equity market be only back to where they be in February - hardly the most dramatic of sell-offs . the clear indicator of international sentiment towards the UK be the value of the pound . it have hold up for much of the campaign but have be fall as we get closer to the June @card@ vote . but be that a bad thing ? there be plenty who would argue that it be currently too high and a fall will help the UK ' S exporter . on the flip side , a sharp fall in sterling follow Brexit , be it to occur , would make import more expensive and therefore increase the possibility of inflation . if that look like happen the Bank of England might feel it be too risky to cut rate to dampen any economic turmoil and might even feel it have to hike them . that would result in the price for government bond fall and yield rise . on top of this be the possibility that foreign investor might stop see the UK as a safe haven and sell their holding of gilt . there ' s no clear evidence of this happening yet . foreign investor own about a quarter of all UK government bond and the late datum from the Bank of England show this proportion be unchanged . ' a post-Brexit fall in sterling would make import more expensive ' but , if a sell-off do occur follow Brexit , it could put downward pressure on price result in rise yield . a poll of @card@ investment professional conduct by the CFA institute have find that nearly 69pc think a vote to leave the EU would lead to an immediate increase in benchmark 10-year UK government bond spread over German bund . but that expectation that yield will rise in the event of Brexit appear to contradict what have happen - they ' ve fall - as the chance of Brexit have increase . muddy the water further be the fact that these asset price be , unlike the poll , not only look at the UK referendum but be also price in worsen worry about the global economy in general and a low inflation environment . how much of the movement in asset price be down to the referendum and how much be down to what be go on in the rest of the world be really anyone ' s guess . confuse yet ? you ' re not alone . the price of government bond yield could just as easily rise or fall in the event of Brexit and both side of the argument be likely to read a justification of their opinion into either scenario . investor be probably well off keep out of it if they can . ' the leave campaign have seize on the fact that gilt yield have fall ' ' a post-Brexit fall in sterling would make import more expensive '
Cameron ' s ' fixer ' broker Brexit peace deal ; long road to the deal Sir Oliver Letwin head off Tory rebellion over leave date with amendment to allow great flexibility
David Cameron ' S former ` ` fixer ' ' last night broker a potential peace deal between Theresa May and Tory rebel that could avoid a second Brexit rebellion in the space of a week . the Prime Minister be understand to be willing to accept a compromise propose by Sir Oliver Letwin over the Brexit date be enshrine in law follow talk with both side . an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill table by Sir Oliver would enable Mrs May to save face by keep the Brexit date of March @card@ , @card@ on the Bill , while also allow Parliament to vote to change the official Brexit date if negotiation with Brussels over-run . Sir Oliver say last night he be ` ` absolutely confident ' ' his amendment would be pass when it be put to a vote next Wednesday . crucially , his amendment be co-sign by Bernard Jenkin MP , one of the most vocal Eurosceptics on the Tory backbenches , and Jeremy Lefroy MP , one of the Tory who be plan to rebel . Dominic Grieve , the rebel ' ringleader and a former attorney general , last night give his support to the plan , and Government source indicate Mrs May be receptive to the idea , though one Tory rebel describe it as a ` ` serious step down for the Prime Minister ' ' . Mrs May , who suffer her first parliamentary defeat on Brexit this week when @card@ Tory rebel join Labour in demand a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final deal with Brussels , have be face a second defeat after the mutineer say the Brexit date must not appear on the Bill . they argue that enshrine Brexit day in law will give the government no flexibility , mean Britain could crash out without a deal if negotiation with the EU over-run by a matter of day or week . Sir Oliver ' S amendment allow for the date of Brexit to be change by Parliament if necessary , mirror the process for extend the Brexit negotiation , which can only be do if all @card@ EU member state agree to extend the two-year period specify under Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty . Sir Oliver tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` it mean that the date remain on the face of the Bill but if the UK Government or the EU use the Article @card@ process to create extra time for negotiation then the government do n't have to start all over again . ' ' Sir Oliver be David Cameron ' s policy chief and be a former chairman of the Conservative Research Department . he no longer hold any official position within the party , but remain one of the most influential voice on the backbenches . he add : ` ` I ' ve talk to Dominic Grieve and he and his friend be likely to be content with it . I have n't speak to anyone in Downing Street but I ' m confident that the government will accept it . this be not something I ' ve just dream up in the bath . ' ' Government source say they be ` ` look closely ' ' at the amendment but have not yet accept it . Vicky Ford , a Conservative MP who come close to rebel this week before decide to vote with the government , say : ` ` I hope that there be some flexibility and I know that the government be listen . ` ` we should try and get this all resolve over the next few day so that we can all go away for Christmas and then get down to the hard work of get this trade deal agree . ' ' countdown to departure milestone the EU and UK have to pass now exploratory UK-EU talk can begin on the future relationship , the second phase of Brexit negotiation , which include trade and transition . Jan @card@ @card@ European affair minister meet to sign off the commission ' S text . this be expect to be a formality . UK-EU negotiation on transition begin . March European Council summit to set out guideline for trade talk , which can then formally begin . Donald Tusk expect these to be more difficult than any negotiation up to now . October Deadline for Brexit agreement to be finalise ahead of ratification by the EU @card@ and European Parliament . Mr Tusk say it will be ` ` dramatically difficult ' ' to achieve an agreement by this time . March @card@ Brexit deal should by now be ratify but it could be derail if MEPs or even one single country , include Britain , reject it . March @card@ @card@ Britain leave the EU and the transition period begin . @card@ after a period of ` ` about two year ' ' , the transition period end and Britain be cut off from the single market , custom union and other EU structure . ' I ' m confident that the government will accept it . this be not something I ' ve just dream up in the bath '
Brexit war of word as two side remain deadlocked ; Stalemate threaten to delay trade talk as UK be accuse of ' nostalgia ' over single market demand
David Davis demand that the European Union put ` ` people above process ' ' yesterday after Brussels ' chief negotiator claim there have be ` ` no progress ' ' during Brexit talk . the Brexit Secretary attack the EU ' s rigid approach to the third round of negotiation that close in Brussels yesterday with the two side deadlock over fundamental issue and with warning that trade talk will not start in October as originally plan . during a bad-tempered press conference in the headquarters of the European Commission , Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say : ` ` there have be no decisive progress on any of the principle subject . ' ' he add : ` ` Time be pass quickly and be short to start with . ' ' Mr Davis say : ` ` Our discussion this week have expose yet again that the UK ' S approach be substantially more flexible and pragmatic than that of the EU as it avoid unnecessary disruption for business and consumer . we urge the EU to be more imaginative and flexible in their approach to withdrawal on this point . ' ' Mr Barnier chide Britain for unrealistic expectation of single market access after Brexit , say the UK demand suggest a ` ` nostalgia ' ' for an organisation it have decide to leave . ` ` I would n't confuse a belief in the free market for nostalgia , ' ' Mr Davis shoot back . Mr Barnier have say : ` ` I see a sort of nostalgia in the form of specific request that would amount to enjoy the benefit of the single market without be part of it . Brexit mean Brexit and leave the single market mean leave the single market . ' ' last night it emerge the EU be demand billion of pound after Brexit for aid to Africa , loan to Ukraine and environmental project in Europe , include bridge for wildlife . Mr Barnier say there be ` ` joint obligation towards third country ' ' which need to be address ` ` seriously and rigorously ' ' . the ongoing row will cause particular embarrassment for Theresa May , who spend much of yesterday assure business leader in Japan that Brexit be go smoothly and they could invest in the UK with confidence . Mrs May , who have meeting with the boss of Toyota , Nissan and Hitachi , later go to a state banquet with Shinzo Abe , the prime minister , apparently unaware of what be go on in Brussels . the exchange come after four day of talk that bring little progress on the issue of Ireland , citizen ' right and the financial settlement to leave the EU . this week , the Daily Telegraph report that French official have suggest the UK should seek a transition deal as a means of break the impasse . Guy Verhofstadt : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
' there can be no turn back ' ; Theresa May prepare for parliamentary battle as opposition party plot to thwart clean Brexit
Jeremy CORBYN and Nicola Sturgeon be last night plot to undermine Theresa May ' s plan for a clean Brexit as the government insist there be ` ` no go back ' ' on the vote to leave . after the Supreme Court rule that Parliament would have to pass a new law trigger Article @card@ : ? Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , call for full access to the single market after Brexit and say he will table legislation demand that the term of any final deal be send back to Brussels if Parliament reject them ; ? the SNP say that it be prepare to table @card@ amendment , include a proposal to block Brexit entirely , while the Liberal Democrats will seek a second referendum and oppose trigger Article @card@ ; ? a dozen pro-European Conservative MP be also prepare to join force with Labour and the SNP in an attempt to force the government formally to set out its negotiate strategy . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , be expect to publish the Article @card@ legislation tomorrow and have warn MP and peer against try to ` ` thwart ' ' or ` ` delay ' ' Brexit . he yesterday insist that there would be ` ` no go back ' ' on the result of the EU referendum and describe attempt to block Brexit as ` ` patronise , undemocratic and improper ' ' . Sir Edward Leigh , a former Tory minister , say the government should be prepare to call an ` ` immediate general election ' ' if its opponent try to undermine Brexit . however , the Prime Minister be confident that she will be able to face down parliamentary opposition and minister believe they could trigger Brexit week earlier than her end of March deadline . the government hope to pass the legislation in the commons within a fortnight , with potential all-night sitting and the first vote schedule for next week . the conservative believe that will leave sufficient time for debate in the Lords , where the government do not hold a majority . ` ` we will let the Lords talk until they wet themselves , ' ' one government source say . Iain Duncan Smith , a former work and pension secretary , say : ` ` this be an attempt to yet again try to tie the government ' S hand and delay Brexit . ` ` the Prime Minister must stick to her gun and get this bill through as fast as possible . ' ' the Supreme Court yesterday rule that the government must table legislation before trigger Article @card@ and begin the process of exit the European Union . however , minister secure the support of three dissenting justice , with one of them warn that judicial intervention in political matter be ` ` fraught with risk ' ' and be not ` ` constitutionally appropriate ' ' . judge also rule that the government do not need permission from Scotland and other devolve administration before trigger Article @card@ . the ruling bring a furious response from Ms Sturgeon , the Scottish First Minister , who claim that the need for a second independence referendum be ` ` ever clear ' ' . the SNP have promise to put forward @card@ ` ` serious and substantive ' ' amendment to the bill , include a proposal that the UK would stay in the EU under a ` ` revise ' ' membership if MP reject the final deal . it also leave Labour in disarray . a spokesman for Mr Corbyn initially suggest that Labour ' S amendment to Article @card@ legislation would ` ` seek to build in the principle of full , tariff-free access to the single market ' ' , only to remove the line from a second press release half an hour later . Labour be prepare to table at least four amendment , include one that would require the government to take a final deal back to Brussels if Parliament vote against it . Mr Corbyn be ultimately expect to impose a three-line whip to support the Article @card@ legislation , but dozen of Labour MP - include shadow minister - will rebel and vote against it . Kate Hoey , a Eurosceptic Labour MP , warn today in an article for the Daily Telegraph that it will be ` ` incredibly damaging ' ' for the party if it be see to obstruct Brexit . ` ` this could be a real threat to our party ' S future , ' ' she say . there be also grow sign of a rebellion among pro-European Conservative MP . a dozen of them call on the government to publish a White Paper to set out its broad strategy before Brexit . the scale of the potential rebellion and the small Tory majority mean that minister could be force to back down and publish the paper or face a potential commons defeat . Mr Davis yesterday tell the commons : ` ` I trust no one will seek to make it a vehicle for attempt to thwart the will of the people or frustrate or delay the process of exit the European union . ' ' Ministers be privately warn that the government be prepare to flood the Lords with hundred of Conservative peer if it try to block Brexit . Lord Blunkett , a Labour peer and former home secretary , say it would be ` ` foolish in the extreme ' ' and ` ` unthinkable ' ' for Lords to block Brexit . inside Brexit report Pages @card@ opinion Page @card@ Editorial Comment Page @card@ Scottish NATIONAL Party plan to table amendment to the Article @card@ bill , include one that seek to block Brexit entirely Liberal Democrats All MP tell to vote against Article @card@ in an attempt to force a second referendum labour call for full access to the single market and want to force the PM to publish a Brexit plan
Scotland Brussels expect to back UK over check at Irish border
Brussel will support Britain in its row with Ireland over the future of custom check after it leave the European Union , Brexit negotiator believe . Leo Varadkar , the Irish Prime Minister , surprise the British government earlier this month by suggest that there should be a new custom border in the Irish Sea . a formal position paper , publish on Wednesday , will see minister stick to their plan for a ` ` light touch ' ' customs border between Ireland and Northern Ireland use technology and spot check . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , yesterday acknowledge that the dispute be likely to be ` ` problematic ' ' as he call for ` ` invisible ' ' customs check . however , Brexit negotiator be increasingly confident that Brussels will support Britain over the dispute . speak in Edinburgh , Mr Davis say he expect an agreement over the free movement of people between Ireland and Northern Ireland will be ` ` straightforward ' ' . he say : ` ` I be sit next to an Irish banker at a dinner of financial service , and he say what be I go to do ? how be I go to be able to travel between Britain and Ireland . ` ` I say the same way you have be do since @card@ when the Common Travel Area be establish . that bit ought to be very straightforward . the bit that ' s more problematic be make the border invisible in the way that it be now . ' ' on Tuesday the government will publish a paper on custom arrangement after Brexit , follow by the paper on Northern Ireland . however Michel Barnier , the EU ' s Brexit negotiator , be refuse to negotiate on the future of Britain ' s relationship with the EU until after significant progress have be make in Brexit divorce talk . Mr Davis hope that the publication of the position paper will help drive forward negotiation . he say : ` ` we need to get on with negotiate the big issue around our future partnership to ensure we get a deal that deliver a strong UK and EU . ' ' an ally of Mr Davis say : ` ` David be try to change the dynamic and drive negotiation forward .
Scotland Juncker ' s furious take on Brexit dinner ; the Telegraph Election @card@ ; German newspaper paint picture of disastrous meeting between Prime Minister and EC president
as JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker , the president of the European Commission , leave Downing Street on Wednesday night , he and his team appear to be in good spirit . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , be see throw her head back with laughter in the lobby of Downing Street as Martin Selmayr , Mr Juncker ' s chief of staff , make a joke . both Downing Street and Brussels subsequently hail the meeting as ` ` constructive ' ' . on Sunday , however , a very differ-ent version of event emerge in a German newspaper which suggest that Mr Juncker have launch a scathing attack on Mrs May . the report claim that Mr Juncker warn Mrs May that Brexit ` ` can not be a success ' ' , add that he be leave Downing Street ` ` @card@ time more sceptical ' ' . he and his official now believe the chance of Brexit negotiation fail be ` ` over @card@ per cent ' ' . the follow day , the newspaper report , Mr Juncker have call Angela Merkel and describe Mrs May as ` ` delude ' ' and ` ` live in another galaxy ' ' . Mrs Merkel subsequently accuse Britain of suffer from ` ` Brexit delusion ' ' . Mrs May yesterday dismiss the report as ` ` Brussels gossip ' ' , but concede that negotiation will be ` ` tough ' ' . May ' s ' pre-emptive strike ' accord to Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung , the meeting descend into acrimony almost immediately as Mr Juncker demand to know why Britain have block EU budget negotiation . Mrs May say that because of the election any decision that would bind the hand of the next government could not be make . Mr Juncker and his official , however , regard the block as a ` ` pre-emptive strike ' ' ahead of Brexit , suspect Mrs May be try to make his life ` ` hell ' ' in a bid to improve her negotiate position . Davis under fire after half an hour of talk Mrs May and Mr Juncker go to dinner where they be join by Michel Barnier , the European Commission ' s chief negotiator for Brexit , and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . in a bid to break the ice Mr Davis reportedly highlight a legal challenge he bring against the government as a back-bench MP over the UK ' s surveillance power in the European court . Mrs May be ` ` not amused ' ' . ` ` the visitor wonder whether Davis would still be in charge of the negotiation after the election , ' ' the German newspaper report . early expat deal rule out Mrs May tell Mr Juncker that she want to settle the issue of the right of the 3million EU migrant live in Britain and the @card@ million Briton live in the EU by the end of June . her suggestion be report to have ` ` astonish ' ' Mr Juncker . ` ` I think you underestimate this , Theresa , ' ' he be report to have say . Mr Juncker be say to have pull two thick file from his bag - the accession treaty with Croatia and the free trade deal with Canada , both of which be thousand of page long - say the divorce treaty and future free trade agreement would be just as complex . talk in the open The Prime Minister suggest talk could take place in monthly , four-day block which would remain confidential . the European Commission say this would be ` ` impossible ' ' . ' Brexit can not be a success ' Mrs May paint a ` ` rosy picture ' ' of a post-Brexit Britain which would be open to the world and closely integrate with the Single Market . ` ` let us make Brexit a success , ' ' she say . accord to the report Mr Juncker say that Britain could no longer remain a member of the Customs Union and would be bad off than it be today . ` ` Brexit can not be a success , ' ' he say . Mrs May appear ` ` surprise by this ' ' , the report suggest . with the meal less than half way through , Mr Juncker respond : ` ` the more I hear , the more sceptical I become . ' ' battle over the bill one of the most contentious part of the discussion be over Britain ' s Brexit divorce bill . the EU want the UK to pay up to £50billion to fulfil its obligation as it leave the bloc . Mrs May tell Mr Juncker that the UK be not legally oblige to pay ` ` a penny ' ' . but he say that if the UK fail to meet its obligation it will undermine a potential free trade deal . he also suggest it would mean that the parliament of all other EU nation would have to sign off on the deal , put the process at risk : ` ` why should they pick up London ' S bill ? ' ' a call to Angela Merkel the follow day Mr Juncker speak to Mrs Merkel at 3pm and reportedly say : ` ` Theresa May be live on another galaxy , she be delude herself . ' ' an hour and a half later Mrs Merkel tell the Bundestag : ` ` I have the impression some in Great Britain still harbour illusion about it [ Brexit ] . that would be a waste of time . ' ' Mrs May respond directly to Mrs Merkel , warn that her rhetoric demonstrate that all @card@ member of the EU be ` ` line up against us ' ' . Brussels gossip ? the Prime Minister yesterday insist the talk have be constructive . however she add : ` ` Every vote for me and my team will strengthen my hand in those negotiation . ` ` and when it come to June the 8th , people have a clear choice . there ' ll be @card@ European country on one side of the table . ` ` who do they want to see stand up for Britain on the other side of the table - me , or Jeremy Corbyn ? ' ' EU official warn after the meeting that be now ` ` more likely than not ' ' that Brexit talk will fail . Mrs May tell EU delegate at the meal : ` ` let us make Brexit a success . ' ' but Mr Juncker think otherwise . delegate say they be ` ` astonish ' ' by Mrs May ' s push for a deal on EU migrant to be sort ` ` by the end of June ' ' . Mrs May appear to play hardball over the divorce bill , insist the UK do not legally owe the EU any money . accord to the report Mrs May appear ' p***** off ' with Mr Davis during the meal for highlight a case he once bring against the government as an MP over surveillance power . the PM reportedly urge that the monthly talk stay secret . the EU say this be ` ` impossible ' ' as it have to consult member state . ' who do they want to see stand up for Britain on the other side of the table - me or Jeremy Corbyn ? '
the season of goodwill ? a frosty snub from Osborne to IDS suggest not ; Sketch
it be no secret that , in their Cabinet day , George Osborne and Iain Duncan Smith be n't the good of friend . to judge from what happen at yesterday ' s Brexit debate , I ' m go to guess that relation have n't improve . since his demotion , Mr Osborne have rarely be see in the chamber . so it be a pleasure to spot him lurk near the back , exchange whisper with colleague , and stroke his chin as if it be a Bond villain ' S cat . after a while I glance at the clock . Mr Osborne have be present for an hour and @card@ minute . a long time . be he plot a dramatic intervention ? if he be , we sadly do n't get to hear it , because then the Speaker invite a speech from Mr Duncan Smith . immediately , Mr Osborne get up and leave . I do n't know whether Mr Duncan Smith register this slight from his party colleague . but I assume not , because he then start taunt Labour for be divide . Labour have call the debate to force the government into publish its plan for Brexit . to get its own back , the government have table an amendment to force Labour into voting for Article @card@ to be invoke by the end of March . ` ` Facing defeat , the government have cave , ' ' maintain Sir Keir Starmer . the shadow Brexit secretary be a recent addition to Labour ' s front bench . he be a heavy , forbid figure , with an unblinking glare and a hard , bony face . essentially he look like a kneecap with eye . Labour , he insist , be not try to ` ` frustrate ' ' Brexit ; merely to ` ` shape the debate ' ' and avoid ` ` a hard Brexit ' ' . David Davis look at him testily . he have argue before that there ' s no such thing as ` ` a hard Brexit ' ' . ` ` to be honest , ' ' retort the Brexit Secretary , ` ` I do n't even know what ' hard Brexit ' mean . ' ' ` ` Hard Brexit mean hard Brexit ! ' ' parped a heckler . Mr Davis say MP must give the government leeway in its EU negotiation ; otherwise , it would be like try to thread a needle ` ` with @card@ people jog your elbow ' ' . Hilary Benn ( Lab , Leeds Central ) , look exasperate , insist that MP need clarity , not the occasional hint . ` ` when Moses come down from the mountain bear the tablet , ' ' he snort , ` ` they do not contain ' the Ten Hints ' ! ' ' the debate be grow increasingly partisan . but then in step an unlikely peacemaker : Ed Miliband . the former Labour leader say he share the view of two lead Tory . during a visit to the Commons library , he ' d be impress by a pamphlet the two have write in @card@ , entitle ` ` Restoring Parliamentary Authority : EU Laws and British Scrutiny ' ' . ` ` Our feeble system of scrutiny undermine Parliament ' s ability to check or restrain government action in Europe , ' ' they ' d write . ` ` we therefore need a system that give Parliament real power over minister , enough time to scrutinise , and the transparency to restore public trust in the process . ' ' the pamphlet ' S author , say Mr Miliband , be Nick Timothy - now Joint Chief of Staff in Downing Street - and Theresa May . ' the Brexit debate be grow more partisan . but then in step an unlikely peacemaker : Ed Miliband '
Tory rebel stall Brexit Bill ; Theresa May face battle over flagship legislation as Remain MP support hostile amendment Chancellor accuse of sabotage as EU say talk be deadlock
Theresa May ' S plan for Brexit be in disarray last night after it emerge her flagship Brexit Bill have be put on hold because of a potentially disastrous Tory rebellion . the EU Withdrawal Bill have be schedule for scrutiny by MP next week , but have now be take out of the parliamentary calendar because the government face defeat on more than a dozen hostile amendment . it come on the day that Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , admit that ` ` no deal ' ' be now a real possibility after talk in Brussels reach deadlock . there be also call from a former Conservative chancellor for Mrs May to sack Philip Hammond for attempt to ` ` sabotage ' ' Mrs May ' s Brexit plan . the development add to a grow sense in Westminster that Brexit be grind to a halt because of opposition in Brussels and in Parliament to the government ' S strategy . a total of @card@ amendment and @card@ new clause have be table to the EU Withdrawal Bill - which will take EU law into domestic legislation to provide continuity when the UK leave the EU in @card@ - of which @card@ have enough support from Tory MP to defeat the government . if Mrs May be defeat on the bill it would seriously reduce her already wane authority , mean whip must strike deal with the Tory rebel to ensure they toe the party line . rebel be unhappy over the government ' s desire to secure so-called ` ` Henry VIII power ' ' , which give minister the right to make legislative change without full parliamentary scrutiny . it be the late evidence of the battle royal that Mrs May face in the come month to keep Brexit on track . she also face discord in Cabinet , with Lord Lawson urge Mrs May to remove Philip Hammond from her top team . the former Chancellor say Mr Hammond ' s action over the past few week have be ` ` unhelpful ' ' and irresponsible . Mr Hammond prompt fury among his Cabinet colleague on Wednesday by say that money should only be spend on preparation for a ` ` no deal ' ' outcome ` ` at the very last moment ' ' . his comment appear to undermine Mrs May ' S attempt the previous day to put pressure on the European Union by talk up the chance of no deal . he be rebuke just hour later when Mrs May take a friendly question from her pro-Brexit colleague Iain Duncan Smith in the commons , allow her to reassure MP that money will be spend when need . minister be increasingly convince that Mrs May will soon reshuffle her Cabinet to restore her authority . the prospect of Brexit talk collapse without a deal be reach move a step close yesterday as Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , make his most explicit admission to date that ` ` no deal ' ' be a real possibility . Mr Barnier tell a press conference at the European Commission ' s head quarter : ` ` no deal would be a very bad deal . to be clear , on our side we will be ready to face any eventuality and all the eventuality . ' ' Mr Barnier say talk be deadlock after five round of negotiation , with huge division between the two camp remain , especially over the so-called Brexit divorce bill . he confirm he would not recommend to EU leader that they should allow him to begin trade talk with Britain when they gather at a Brussels summit next week . it also emerge yesterday that a Commons debate on the EU withdrawal bill , schedule for next week , have be postpone with no new date yet fix . it be understand that the delay have be cause by extra administrative work create by the sheer number of amendment table by MP , but the delay will add to the sense of Brexit be put on hold . ask whether Mr Hammond should remain as Chancellor , Lord Lawson tell the BBC : ` ` I fear not . I fear that he be unhelpful . he may not intend it but in practice what he be do be very close to sabotage . ' ' he add : ` ` the really important thing now be that we prepare for the no deal outcome . ' ' Downing Street insist Mrs May retain full confidence in her Chancellor . Boris Johnson and Liam Fox , two lead Brexiteers , play down suggestion of a split in the Cabinet over preparation to leave . at the end of the late round of Brexit talk , Mr Barnier describe the impasse as ` ` disturbing ' ' and say there be ` ` no question ' ' of the EU make concession on the financial settlement , Ireland and citizen ' right . David Davis , the Brexit secretary , call on EU leader , who meet in Brussels on Oct @card@ , to grant Mr Barnier the flexibility to begin talk on Britain ' s future relationship with the www.EU.No @card@ echo the call . Mr Barnier hint that he would ask EU government , include Germany , to expand his mandate . while that be unlikely to include full trade negotiation , it could allow ` ` scoping ' ' of the future relationship and the transition deal .
May head for Brexit without vote by MP ; Public ' S decision be final , say Downing St in blow to last hope of Remain campaigner PM tell she can trigger Brexit without MP ' backing
Theresa May will not hold a parliamentary vote on Brexit before open negotiation to formally trigger Britain ' s withdrawal from the European Union , the Daily Telegraph have learn . opponent of Brexit claim that because the EU referendum result be advisory it must be approve by a vote in the Commons before Article @card@ - the formal mechanism to leave the EU - be trigger . however , in a move which will cheer Eurosceptics , it be believe the Prime Minister will invoke Article @card@ without a vote in Parliament . it have be suggest - by Tony Blair , and Owen Smith , the Labour leadership candidate , among other - that Remain-supporting MP could use a vote to stop Brexit . but source say that because Mrs May believe that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' she will not offer opponent the opportunity to stall Britain ' s withdrawal from the EU . a Downing Street source say : ` ` the Prime Minister have be absolutely clear that the British public have vote and now she will get on with deliver Brexit . ' ' Mrs May have consult government lawyer , who have tell the Prime Minister she have the executive power to invoke Article @card@ and begin the formal process of exit the European union without a vote . her decision will come as a blow to Remain campaigner , who have be hope to use Parliament to delay Brexit or halt it entirely . a majority of MP , a total of around @card@ , campaign for Britain to stay in the EU at the last election . the House of Lords be also overwhelmingly in favour of Britain remain in the union , mean that obtain formal parliamentary approval for Brexit could take year . Mr Smith last week set out plan to block Article @card@ in Parliament . he say : ` ` under my leadership , Labour wo n't give the Tories a blank cheque . ` ` we will vote in Parliament to block any attempt to invoke Article @card@ until Theresa May commit to a second referendum or a general election on whatever EU exit deal emerge at the end of the process . I hope Jeremy [ Corbyn ] will support me in such a move . ' ' Mr Blair make a similar suggestion earlier this year , as he propose that Britain should be open to the idea of hold a second referendum . the former prime minister say : ` ` if , as we start to see the detail emerge of what this new world we be go into look like , what be the practical effect , then Parliament have get a role . the country should carry on be engage in this debate , it should carry on express its view . ' ' a group of lawyer have mount alegal challenge in an attempt to force Mrs May to hold a parliamentary vote . the case , which will be hear in the High Court in October , argue that Article @card@ can not be invoke until the European Communities Act of @card@ be repeal . however , government lawyer be confident that they will win , pave the way for Article @card@ to be trigger at the beginning of next year , which could see Britain leave the European union in @card@ . Sir Bill Cash , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP and lead Brexit campaigner , say : ` ` it sound emphatic and that ' s what we want to hear . ` ` there be people who be threaten to try and stop Brexit . the bottom line be that there be nothing that could possibly be allow to stand in its way . everyone in Europe be expect it , the decision have be take by the British people and that ' S it . Let ' s get on with it . ' ' it come as a senior Czech official warn Britain that unless it trigger Article @card@ soon ` ` the goodwill that still exist will start to disappear ' ' . Tomas Prouza , the Czech secretary of state for EU affair , issue the warning follow a meeting of leader from the Visegrad Four - Poland , Hungary and the Czech and Slovak republic - and Angela Merkel in Warsaw yesterday . the UN have be accuse of try to shut down political debate in Britain after it blame MP for fuel a rise in hate crime around the EU referendum . a report by the UN say politician have ` ` fail to condemn ' ' racist abuse and use ` ` divisive ' ' and ` ` anti-immigrant ' ' rhetoric during the campaign . Andrew Bridgen , the MP for North West Leicestershire , dismiss the suggestion and say the UN be attempt to close down ` ` honest debate ' ' .
Scotland Heseltine ' should lose whip ' ; Brexit reignite old feud between Tory elder statesman
Theresa May be under pressure from her MP and peer to remove the Conservative whip from Lord Heseltine for suggest a Jeremy Corbyn government might be preferable to Brexit . Lord Tebbit , the former minister , question his ex-colleague ' S loyalty and say he should be ban from sit on the Tory bench in the Lords . the former deputy prime minister say yesterday it be a ` ` terrible dilemma ' ' whether to vote Labour to stop Brexit , add that : ` ` there be people in the Conservative Party who be seriously wonder which way to vote . ' ' he suggest earlier this week that a Corbyn government would be less ` ` damaging ' ' than Brexit because Labour could only cause ` ` short-term ' ' damage whereas Brexit would be ` ` a long-term disaster ' ' . the peer have be a constant critic of Brexit , and be sack as a government adviser in March after lead a Lords rebellion call for a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal . Lord Tebbit , the former Conservative Party chairman , say : ` ` I think it be unprecedented for a man in receipt of the Conservative whip to suggest that a Corbyn government would be preferable to a British government govern the UK , give that the alternative he be advocate be Brussels . it must call into question whether his loyalty be to the UK or a foreign power . ' ' their feud date back to @card@ , when Lord Heseltine challenge Margaret Thatcher as party leader . Lord Tebbit help run her campaign . both be see as likely successor , but when she resign , Lord Tebbit support John Major , who beat Heseltine in the final ballot . Lord Tebbit once describe Lord Heseltine as a ` ` serial assassin ' ' after he undermine the leadership of Iain Duncan Smith and William Hague . the Bow Group , a think tank whose patron include Lord Lamont and John Redwood MP , call for Lord Heseltine to have his whip withdraw . Ben Harris-Quinney , its chairman , say : ` ` the Brexit negotiation can not be lead by a Conservative government that allow outright sabotage to go unaddressed . ' ' yesterday , Lord Heseltine tell Sky News : ` ` the people who seem the most intolerant of debate be the very same people who have use the freedom of debate to argue the Brexit case . ' '
remain campaigner vow to ' stop the Brexit train wreck '
lead Remain campaigner have vow to exploit the ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on Brexit in a bid to ` ` sway public opinion ' ' and keep the UK in the EU . Tory rebel last week defeat the government as they succeed in force minister to enshrine a vote on the final Brexit deal in law . while the pro-European Tories deny that they be try to block Brexit , a lead Remain campaigner have now vow to use the vote to try to ` ` stop the train wreck ' ' of Brexit . Lord Malloch-Brown , a former Labour foreign minister and senior diplomat , be to take a lead role in try to coordinate opposition to Brexit . it come as Labour ' s front bench clash over the possibility of a second EU referendum . Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , tell BBC One ' S the Andrew Marr Show that ` ` the Labour Party do n't support a second referendum ' ' . but speak on BBC Radio @card@ Live ' s Pienaar ' S politics just minute after his colleague ' S comment , Tom Watson , Labour ' s deputy leader , say ` ` you should n't rule anything out ' ' when engage in ` ` complex negotiation ' ' . Lord Malloch-Brown tell the Guardian : ` ` the aim will be to shift public opinion by the time MP come next autumn to have the meaningful vote that be agree last week . we can not know precisely the deal that the meaningful vote will be on , but it will be the moment to stop the train wreck . ' ' Calls to frustrate the Brexit process be quickly condemn as undemocratic by Eurosceptic MP . Andrew Rosindell , the MP for Romford , say : ` ` these people will be judge by history , denial of democracy and a shameful underhanded attempt to derail the will of the people . ' '
Davis promise vote on Brexit measure ; Cabinet minister bow to MP threatening rebellion over ' dangerous ' power in new legislation
David Davis be prepare to back down in the face of a rebellion by pro-European Tory MP and ensure that there be vote on the most controversial aspect of Brexit , the Daily Telegraph have learn . Pro-European Tories have threaten to join Labour , Liberal Democrats and the SNP in a rebellion over the government ' s use of ` ` Henry VIII power ' ' in the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill . they have raise concern that the Bill , which transfer EU law and regulation on to the UK ' s statute book , could give minister ` ` dangerous ' ' power to change and amend legislation without a vote in Parliament . Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , reassure Tory MP in the commons that he will look at ` ` mechanism ' ' to ensure that there be a ` ` fully democratic and open process ' ' . the Telegraph understand that minister be likely to recommend that a joint committee of peer and MP be establish to assess which amendment need more scrutiny by Parliament . it come ahead of a pivotal vote in the Commons on Monday with the second reading of the Brexit Bill . Labour have vow to oppose it , but pro-European Tory MP have say they will support it for now but could rebel in October . a minister tell the Telegraph that pro-European MP be ` ` grandstand ' ' in public but more willing to work with the government in private . it come as Mrs May say that she will not sack two Eurosceptic minister over a letter sign by more than @card@ Tory MP urge the Prime Minister not to give ground over Brexit . Nicky Morgan , the chairman of the Treasury select committee , suggest that Downing Street should look into the role of Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , and Suella Fernandes , an aide to the Chancellor . both be accuse of help to orchestrate the letter , but Downing Street say that no action will be take against them . Andrew Rosindell , the Eurosceptic Tory MP for Romford , say : ` ` this be naked opportunism from by the diminish pro-EU lobby who will find any excuse to try and get Brexiters out of a position of authority . a number of us MP wo n't stand for it . ' ' it come as Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say that he have ` ` rock solid confidence ' ' that Britain will be able to agree a Brexit trade deal before it leave the EU . Mr Johnson also say that it be not ` ` beyond the wit of man ' ' to resolve the issue of the Irish border after Brexit . talk with Brussel be currently in deadlock amid acrimony . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say that leak Home Office plan for a crackdown on EU migration after Brexit have ` ` poison the diplomatic well ' ' . the government be yesterday accuse of an ` ` unprecedented attempt to rig Parliament ' ' by stack key committee which scrutinise legislation with Tories . Downing Street say : ` ` the adjustment provide for maximum scrutiny with minimum disruption and delay , both to parliamentary proceeding and to the governance of the country . ' '
British Retail Consortium warn of Brexit cost on import
the British Retail Consortium be ramp up its pressure on the government to ensure that Brexit trade talk be focus on keep shop price low for consumer once the UK leave the European Union . Richard Baker , chairman of the BRC , have today write to Liam Fox , International Trade Secretary , to spell out what he believe to be ` ` an irrefutable case for a consumer-first strategy ' ' to Brexit . last week Theresa May set out her blueprint for Brexit by say she would trigger article @card@ , the formal process to leave the bloc , by March next year . fear about a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' send sterling tumble to its low point for @card@ year last week and have fuel concern about the health of exist trade relationship with the continent . Mr Baker argue that while most of the attention have be on export in the post-Brexit era , the potential impact on import could mean rise cost for retailer and consumer . ` ` the retail industry be the UK ' s big importer , and have huge experience of import from every corner of the world . we will be engage in a constructive dialogue with Government that will bring our experience to bear on the Brexit talk to the benefit of everyone in the UK , ' ' he add . Mr Baker , who be also chairman of Costa owner Whitbread and sofa retailer DFS , have argue that the fiercely competitive sector have very little margin leave to absorb the add cost from import tariff and administrative burden . if the UK fall back on to World Trade Organisation rule , the average duty on meat import could be as high as 27pc , while clothing and footwear would attract tariff of 11pc to 16pc , the BRC say . source woman ' S clothing from Bangladesh would also be 12pc high . retailer be already threaten with high import cost due to the slump in sterling , which be expect to hurt major retailer ' profitability next year , when currency hedge wind up .
' no appetite ' for bonfire of EU regulation after Brexit Body : by James Crisp Brussels Correspondent THE City of London have ` ` no appetite ' ' for a bonfire of EU regulation after Brexit , representative of UK-based financial firm say yesterday , as they unveil plan for a dispute resolution body to limit how far British law can change after the UK leave the bloc . the panel of unelected judge would have the power to strip access to the EU from a sector where fresh British law move too far away from standard set by Brussels . it be inspire by the EFTA court for EU relation with country such as Norway . the EFTA court take instruction from EU judge but be not technically under the direct jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . end the ECJ ' s supremacy over British law be a red line for Britain in the Brexit negotiation , which continue this week in Brussels . negotiator be try to break the deadlock over the so-called Brexit bill , Ireland and citizen ' right . the EU be refuse to discuss the future trading relationship until it judge sufficient progress have be make on those three issue . after Brexit , Britain ' s financial service industry will lose its ` ` passporting right ' ' , which give barrier-free access to the single market . continued access will need to be renegotiate in Brexit divorce talk and will most likely be cement in the form of a free trade agreement . most free trade deal be strike with the goal of bring regulatory standard closer together but there be expectation that Britain , which already have EU standard in British law , will move away from them over time . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , have say that UK and EU standard for financial regulation will diverge after Brexit , as Britain seek a competitive edge to safeguard London ' s status as Europe ' s pre-eminent financial hub . that worry Brussels , which fear low standard could attract investment away from the EU . it be also under pressure from country such as Germany and France , which hope that Frankfurt and Paris could poach London ' S crown . the International Regulatory Strategy Group ( IRSG ) , which be sponsor by the City of London and TheCityUK , want a free trade agreement base on regulatory alignment between Britain and the EU . ` ` there be no appetite in the City of London for a bonfire of regulation , ' ' say Mark Hoban , chair of the IRSG , which be back by foreign firm include Deutsche Bank , JP Morgan , Goldman Sachs and BNP Paribas .
it be possible to build a consensus on Brexit
can the government deliver Brexit ? with the Tory-DUP deal in doubt , it look impossible . but despite appearance , there be a grow consensus on Brexit , and if the government can survive it should be able to broker a compromise that can get through Parliament . the compromise involve negotiate a transitional arrangement , such as several year ' membership of the European Economic Area , that give Britain and the EU extra time to strike a long-term trade deal . this would n't deliver any Brexit priority instantly , like immigration control or an end to massive EU budget payment . but so long as it ' s temporary , this approach would deliver Brexit over time while avoid the economic shock of a chaotic exit without a deal . most importantly for the government , it stand a good chance of get through Parliament , which ca n't yet be say for the legislation outline in the Queen ' s Speech . a transitional deal would help to defuse the current row over a ` ` soft ' ' versus ` ` hard ' ' Brexit . instead of choose one or the other , the government would start softly while it sort out permanent term , such as tariff and regulatory cooperation , and then exit fully when everything be agree . many Brexiteers wo n't voice their support for this position loudly , but behind the scene , and even occasionally in public , they have always acknowledge its advantage . it remove the cliff-edge of the Article @card@ process , which be design to put the exit state under maximum pressure , and allow business time to prepare for change . the government would probably always have want such a deal anyway , but the election have force its hand by empower pro-Remain MP . to get a decent outcome , Britain need to conduct Brexit negotiation with confidence and that mean that it need Parliament on board . remain MP and peer will find it hard to resist Brexit legislation if the government be explicit about its desire for a soft transition , which would significantly reduce the risk that Britain leave with no deal . it would also gain support from those who want to keep Britain as close to the EU as possible . a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit transition be n't without danger , of course . it might well suit France and Germany to keep Britain in a halfway house , pay into the EU budget without wield any power . many Remainers will no doubt hope we get stick there . but it ' S unlikely that future British government would put up with such an untenable position and , to insure against it , the transition could be design with a time limit . build this consensus be well within reach . but to get there , the government have to make a definitive offer to its rival in Parliament . stand in my friend ' s kitchen as a pan full of tomato sizzle on his hob , I find myself stare , for the second time in a week , at the burntout husk of Grenfell Tower . my friend live about five minute ' walk away , in a pleasant , new-build flat . the council allow the site to be develop a few year ago to provide affordable home and be plan a similar demolition and redevelopment of the surround Silchester Estate , a neighbour collection of dreary tower block . many estate resident be resist the plan , however . the Grenfell Action Group , the resident ' group for the tower , have campaign against the Silchester scheme on the basis that it amount to ` ` social cleansing ' ' , despite the fact that it would provide every existing council tenant with a brand new flat . the alternative to pull down the age estate be , of course , to refurbish it . have debate a similar set of option for Grenfell Tower , the council fatefully decide to keep tenant in place and renovate instead of rebuilding , end up with the catastrophe we see last week . now , the late conspiracy theory do the round locally be that the council deliberately burn the building down so that it could be develop instead . in reality , council everywhere be deal with a legacy of decrepit housing throw up decade ago . stare out of the window at the result of the refurbishment , it be clear that the consequence of make the wrong decision stay with us for many year . he ' S have less than two month in government and Emmanuel Macron have already lose three minister . the youthful French president be elect to bring vigour and renewal to French politics , trading on his status as an outsider to suggest that he would vanquish the useless , corrupt ancien régime . his slate of parliamentary candidate , who just win a majority in the National Assembly , be half make up of total political novice who have never hold office before . the ex-ministers give Mr Macron such grief be , by contrast , experienced politician fell by potential ethic issue to do with nepotism or use of public fund . the hope must be , I suppose , that his brand-new MP wo n't be carry around such baggage . as Ukip show , however , political novice come with their own set of vulnerability , from off-colour social medium post to funny attitude about the use of EU money . Mr Macron will be lucky if his current predicament be the only scandal to mar his squeaky-clean image . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
May instruct her minister to make the most of Brexit ; New leadership ; PM issue challenge at first Cabinet meeting before hold talk with Merkel about UK ' s role in Europe
Britain must not be ` ` define by Brexit ' ' and everyone should prosper from the ` ` opportunity ' ' of leave the European Union , Theresa May have say before the first meeting of her Cabinet . the Prime Minister will today tell minister that it be their ` ` duty ' ' to improve education and skill and ensure that social mobility be ` ` at the heart of my government ' ' . she say that minister must ` ` deliver success on behalf of everyone in the UK ' ' after a Brexit and not just for the ` ` privileged few ' ' . Mrs May will tomorrow travel to Berlin for her first face-to-face meeting as Prime Minister with Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor . Downing Street confirm that they will discuss Brexit despite the insistence of European leader that no negotiation should take place until the formal process of leave the EU have begin . she will use the meeting to insist that Britain will not turn its back on the Europe after Brexit , but instead build strong partnership with EU nation . Boris Johnson , the new Foreign Secretary , yesterday use his first Brussels summit to vow that Britain will not ` ` be in any way abandon our lead role in European participation and co-operation of all kind ' ' . Mrs May , speak before her first Cabinet meeting , say : ` ` Brexit mean Brexit - and we ' re go to make a success of it . it will be the responsibility of everyone sit around the Cabinet table to make Brexit work for Britain . ` ` and it will also be their duty to deliver success on behalf of everyone in the UK , not just the privileged few . that be why social justice will be at the heart of my government . ` ` so we will not allow the country to be define by Brexit ; but instead build the education , skill , and social mobility to allow everyone to prosper from the opportunity of leave the EU . ' ' it come after she vow in her first speech as Prime Minister last week to help working-class people who be ` ` just managing ' ' to cope with life . she say that she want to ` ` fight against the burning injustice ' ' of poverty , race , class and health and give people back ` ` control ' ' of their life . after Cabinet the Prime Minister will hold her first meeting of the National Security Council , during which she will lead discussion on the global threat face Britain and the safety of British national overseas . Mrs May have rule out claim by Nicola Sturgeon that Scotland will have a veto over when Britain leave the European Union . on Friday she tell Scotland ' S First Minister that she would not start the Brexit process until she have agree a ` ` UK approach ' ' . Ms Sturgeon claim that her comment put the Scottish government in a ` ` very , very strong position ' ' over when Britain trigger Article @card@ and begin the formal process of leave the EU . but Downing Street yesterday make clear that the Prime Miniser will have the final say as to when Britain leave the EU . Mrs May yesterday make her first visit to Wales as Prime Minister and say that she want the Welsh government to be ` ` involve and engage ' ' in Brexit negotiation . she say she recognise concern on the loss of EU funding and describe the meeting as ` ` very constructive ' ' . the Prime Minister say that a £24 billion deal by a Japanese company to buy one of Britain ' s big technology company show the UK be ` ` open for business ' ' . her backing come after she speak directly to the chief executive of Soft-Bank , the Japanese company buy ARM Holdings . she say she have receive assurance that SoftBank will double the workforce in the UK and retain its Cambridge headquarters . during his appearance in Brussels , Mr Johnson speak French at the breakfast meeting as he seek to build bridge with minister who be anger after he compare the EU ' S ambition to Hitler ' s aim to create a superstate . the French foreign minister say Mr Johnson do not apologise . ' ' Build the education , skill and social mobility to allow everyone to prosper from leave the EU '
the future be precarious as May learn the wrong lesson in defeat
one of the image conjure up during Britain ' s referendum campaign as a way of make the argument for leave be that of be ` ` tethered ' ' or ` ` shackle ' ' to a ` ` corpse ' ' . faintly distasteful though this idea might have be , it be both effective and partially true . at the time , many EU member be still deep in the economic doldrums , with crush level of unemployment , the continent be wrack by financial and political crisis , Europe ' s experiment with monetary union have come within a whisker of spark worldwide economic Armageddon , and populism both of the Right and Left be rampant . Britain , by contrast , seem like a haven of stability , with a relatively strong centre-Right government , record level of job creation , and a rise tide of inward investment . who in their right mind would want to remain part of Europe ' s ruinous construct ? but that be then . little more than a year later , the table have turn @card@ degree . the government be in chaos after one of the most ineptly run election campaign in live memory , the long haul back to a balanced budget and a nation that once again live within its means be derail , and virtually all the economic indicator be turn negative . in Europe , meanwhile , the populist tide be ebb fast , the economy be grow strongly again , and a pro-business reformer have be sweep to power in France , together with the parliamentary majority that might enable him to actually implement his programme . even Italy seem to be step back from the brink , with the Five Star movement in ragged retreat . something akin to a blood transfusion seem to have take place ; the corpse be transform into Britain . you can almost smell the schadenfreude blow in from the continent . the symbolism of yesterday ' s meeting between Theresa May and Emmanuel Macron could scarcely have be great - the one humiliate and fight for her political life ; the other triumphant , have cruelly snatch the landslide election victory Mrs May have be count on , and ship it off to France . where do this once unimaginable reversal in fortune leave the UK economy and the challenge of Brexit ? start with Brexit , where Mrs May ' s determination to carry on with the negotiate strategy she have settle on ahead of the election look for the moment to be the right approach . give that it be what both the government and the EU have be plan for , there seem little point at this stage in rip it up and start again with a different set of objective . what be clear , however , be that Mrs May be no longer in control of the outcome - parliament will decide on whatever deal emerge . it may well be that Brexit purist will have to swallow their principle and accept Norwegian or Swiss-style arrangement , include continued budgetary contribution , no more than minor tweak to free movement , and some degree of European Court of Justice rule . on many level this would seem unsatisfactory , but even for hardliner some form of Brexit be presumably preferable to no Brexit at all . a soft Brexit may be the only form of it parliament can agree on . the other option would be to leave the EU without any deal , but such an economically disruptive outcome be very unlikely to be acceptable to MP and , bar accident , be therefore not really an option at all . Steve Baker , a hardliner appoint last night as Brexit minister , seem in anticipation already to have nuanced his position from the virtually raw form of Brexit he once advocate to a medium-rare one . obviously , it take two to tango . the point be often make that it may actually suit the newly empower Mr Macron to have as complete a divorce from Britain as possible , so as to reinvigorate the old Franco/German partnership and establish it once again as the true source of decision-making in Europe . and certainly , he will attempt to use Brexit to shift as many job as possible from the UK to France . but beyond the former investment banker ' S ambition for poach finance and manufacturing , his approach , like Germany ' S , will otherwise be instruct by purely pragmatic consideration , and that essentially mean ensure a relatively soft form of Brexit . Mr Macron have only a small window of opportunity to impose his reform agenda on France ; the honeymoon will soon be over and the pushback under way . a no-deal Brexit would be to risk upset Europe ' S still fragile economic recovery , kill off Mr Macron ' S intend tax cutting and labour market revolution , such as it be , before it even get under way . a bad deal be , therefore , as unattractive for him as it be for Britain . Europe desperately need its economic sweet spot to continue . so much for Brexit ; what of prospect , post the election debacle , for the UK economy ? it be much hard to be optimistic on this front . the housing market seem fast to be grind to a halt , consumer spending be under pressure from rise inflation , and investment be be hit by Brexit uncertainty . paralyse by the loss of its majority , the government also appear clueless on what to do next . by most account , Mrs May have read the Pa Labour surge as a vote against austerity and , egg on by her newly elect Scottish MP and her enforce alliance with the Democratic Unionist party - socially conservative , but fiscally profligate - seem mind to abandon it entirely . in anticipation of some form of upset on the rocky road to Brexit , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have already create the space for a limited fiscal stimulus , but he ' ll be under pressure to go further . if this be do in the form of tax cut , then it might even be welcome but the Prime Minister seem to want to go the other way - to ape Labour in tax , borrow and spend more . Mrs May be commendably contrite in her message to the parliamentary party the other night , but she appear to have draw all the wrong lesson from her defeat . at no point do she back away from the anti-business , anti-free market agenda she set out in her disastrously misjudge election manifesto . the conclusion she ' S draw be that we need more welfarism , not less . both politically and economically , we seem with breathtaking speed to have enter an extraordinarily dangerous place . not since the financial crisis have the future look so precarious . ' something akin to a blood transfusion seem to have take place ; the corpse be transform into Britain '
EU step up talk with Labour ; Brussels seek Brexit assurance from Corbyn over fear Theresa May ' S government will collapse ; Tory Party turmoil ; May ' S weakness ' part of EU ' s calculation '
EU NEGOTIATORS have ` ` significantly ' ' increase back-room talk with Labour because they be become concerned Theresa May ' S administration will collapse before Brexit be complete . Brussels be seek assurance from Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , that he will honour agreement reach with the conservative if he come to power . source have tell the Daily Telegraph that there have be ` ` a significant change in tone ' ' from Brussels towards Labour since the general election and meeting since then have be at a high level and more frequent . both Mr Corbyn and Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , have hold meeting with Michel Barnier , the European Union ' s chief negotiator , and Frans Timmermans , the first vice-president of the European Commission , and other include member of the Brexit negotiating team . meanwhile , Sir Nigel Sheinwald , Britain ' s former permanent representative in Brussels , say the Prime Minister ' S vulnerability be now a ` ` destabilising ' ' influence on the negotiation . Mrs May ' s calamitous conference speech , and her failure to unite her party behind her Brexit plan , have cause concern in Brussels ahead of the resumption of Brexit talk on Monday . the Prime Minister will travel to Brussels on Oct @card@ for a meeting of the European Council , which be expect to refuse to allow Brexit negotiator to begin trade talk with the UK . it will mean no progress will be make on trade talk until at least December , when the council next meet . while it be in the interest of EU negotiator to pile pressure on Mrs may before then , the Daily Telegraph have be tell that they be genuinely concern that the talk may be render irrelevant if she be force from office and there be a change of government . to guard against have to reset the entire process , source say they be take Mr Corbyn ` ` increasingly seriously ' ' and some believe Labour have a more realistic approach to Brexit . since Sir Keir set out the party ' s ambition for a status quo Brexit transition period in August , the communication between Labour and the EU have continue on page @card@ Laurence Dodds : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from page @card@ intensify . EU negotiator believe Mr Corbyn and Sir Keir could soon be in power and want to know where they stand in case it be they who take over the talk . lead Brussels figure have tell the Daily Telegraph that Brexit will continue with or without Mrs May but admit the European Commission be increasingly anxious about promise make by her team be keep by a future government . one well-place Brussels source , familiar with the high level of EU policymak , say : ` ` Corbyn be begin to be take seriously in Brussels . ` ` he have be a mystery on European affair through the referendum and since . people do n't quite know what he want or what he think but that be change . ' ' the source add : ` ` you have to believe that the other side ' s negotiate position be genuine and you have to believe that whatever you agree along the way be go to be implement in the future . there have to be a belief there be a consensus in the country that extend beyond the government and to the future government . that exist now but will it last ? ' ' Sir Nigel , who be Britain ' s permanent representative to the EU from @card@ , say Mrs May ' s precarious position be ` ` destabilising ' ' . he say : ` ` the Europeans be get to know the likes of David Davis and Philip Hammond and be get along with them . ' ' he suggest that Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , or Mr Hammond , the Chancellor , become prime minister ` ` might be a more stable option for the Europeans ' ' , although he say Brussels have factor in Mrs May ' s weakness when plan its strategy for the talk . ` ` the uncertainty about the balance of power and the personal authority of the Prime Minister be part of their calculation , ' ' he say . one EU source say : ` ` some take the view that there have to be a cathartic crisis on the UK side before thing get serious . other be begin to take seriously the prospect of no deal . ' '
Brexit Britain must court Donald Trump ; establish @card@ body : much of politics be about perspective . when Theresa May meet Donald Trump at the White House and congratulate him on his election victory , the Left howl with rage . yesterday , Emmanuel Macron , the French president , be host to the same man at France ' S Bastille Day celebration and be congratulate . France be right to court the world ' s strong power ; so be Britain . why do one earn praise for it while the other be ridicule ? because the criticism be inform by political subjectivity , a subjectivity that be also misrepresent Brexit . most voter , even those that vote Remain , have come to accept that Brexit will happen . a small but powerful minority refuse to give in , and in term so hyperbolic that it question their common sense . Lord Adonis , for example , have liken Brexit to appeasement in the 1930s . the comparison be tasteless and inaccurate . appeasement represent a withdrawal from international responsibility , yes , but Brexit represent a withdrawal from European parochialism . it be Europe , not the UK , which be inward-looking , protectionist , overregulate and arcane . Britain have long strain at the leash of its EU membership precisely because its ambition lie further afield . if appeasement could be crudely characterise as put off difficult decision , Brexit be actually about embrace change - and it be the militant Remainers who embody procrastination . this week they step forward with a list of demand relate to the great repeal bill , range from petty grab for devolve power to attempt to render Brexit moot by , say , keep the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice or maintain all of the EU ' s employment law . and then there be the absurd demand that Britain remain within the single market for an indefinite period , which would leave many ask why Britain vote to leave at all . the government must not compromise with those who seek to undermine the stated will of the people . nor should it back away from invite Mr Trump to visit Britain . the two issue be link : Britain ' S future be as a free trading nation with global influence . what militant Remainers denounce as Brexit ' S challenge , the clear-eyed can see as opportunity . it be up to the government to explain this , and to inject great ambition and passion into the case for Brexit .
City need deal this year over post-Brexit trade , say head of FCA
LONDON and Brussels should agree this year on a transition deal that ease financial firm into Brexit so that company be not force into make quick decision about move job and operation from the UK , the head of the City watchdog have say . in his first big speech tackle Brexit , Financial Conduct Authority chief Andrew Bailey say company should not be push into move location once the UK leave the EU . there be concern that bank be start to implement Brexit contingency plan because they fear a ` ` cliff edge ' ' switch to a post-Brexit landscape once the two-year negotiation period end in @card@ . Senior City figure have be push for early agreement on a long transition period that would smooth the way forward for the UK ' s enormous financial service sector , stop bank , asset manager and insurer from make hurried decision . ` ` it would be regrettable all round if we put firm into this position where they feel they ' re in a bind because they have to do practical implementation of contingency plan before they know the context in which they ' re go to be work in the future , ' ' Mr Bailey say . ` ` we need it to be know during the course of this year . ' ' London be a global powerhouse for finance , in part because many big international business have headquarter their European operation in the British capital . but other EU city be now vie to attract company that be fearful of lose access to the EU ' s single market after the UK leave the trading bloc . Barclays have already find new , big office space in Dublin as it ramp up plan to increase its presence in Ireland ahead of Brexit , while it emerge yesterday that Deutsche Bank be press ahead with plan to shift job from London to Frankfurt . three big Japanese security firm - Nomura , Daiwa and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group - recently announce they be apply for licence to set up subsidiary in the German city . Mr Bailey argue that ` ` authority should not dictate the location of firm ' ' but that ` ` we should allow open market to shape those choice ' ' . he add : ` ` when I hear people say that firm need to relocate in order to continue to benefit from access to EU financial market , I start to seriously wonder . Does Brexit have to mean abandon the benefit of free trade and open market in financial service ? it should not . ' ' Brussels have push back on the idea of an early deal on transition , with EU negotiator Michael Barnier say that such an arrangement would only be discuss once a ` ` clear picture ' ' of the UK ' s broad post-Brexit relationship with the EU have take shape . the FCA chief say that the concept of ` ` equivalence ' ' - where different country provide market access because they have similar regulatory regime - could be the basis for the UK ' s future financial service tie with Europe . he suggest that equivalence ` ` back up by effective joint supervisory oversight ' ' would be good than switch the location of the UK ' s huge clearing industry , which Brussels want to move back into Europe .
Civil Service to hire @card@ staff to prepare for Brexit as Davis hail ' acceleration ' in talk ; Europe
the government have spend half a billion pound on Brexit preparation and will create up to @card@ civil service job by the end of next year to ensure the UK be ready . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , tell the Cabinet that there have be a ` ` significant acceleration ' ' in preparation for Brexit , with @card@ programme already under way . minister be prepare for a ` ` range of outcome ' ' , include the possibility of leave the European union without a deal . as Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say he be prepare to ` ` speed up ' ' Brexit negotiation , Mr Davis say that more than @card@ new post have already be create in Whitehall department as part of a ` ` huge cross-Government effort ' ' . they include @card@ lawyer , who be expect to help with the process of transfer EU law onto Britain ' s statute book . HMRC be also plan to recruit up to @card@ extra staff as it prepare for new custom arrangement . Theresa May also tell the Cabinet that a new EU exit and trade sub-committee be be create ` ` to support the intensification of our domestic preparation ' ' . it will be lead by Damian Green , the First Secretary of State . Mr Davis tell the Lords EU select committee yesterday that the Brexit withdrawal agreement would ` ` probably favour ' ' Brussels . he say : ` ` in the infamous - or famous - word of the European Union nothing be agree until everything be agree . the withdrawal agreement on balance will probably favour the union in term of the thing like money and so on . whereas the future relationship will favour both side and will be important to both of us . ' ' Mr Davis say he be seek an ` ` intensification ' ' of talk but insist Britain be on course to leave the EU in March @card@ . he say : ` ` we want to get on with the process - we be not hold up the process . ` ` we offer them the beginning of next week - they could n't do it . so it ' S the latter part of next week when it will be when the negotiator engage . and I ' ll be out there on Friday . ' '
Scotland Brexit ' a mistake , not a disaster ' Cameron admit in Davos video
David Cameron have admit that Brexit be not the disaster he repeatedly predict during the EU referendum . the former prime minister , criticise as the architect of what be describe as ` ` Project Fear ' ' ahead of the referendum , say the UK ' s withdrawal from the EU would be ` ` difficult ' ' . in a conversation catch on camera with Lakshmi Mittal , the Indian steel tycoon , at the Davos summit in Switzerland , Mr Cameron be hear say : ` ` it ' s frustrating - as I keep say it ' s a mistake , not a disaster . it ' S turn out less badly than we first think . it ' S still go to be difficult . ' ' his comment come as Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , back Boris Johnson ' s call to use the UK ' s Brexit dividend to boost NHS funding , declare it ` ` absolutely unthinkable ' ' for the health service not to benefit . meanwhile , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , put himself on a collision course with Eurosceptic MP after he say Brussels could impose new law on the UK during a transition period . Mr Cameron ' s comment at the World Economic Forum be not the first time he have be catch out by a live microphone . in @card@ he be record say the Queen have ` ` purr ' ' down the line after he tell her Scotland have vote against independence . Mr Cameron spearhead the campaign to keep the UK in the EU , have take the decision to offer the nation a vote on the subject . he describe Brexit as the ` ` gamble of the century ' ' before the poll on June @card@ , @card@ . Mr Cameron be criticise after George Osborne , then-chancellor , publish an official Treasury document in April @card@ which warn Brexit would cost UK household £4,300 a year . he resign as prime minister in the immediate aftermath of the result . his comment in Davos come after Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , be give a dressing-down by Theresa May in front of minister at a Cabinet meeting on Tuesday after his plan to hand the NHS an extra £100million per week be widely brief to the medium . the Prime Minister say the NHS would be a ` ` top priority ' ' for the money Britain would save once it stop pay into the EU budget but she stop short of promise an exact figure . Mr Johnson receive the backing of Dr Fox on Wednesday . he tell today on BBC Radio Four : ` ` exactly how we spend the dividend that come from leave the European Union will be determine by the priority we face at the time . I find it absolutely unthinkable that health would not be amongst the top of those . ' ' Mr Johnson be chide by up to eight senior minister for brief the medium . however , the criticism be unlikely to deter him from speak his mind on Brexit as he be reportedly prepare to make the ` ` liberal case ' ' for withdrawal in a speech next month . meanwhile , Jacob Rees-Mogg warn Britain could be leave as the EU ' s ` ` lackey ' ' during the Brexit transition period after Mr Davis say Brussels could impose new law on the UK after the point of withdrawal in March @card@ . Mr Davis tell the Brexit Select Committee the UK would accept the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , continue to play by the rule of single market and make EU budget contribution during a two-year transition . his comment prompt Mr Rees-Mogg , a lead Brexiteer and the chairman of the influential European Research Group of Eurosceptic Tory MP , to claim Britain would effectively be a ` ` vassal state ' ' of the EU .
Scotland Cable attack the elderly for vote leave
sir Vince Cable have be accuse of ` ` patronise ' ' pensioner after claim they ` ` comprehensively shaft young people ' ' by voting for Brexit . the 74-year-old Liberal Democrat leader accuse old people who back Brexit of ` ` masochism ' ' and say their view have be ` ` colour by nostalgia from an imperial past ' ' . write in the Mail on Sunday , Sir Vince say that refer to Brexiteers as ` ` martyr ' ' be dangerous . he say : ` ` to describe such masochism as martyrdom be dangerous . we have n't yet hear about ' Brexit jihadis ' but there be an undercurrent of violence in the language , which be troubling . we have already have the most fervent of Brexiteers , such as Nigel Farage , warning of civil unrest if the ' will of the people ' be frustrate . ` ` Brexiteers may well be frustrate since the practical difficulty of Brexit , as well as the cost , could result in Brexit never happen . but the last thing the UK need be further polarisation . ' ' he add : ` ` another concern be that the self-declared martyr may be plan to sacrifice other people rather than themselves . it be striking that the martyr appear predominantly elderly . ' ' Sir Vince say this ` ` martyrdom of the old come cheap , since few have job to lose ' ' as he frame the Brexit debate as a battle between young and old . he say : ` ` the old have comprehensively shaft the young . ` ` and the old have have the last word about Brexit , impose a world view colour by nostalgia for an imperial past on a generation much more comfortable with modern Europe . ' ' but he be criticise by Frank Field , the 75-year-old Labour chairman of the pension select committee and lead member of the Vote leave campaign group . Mr Field tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` not only be he patronise , he be undermine his own base because he must have be elect by old voter . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
why small business should not expect a smooth Brexit
Europe have 23m small and medium-sized enterprise . they be the backbone of the European economy , accounting for 99pc of all company in the EU and 67pc of employment . that amount to approximately 58pc of gross value add in the non-financial economy . and yet , as a Boston Consulting Group ( BCG ) report commission by AFME reveal , however much disruption Brexit may cause , it wo n't necessarily be big business which suffer the most , but rather the small and medium business who will be prop up our post-Brexit economy . this apply to SMEs in the rest of the EU as well as in the UK . we come to this conclusion after analyse how company and investor in the current EU28 could be affect by the impact of a hard Brexit on the wholesale banking service they consume . BCG ' S researcher speak to more than @card@ chief executive and treasurer of corporate , investment firm and SMEs , along with @card@ industry association which represent a wide range of company and sector . what be strike from the response be that SMEs could find themselves the hardest hit unless they take action now . there be three reason for this . first , the banking-related effect of a hard Brexit could lead to a high cost of capital for SMEs and more restricted access to wholesale banking service . while the exact figure will vary , there be a real risk of fragmentation unless industry and policymaker can work together for a solution that benefit EU business and consumer . secondly , while the scale and bargaining power of individual large corporate and investor mean that many of them would be able to navigate the wholesale banking impact of a hard Brexit , SMEs would undoubtedly find it hard . that ' S because not only be SMEs more likely to find their access to wholesale banking service restrict , but the cost of make adjustment - such as form new banking relationship - can be material for them . SMEs tend to choose a local bank and stay loyal to them . in fact , 60pc of SMEs currently only use one bank for their business banking because of high cost and great difficulty than large corporate when build new relationship . in the event a local UK bank choose not to establish a subsidiary in the EU27 , or that a hard Brexit result in bank have to change their service for exist customer , develop a new banking relationship could be timeconsuming , take anywhere from six month to replicate what SMEs currently do in the UK . thirdly - and crucially give the above - 55pc of the SME participant who comment in the report admit that they have make no plan so far for Brexit . worryingly , the assumption from corporate - small and large - be that their bank will continue to provide financing and be there in the same guise . some 44pc of the SMEs interview expect their bank to absorb any additional cost cause by Brexit . however , this may be overly optimistic . the loss of passporting may cause some bank operate through a UK banking licence to withdraw from the EU27 , reduce the capital available to company and investor . other bank be likely to use subsidiary to maintain cross-border operation , but this could be costly . we can not presume that the plumbing underpin the banking system will continue to function seamlessly . the most likely result be that the European financial and banking market become less integrated - ultimately limit access to market and raise cost . to mitigate such adverse effect of Brexit on end user , our interviewee make a number of suggestion . these include a transition period to give bank and their client time to adjust , as well as ` ` grandfathering ' ' of exist contract in order to minimise the legal and operational disruption to bank and their client . above all , business tell us that they want the status quo preserve . the majority hope Brexit negotiation will result in similar level of access to and cost of wholesale banking service as they have today . they feel strongly that the political negotiation should keep in mind the impact of Brexit on real economy end user . the continued stability of pan-European capital market and future economic growth depend on it . Simon Lewis be the chief executive of the Association for Financial Markets in Europe ' however much disruption Brexit may cause , it wo n't necessarily be big business which suffer the most '
Scotland Brexit impact study never take place , say minister
the government can not reveal impact assessment for Britain ' s economy in the wake of Brexit because they ` ` do n't exist ' ' , David Davis have admit . the declaration before the Brexit select committee have put the Brexit Secretary on collision course with MP who accuse him of a ` ` total dereliction of duty ' ' as he say that ` ` no systematic impact assessment ' ' have be undertake by the government . a month ago , the House of Commons demand minister hand over the assessment and be left disappoint at the paucity of material release , prompt suggestion that Mr Davis may be in contempt of Parliament for fail to comply with the exact wording of a motion agree by MP - something rebuff by the committee after agree the government have comply with the term of the motion . yesterday Mr Davis tell the committee the reason his Department for Exiting the European Union have not hand over the impact assessment be that such work have not be do . he say : ` ` the motion ask for thing that do n't exist . that ' s the point . it ask for thing that do n't exist . I have try to get as close to that as I could within the parameter that my duty as a minister allow . ' ' in June , Mr Davis say the government have ` ` @card@ , nearly @card@ sector analysis already do ' ' on the impact of Brexit and in October added work have be undertake in ` ` excruciating detail ' ' . but he say yesterday that sectoral analysis be not the same as an impact assessment . the revelation prompt Labour ' S Angela Eagle to accuse Mr Davis of a ` ` dereliction of duty ' ' while other call on him to resign . ' the motion ask for thing that do n't exist . that ' s the point . it ask for thing that do n't exist '
Brexit negotiation be happen in a parallel universe
the description be shocking.Theresa May be plague by delude Tory nativist determine to push for a catastrophic rupture with Europe . British society be crack up . a once liberal nation be succumb to dark force . the British people have fatally misjudge Europe ' S resolve , and have no inkling of what will hit them as the awful logic of Brexit unfold . this in a nutshell be what EU official , strategist , and business leader be be tell in Brussels . ` ` Britain be no long the rational , stable country that we be use to . there be a nationalistic , almost revolutionary mood , ' ' say Garvan Walshe , a former Tory strategist and now head of the advisory BrexitAnalytics . the situation for EU national live and work in the UK be now so hostile that many will no longer want to work in the country whatever happen . company must start prepare for this exodus of talent . Mr Walshe tell a packed gathering at the European Business Summit that the British mistakenly think they hold strong card in the Brexit talk . they flatter themselves on a competitive edge in new technology and innovation , when the country be instead sit on an economic time-bomb . ` ` the UK face mediumterm fiscal insolvency , ' ' he tell them , warn that the country have be keep afloat by foreign capital flow that be now in jeopardy . some might cavil at this claim . Britain borrow in its own currency . the Bank of England be able to create unlimited amount of sterling to buy Gilts . the country can not face fiscal insolvency . if there be a risk , it be of a different kind : inflation and a decline currency . Mr Walshe say Downing Street have misjudge everything . it have fail to secure ` ` opt-outs ' ' on European Court jurisdiction and migration , fail to secure a framework for talk in which the divorce bill and a future trade deal would be discuss at the same time , fail to ` ` divide and rule ' ' an unified EU-27 , and fail in its prayer for a eurosceptic upset in France . Mr Walshe tell company executive that the chief question be whether Britain will fall back to the World Trade Organisation by agreement , or crash into a WTO default in a traumatic walk-out . his advice to firm with operation in the UK be to assume the bad and prepare for political breakdown . they should not wait for a transition . we be already in the transition phase.Companies must take action now . the one blessing be that the EU will at least take pity on a blight Britain . ` ` it be not in the interest of the EU to have a pauperise , ' emmiserised ' UK so close to them , ' ' he say . reader can judge for themselves whether this accurately reflect the mood in Britain , or the state of British politics , or the ` ` game theory ' ' brinkmanship by both side in the Brexit talk . what be interesting be that none in the Brussels audience challenge Mr Walshe ' s assumption during question , and many still think that Brexit can and will be reverse . the establish narrative in EU capital and the European press be that Britain have go off the rail and be commit egregious self-harm . there be murmur of approval at this forum when German finance minister Wolfgang Schauble predict that ` ` the British people will learn very soon that Brexit be a mistake ' ' . nobody suggest in any Brexit session that the EU itself might have misjudge the political dynamics , or make a mistake in try to dictate even the term of negotiation - as if Britain be as vulnerable as Greece , or akin to an EU accession country jump through hoop to gain admission . it be take for grant that the EU set the rule in these talk . yet there be an alternative view . Wolfgang Münchau argue in Eurointelligence that the EU have be catch off-guard at every stage of the saga . ` ` we have argue for some time that the main risk to the entire Brexit process be a source of cognitive dissonance on the part of the EU , which have a long history of misjudge UK politics , ' ' he say . the EU side never take Brexit seriously in the first place , and therefore give nothing of substance in the final talk with David Cameron . this complacency be in striking contrast with the ` ` devolution max ' ' offer to Scotland before the referendum . Mr Münchau say they laugh at Mrs May ' s pledge that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' only to learn that she be deadly serious . now they be repeat the error over her ` ` better-no-dealthan-a-bad-deal ' ' pledge . the EU elite buy into ` ` Bregret ' ' hope , overestimate the influence of ` ` hard Remainers ' ' . they seem largely unaware of the ` ` Re-leaver ' ' phenomenon , the big bloc of Remainers who stoically accept the verdict of the referendum and want to get on with Brexit . ` ` the EU be now find out that the Brexit negotiation be go to be different from the talk with Greece in @card@ , ' ' he say . a leak memo from the European Commission suggest that the two key official , Michel Barnier and Jean-Claude Juncker , have be shock by British resistance . they be belatedly wake up to the risk that the UK will walk out if push too crudely on the ( Euro ) 100bn divorce bill , and if it be make to sign before talk start on the future relationship . event will determine whether Mr Walshe or Mr Münchau be close to the mark . what be clear be that the EU and the UK be now live in a parallel universe . this have the makings of a suspense thriller . they laugh at ' Brexit mean Brexit ' . now they be repeat the error with ' well no deal than a bad deal '
May ' lack the courage to face complexity of leave EU '
Theresa May be fail to summon the courage to acknowledge the ` ` complexity ' ' of leave the European Union , the head of the senior civil servant ' union have claim . Dave Penman , the general secretary of the FDA , have say the Prime Minister ' s refusal to openly discuss the difficulty of Brexit with minister could bring Whitehall to breaking point . in an interview with the Guardian , he warn that the ` ` politics around Brexit be the big risk to Brexit ' ' . Mr Penman , who represent @card@ senior civil servant , call on Mrs May to give department more resource . he say : ` ` the civil service be either go to have to be give more resource to deal with Brexit and its usual work or it will have to change its priority . and the government do n't want to admit to either . ' ' Mrs May table an amendment earlier this month which force a Commons vote on whether Parliament agree that Article @card@ , which begin formal talk to leave the EU , should be trigger by the end of March . Downing Street have also commit to present MP with a Brexit ` ` plan ' ' after criticism from backbencher . Mr Penman warn : ` ` it be pure politics that be define the Brexit debate and force May to say , ' this be not a big , difficult job , and it be all in hand ' . ` ` Ministers lack the political courage to admit how complex and time-consuming this will be . ' ' the Cabinet Office say the civil service be ` ` fully focused ' ' on deliver Brexit and that the government be be equip with ` ` the right people and the right skill ' ' for the process .
be wary on sterling as the trader may be get it laughably wrong
boom : the pound take off like a rocket ; prove , once again , how little financial trader really understand politics . to close watcher of the Article @card@ court case , it be become clear that after a series of unconvincing argument , the government be dangerously close to lose . it be n't price in , however , and so sterling gain as much as two cent against the dollar in the space of three hour yesterday . the ruling change the whole ball game , make the next two year even more unpredictable than they be before . we ' d well get use to some wild market move . the central thesis of yesterday ' s voracious sterling buyer be this : the ruling mean Brexit wo n't happen . their logic seem compelling . the court have hand control of Brexit to Parliament , which be dominate by MP who strongly favour Remain . MP on both side of the House - Kenneth Clarke for the Tories and David Lammy for Labour - have already say they would vote to veto Brexit as soon as they get the chance . so even if Brexit do happen , they now think it will be a soft , friendly version that allow everything to carry on as normal for the City of London and for Britain ' S economy . give the overwhelmingly negative view of Brexit among financial type , this be see as a strong boost for GDP and the pound . once again , the trader could be get it laughably wrong . there be still two clear route to a Brexit that will involve a sharp break in Britain ' s trading relationship with the EU , even if the government be force to hold a General election campaign as a result of the court ruling . for the City , the ruling could actually worsen its position . although this government understand the importance of financial service to the economy , an election campaign that place Brexit centre-stage could whip up some toxic rhetoric against London ' s elite international banker and immigration . the first possibility be that Parliament will probably fall into line and , despite its misgiving , vote to trigger Article @card@ . the decision to leave the EU be support by the large number of vote ever cast in British history . for Labour MP , the danger of defy that vote be clear : it be support by swathe of working-class voter in northern industrial town . these voter be previously the bedrock of Labour support , until last year , when they switch in their million to UKIP . any Labour MP who defy a trend like that face electoral oblivion . more interestingly , many of the staunchly pro-Remain Tory who be outspoken during the campaign will be reluctant to be see as thwart the will of the people . one of those be Anna Soubry , a former business minister . even before the Article @card@ ruling this week , she tell me that Parliament would never vote against Article @card@ be trigger . ` ` I do n't know anyone except for Ken [ Clarke ] who ' S say they ' ll vote against Article @card@ , ' ' she say . ` ` do you really think Parliament be go to turn around to all those disenchanted , disillusion people and stick two finger up ? ' ' if they do , she warn : ` ` there ' ll be people on the street ' ' . one caveat , however : she coyly refuse to divulge how she herself will vote . even if Soubry be wrong , however , Brexit will still happen . Theresa May be commit to it for both electoral and democratic reason . so if she can not get legislation through this Parliament to trigger Article @card@ , she will find a way to hold a General Election . the Fixed Term Parliament Act make this a little complex , but where there be a political will , there ' s a way . many in Westminster be already expect a springtime poll . give the state of the Labour party , May be on course for a landslide . Recent projection suggest that she could sweep up enough vote from Labour and UKIP for a 150-seat majority . with her eye firmly fix on the patriotic working class , there be no electoral advantage to her in promise a watered-down Brexit . this would be a dangerous election campaign for the City . EU market access for Britain ' s financial sector be one of the top concern voice by pro-Remainers who want Britain to stay in or cling on to single market membership . but anyone make that argument be open to what be still a potent charge : they be defend the evil banker . Labour have already claim that May be try to engineer ` ` a banker ' Brexit ' ' . the fact that the City of London include much more than bank and contribute over a tenth of government revenue mean little to its ideologically drive opponent . outside electoral politics , however , there be one significant barrier to Brexit that the Article @card@ ruling do create : the House of Lords . unlike the Commons , whose member be sensitive to the evolve whim of their voter , the Lords need have no fear of electoral chastisement . year of Labour government have leave the Chamber pack with pro-EU Blairite peer who , as the tax credit row show last year , be not afraid of veto government policy . and yet , I ' d still bet on Brexit . as Soubry concede , a Brexit veto by any branch of Parliament will turn the atmosphere poisonous very quickly . instead of block the referendum result , it be far likely that it would result in a sharply accelerate programme of Lords reform . the logic of the Article @card@ ruling be that an early election be far likely than it be on Wednesday . May would probably return to government on a landslide and therefore have much more freedom from the demand of two conflicting group - the Osbornite Remainers and the zealous Brexiteers . it say a lot about May ' s inscrutability that this still do n't tell us much more than before about how she will play Brexit . none of this change the fundamental logic that the EU should , in economic term , be open to a reasonable deal for the City and British trade . parliamentary scrutiny will hopefully improve the quality of the government ' S negotiation , provide MP do n't demand unreasonable level of transparency . but the ruling do mean that we be in for a very dramatic , unpredictable and bumpy ride . there ' S just one rule that will hold true : never trust a trader on politics . ' the decision to leave the EU be support by the large number of vote ever cast in British history '
Davis : EU ca n't cherry pick on trade deal
the European Union must not be allow to ` ` cherry pick ' ' a free trade deal that exclude the City of London and financial service , David Davis warn today . write in the Daily Telegraph the Brexit Secretary tell Brussel that the UK want ` ` the full sweep of economic cooperation ' ' and with minimal barrier to trade in good and service . his intervention represent a direct challenge to Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , who have repeatedly say that the final Brexit deal can not include financial service . the issue be likely to be one of the most controversial of the second phase of Brexit negotiation this year amid concern that the EU be seek to mount a Brexit land-grab on the City . in his article , Mr Davis deliberately adopt the language of Mr Barnier , who have repeatedly say that Britain can not ` ` cherry pick ' ' the benefit it want from the Single Market after Brexit . Mr Davis say : ` ` I do not believe the strength of this cooperation need change because we be leave the European Union . many of these principle can be apply to service trade too . give the strength and breadth of the pan-European economic relationship , a deal that take in some area of our economic relationship but not other would be , in the favour phrase of EU diplomat , cherry picking . ' ' it come after Mr Barnier say last month that there be ` ` no place ' ' for financial service in a free-trade agreement , claim that Britain have only itself to blame for leave the EU . David Davis comment : page @card@
voter have disarm our Brexit negotiator - we ' ll get a bad deal ; if the PM do n't have the backing of Parliament , the EU will have no incentive to concede anything
deal or no deal ? on Thursday , Britain take its good option for Brexit off the table . although the government say that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' , its ultimate goal be to ensure that we never face that choice . the election have , however , make a good deal impossible and so the choice between ` ` no deal ' ' and a ` ` bad deal ' ' now look inevitable . unfortunately , the election have also now ensure that the consequence of ` ` no deal ' ' would be immeasurably more damaging . let me explain . negotiation with the EU be always go to be difficult and nasty . I be cautiously optimistic , however , that shared interest and mutual reasonableness would eventually result in a workable deal , deliver Brexit without a crippling economic cost . this option be now go for the foreseeable future . the reason that be that implement it require pass a series of enormous , controversial bill through Parliament , cover everything from immigration to fishery . there be little chance that Theresa May , or any Conservative Prime Minister , can steer any such legislation through both house . from the most pious of peer to the pro-Remain Scottish Tories , our new Parliament heavily favour the soft of soft-boiled Brexits . the government will not get the support it need to implement anything else . this will prove deadly to the Brexit negotiation . the British delegation will arrive for talk in Brussels carry a pile of paper that no one can vouch for . it be like turn up to fight a duel with a dead fish . Britain can huff and puff and make as many demand as it like . the EU ' S negotiator will simply stare at us across the table and think to themselves : ` ` Whom do they speak for ? can they deliver any of this ? will this Prime Minister even be here next week ? ' ' confident that our newly elect Parliament would do almost anything to avoid talk collapse , the EU will have overwhelming incentive to concede nothing . expect an enormous Brexit bill , EU court authority over its citizen ' right , continue regulatory meddling and so on . the deal on offer could be so bad that it would simply be good to stay in the EU single market or European economic area for the time be . this be , of course , many Remainers ' preferred choice . it be not a good option , however . although it guarantee continued tariff and customs-free trade and offer us some recourse to dispute particularly discriminatory EU regulation , it do not do anything that a reasonable voter could expect Brexit would do . it do not end free movement or the jurisdiction of EU court . it could well increase our annual budget payment by abolish the rebate . it be much bad than simply remain a member of the damn club - and will be view as a total betrayal of the referendum result . none the less , this be our likely option one . naturally , Brexiteers will consider any possible www.alternative.No deal be good than a bad deal , right ? well , perhaps , before . but the new paralysis in Parliament have dramatically heighten the danger of a ` ` no deal ' ' scenario . if the Tories have a large majority , withdraw from the EU without a deal would have be painful , but the government could have mitigate some of the risk . it could have pass a budget include cash to upgrade immigration and custom capacity , put EU law into British law for the time be to provide some legal certainty and temporarily replicate EU tariff to ensure international trade could continue smoothly . it would still have be a rough ride , but minimally cushion by the government . none of these preparation be possible , however , if Parliament will not pass them . the only way for us to quit the EU without a deal in such a situation be for the government to sit tight and let the time run out on negotiation . at that point , in March @card@ , Britain would crash out with no plan in place . business and investor would not know if their legal contract be enforceable . border and custom official would have no idea how to process the queue of people and lorry . plane take off from runway in Luton would not know if they have permission to land in Lyon . million of EU citizen here and Briton abroad would be in limbo . all of this be bad enough , without the additional risk from Britain ' s enormous current account deficit . every year , our economy require a vast inflow of cash from abroad to keep go . that mean any market freeze trigger by a Brexit -related legal vacuum could send sterling into freefall and generate an instant debt www.crisis.No responsible government can take such risk . this leave a nightmarish choice : betray Brexit or risk disaster . either choice be electoral poison for the conservative . it be quite possible that whoever be then our prime minister will instead opt for another election or referendum to avoid make it . there be many Remainers who , calculate that Friday ' S result will lead to an ultra-soft Brexit , be rather please . I vote Remain , but I be not among them . Mrs May have judge her Brexit policy well and although her plan carry economic risk , I think they be tolerable give the unequivocal referendum result and the likelihood that , in the end , we ' d strike a decent deal with the EU . by contrast , the Brexit betrayal might avoid a short-term hit to the economy but will be deeply damaging to our democracy . voter will draw one conclusion from it : the more we vote for change , the more thing stay the same . this can only result in further gain for the political extreme - Ukip and the hard Left . it be small consolation to know that Labour voter be just as split on Brexit as the Tories . Jeremy Corbyn owe his unexpected gain to an electoral alliance of anti-Brexit young people and the pro-Brexit work class , who endorse his fiscal giveaway only on the condition that Labour , like the Tories , would take us out of the single market and end free movement . this alliance would shatter immediately be Mr Corbyn ever to gain power . the bad news for conservative be that , thank to their ` ` victory ' ' , it be they who have be leave face pistol at dawn arm with nothing but a dead fish . Mrs May be try to proceed as normal , but must know that everything have change . the sooner Tories work this out and accept that , for now , a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit staging post be the only palatable option , the well . their battle for a ` ` real ' ' Brexit must now be win again , in the year to come . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
nowhere to run , nowhere to hide , Labour must pray for quick Brexit ; Sketch
never mind a hard Brexit . labour need a quick Brexit . and when I say quick , I do n't mean in two year ' time . I mean they need Brexit to happen today or , at a push , tomorrow . maybe , at the absolute late , next week . because until Britain actually leave the European Union , and the public finally form a consensus about whether Brexit have be a success or a failure , Labour be stuff . that ' S not an exaggeration . they ' re stuff . political debate , for the next two year and beyond , both inside the Commons and out , be go to be dominate by Brexit : the most important , and most viciously divisive , issue of our age . and Labour do n't have a position on it . arguably , they ca n't have a position on it . almost all their MP vote Remain - yet most of their seat vote leave . but then , to further complicate the problem , polling suggest two-third of Labour voter vote Remain . and as for their unshiftable leader , nobody seem certain which side he be on , even now . so what can Labour do ? what can they say ? who be they for ? the party for Brexiters be Ukip and the Tories . the party for Remainers be the Lib Dems and the SNP . all four have be clear where they stand on Brexit . not Labour . unable to be the party of the @card@ per cent or the party of the @card@ per cent , they ' ve try claim to be the party of the @card@ per cent - while sound like the party of the @card@ per cent . there ' s no way around it . they need Brexit to be over and do with , so that they can put the whole miserable debate behind them and start again . until then , they ' re go to have more and more day like yesterday . for Labour , and in particular their leader , PMQs be hopeless . in response to Theresa May ' S big Brexit speech from Tuesday , Jeremy Corbyn be reduce to grumble - twice - that she ' d give it at Lancaster House , rather than in the Commons . ` ` Restoring parliamentary democracy while sideline Parliament , ' ' he mutter . ` ` the Prime Minister be not so much the Iron Lady as the Irony Lady ! ' ' the Irony Lady ? it ' S hard to believe that sound good even at the meeting . it do get a few laugh - but only , I ' m afraid , from disbelieve Tory . Labour MP remain silently impassive , perhaps try to pretend they have n't hear it . Dennis Skinner - their Commons heckler-in-chief for nearly @card@ year - just stare . Mrs May be n't well suit to PMQs . but here she thwack Mr Corbyn about as if he be a shuttlecock . ` ` there be a difference between us - and it ' S very simple , ' ' snap the Prime Minister imperiously . ` ` when I look at Brexit , or any other issue , I consider it , I set out my plan , and I stick to it . it ' S call leadership - he should try it some time ! ' ' Tory MP practically groan with pleasure . Labour MP , meanwhile , gaze helplessly up at the Commons clock - will it to turn to @card@ . the Irony Lady ? it ' S hard to believe that sound good even at the meeting
Sturgeon insist she ' s not bluff over threat to hold new vote on independence
Nicola Sturgeon yesterday insist that she be ` ` not bluff ' ' about her pledge to hold a second referendum on Scottish independence if Britain leave the Single Market after Brexit . Scotland ' S First Minister tell the Andrew Marr Show on BBC that she feel that the Prime Minister have ` ` no plan ' ' for Brexit and say she want Scotland to ` ` take control ' ' of its own future . ask if she be ` ` bluff ' ' because she know she could not win a second referendum , Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` they will be make a big mistake if they think I be in any way bluff . ' ' she add that if Theresa May decide to leave the Single Market it would give Scotland ` ` the opportunity to decide whether it want to be drive off a hard Brexit cliff by Right-wing Tory Brexiteers or whether it want to take control of its own future ' ' . she tell how discussion with Mrs May about Brexit have leave her ` ` frustrated ' ' . she say : ` ` I do n't feel as if I know any more about her negotiate objective than I do six month ago . ' ' ask if she seriously think ` ` there be no plan ' ' , the First Minister say : ` ` Yes I do ' ' . she add : ` ` I say that with a lot of regret as that put every part of the UK into a very perilous position . ' ' she highlight her meeting with Mrs May in October : ` ` I ' m not exaggerate too much when I say the Prime Minister sit on the other side of the table at that meeting and say ' Brexit mean Brexit ' and not a lot more . ` ` I come out of that meeting more frustrated , after a meeting of that nature , than I have ever be before . ' ' Ruth Davidson , Scottish Conservatives leader , accuse Ms Sturgeon of use Brexit as a means of whip up support for independence . she say : ` ` the First Minister need to start act in the interest of all Scot , not simply play to her nationalist base . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
Britain to ditch its ' unfair ' fishing quota after Brexit ; Fishing quota face post-Brexit overhaul
British fisherman will be able to catch hundred of thousand of ton more fish after Brexit because it will be able to overhaul ` ` unfair ' ' fishing quota , the fishery minister suggest . George Eustice say Brexit will provide a ` ` good deal ' ' for fisherman because current quota give a ` ` disproportionately large ' ' share of catch to fisherman from the European Union . he say after Brexit the UK will strike new ` ` reciprocal ' ' arrangement with the EU which will give fisherman a great share of catch in British water and abroad . he say that during Britain ' s membership of the EU , negotiation about fishing quota have stall because of the ` ` institutionalise inertia ' ' of Brussels . he tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` it ' s pretty clear Brexit can be a good deal for British fisherman because we regain control . the equation be that they have one million ton of UK fish and we get about @card@ ton of various specie . ` ` there be area we would hope to get a good deal , particularly with cod and plaice . the truth be , thing will change in a very fundamental way . in the Channel the French get twice as much plaice and three time as much Dover sole as we do . there be an imbalance . ' ' Mr Eustice believe that fisherman in the Channel and the West country continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ in particular could benefit from reform to fishing quota . he highlight Britain ' s ` ` incredibly low ' ' share of plaice and sole in the English Channel , with a similar situation for cod and haddock in the Celtic Sea . he say there be no ` ` balance ' ' to Britain ' s fishing agreement with the EU , and it ` ` benefit more from access to the UK than the UK benefit from access to them ' ' . Mr Eustice insist that Britain will continue to fish sustainably after Brexit . it come as French fisherman accuse their British rival of ` ` plunder ' ' scallop in the Channel , say Brexit could leave UK trawler free to increase their catch without the constraint of EU regulation . Daniel LefÈvre , head of the Lower Normandy Fisheries ' regional committee , say : ` ` not only be the English pillage a resource that we ' ve be protect for more than @card@ year , but the scallop they fish and freeze be come back to be sell in France , compete with our fresh scallop . ' ' the French say they be already subject to strict fishing limit than the British , and they fear Brexit will now disentangle UK boat from the web of EU rule . Mr LefÈvre say under national regulation French fisherman face strict quota , while the British be subject to ` ` more lenient ' ' rule .
Brexit Britain face ' huge bill ' for market access
Philip Hammond last night refuse to rule out make substantial payment to the EU after Brexit in order to secure market access for British-based financial service firm . ask during a trip to Berlin whether the UK would be prepare to pay for access to the EU market for City firm , the Chancellor be pointedly noncommittal . ` ` we will talk about all of these thing , ' ' he say . the question of UK payment emerge after Bloomberg , the news agency , report that Germany would demand ` ` substantial ' ' payment to EU budget in exchange for market access as part of any ` ` deep and comprehensive ' ' trade agreement after Brexit . Mr Hammond ' s implicit acknowledgement that the UK may well need to ` ` pay to play ' ' in Europe after Brexit be likely to inflame passion among Brexiteers who have repeatedly warn such payment would be unacceptable . Theresa May promise last year in a Lancaster House speech that the ` ` day of Britain make vast contribution to the European Union every year will end ' ' after Britain quit the bloc . however trade expert warn that such payment may be unavoidable if the UK want the ` ` high level of access for good and service ' ' that Mr Hammond demand in a speech last night at the die Welt economic summit . Joe Owen , senior researcher at the Institute for Government , and co-author of a new report on the UK ' s trade option after Brexit , say demand for budget contribution from the EU be to be expect . ` ` if you look at other EU deal , then the EU be likely to request some contribution in exchange for ' deep and comprehensive access ' - in the same way EEA state , like Norway , contribute to EU development fund . ' ' the German position on trade talk emerge after the Daily Telegraph reveal that Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , be firmly against the UK idea of ` ` managed divergence ' ' from the EU , believe it amount to the UK want to ` ` have its cake and eat it ' ' . accord to Bloomberg , German official say that the UK must choose between the Swiss or Norwegian model if financial service be to be include in any post-Brexit trade deal . in a combative speech in Berlin , Mr Hammond confront the Franco-German hard line on Brexit , warn Brussel that it must stop try to ` ` punish ' ' Britain for leave the EU . he tell German business leader that the EU have so far be silent on what it want the future relation with the UK to look like , but that input would be require on both side . Mr Hammond say : ` ` they say ' it take two to tango ' : both side need to be clear about what they want from a future relationship . I know the repeated complaint from Brussels have be that the UK have n't make up its mind what type of relationship it want . but in London , many feel that we have little , if any , signal of what future relationship the EU27 would like to have with a post- Brexit Britain . ' '
no excuse for Brexit delay , Whitehall tell
minister have warn Whitehall that there can be no more excuse for delay Brexit preparation , include ready the UK for the prospect of leave the EU without a deal . a team of @card@ official in David Davis ' s Brexit department will this month urge mandarin to intensify preparation for leave the EU as they return a series of delivery plan to Whitehall . Mr Davis ' S department will subsequently produce monthly ` ` progress report ' ' to ensure each government department be enact the plan . it come as his ally raise concern that he will be marginalised if Boris Johnson be hand a ` ` supercharge ' ' Brexit role in a forthcoming reshuffle . Mr Davis ' S department be move to galvanise Brexit preparation after Eurosceptic Cabinet minister , include Michael Gove and Mr Johnson , warn that Whitehall be fail to do enough to prepare for leave the EU . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , provoke a row earlier this year after insist that taxpayer ' money will not be spend on prepare for Brexit without a deal until the ` ` last moment ' ' . a Whitehall source say : ` ` in the New year the government be move from plan phase to a delivery phase . we will be remove the excuse some department have for not be ready . ` ` the intention be to ensure we be ready to deliver Brexit whatever be negotiate in Brussels , and while the chance of a ' no deal ' scenario have fall , we will still be prepare . ' ' Cabinet reshuffle : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
' take it or leave it ' vote on Brexit deal ; Davis give MP final say but concession raise fear of Remainer rebellion Tory rebel expect to vote against law on Brexit date
parliament will be give a ` ` take it or leave it ' ' vote on Brexit after minister agree to enshrine the deal in law in a significant government concession . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , yesterday announce that MP and peer will be give a binding vote on the final deal with Brussels . however , the climbdown have prompt fear that pro-EU MP will attempt to frustrate Brexit by table amendment in the hope of delay or even postpone Britain ' S departure . last night Mr Davis warn that Britain will leave the European union without a deal in March @card@ if MP vote down the government ' s final agreement with Brussels . Mr Davis ' S concession come less than @card@ hour before the Commons be due to begin debate the next stage of the EU Withdrawal Bill , which transfer thousand of European law and regulation on to the UK ' s statute book . the government be face a huge rebellion over the propose move , with more than @card@ amendment table by MP from all party . the Brexit Secretary ' S intervention be an attempt to avert the crisis , and come after the government be force earlier this year to get Parliament ' s support for invoke Article @card@ after a legal challenge . Tory rebel say that the vote be ` ` pointless ' ' because it mean Parliament can not change the term of the final deal . Anna Soubry , a former minister , say the government ` ` might get a nasty shock ' ' . the Brexit Secretary tell the commons the new law , which will cover area include citizen ' right , the so-called divorce bill and a transition period , will provide ` ` certainty and clarity ' ' as Britain leave the EU . he be ask by Owen Paterson , the Eurosceptic Tory MP , whether Britain will leave ` ` without an agreement ' ' if MP vote down the deal . he reply : ` ` Yes . ' ' he later add : ` ` it ' S a meaningful vote , but not meaningful in the sense that some believe meaningful [ to be ] , which be that you can reverse the whole thing . ' ' Mr Davis say that while he be prepare to go back and talk to Brussels if the Commons attempt to make change to the deal , he be doubtful that the timetable would allow any alteration at that stage . he be back by European source who last night warn the UK that the deal will not be change at the 11th hour . one source tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` if the UK Government come back at 11pm on March @card@ @card@ say the House of Commons have amend ' x , y and z ' , then we would need to go back to Council and Parliament . ` ` but it be extremely difficult to imagine member state will start this whole process again once it have be ratify , particularly give how challenging the time be already . ' ' the move infuriate pro-European Tories , who be now prepare to rebel against Government plan to enshrine the date that Britain leave the EU in law . Heidi Allen , a Tory rebel , say that the vote will be ` ` pointless ' ' if Britain fail to secure a deal with Brussels until the ` ` 11th hour ' ' . ` ` there ' d be no time , ' ' she say . Antoinette Sandbach , another pro-European Tory MP , say : ` ` the announcement be meaningless if , for any reason , the timetable slip beyond March @card@ . ' ' Tensions over Brexit within the Conservative Party will increase today as the Bill begin its next stage in the Commons . up to a dozen Tory MP be expect to say that they will vote against plan to enshrine the date that Britain leave the EU in law . Nicky Morgan , the Remain-supporting former education secretary , yesterday accuse the Prime Minister of be ` ` tin-eared and tone-deaf ` ` on Brexit . Labour will decide at a meeting of its shadow cabinet this morning whether to join Tory rebel in oppose the government ' s amendment write the exit date into law . the party will risk alienate Brexit-supporting Labour voter if it do so , but may find the chance of inflict a defeat on the government too difficult to resist . over the next month MP will debate more than @card@ amendment , run into @card@ page . Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general and lead Brexit rebel , suggest that he will not drop an amendment of his own demand a meaningful vote . he suggest that the Brexit deadline should be extend if Parliament vote to amend the final deal to allow talk with Brussels . it come as Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , say that Labour would allow the European Court of Justice to retain some of its influence over UK law after Brexit .
EU ' s rigid nature be main threat to any deal
there have be a significant evolution in the UK ' s position on Brexit in recent week . the Cabinet now appear unite behind Philip Hammond ' s view that a smooth Brexit require a transition period of year , rather than month , between the UK ' s formal withdrawal and a final deal come into force . on Wednesday , the Chancellor express his hope that UK and EU negotiator begin discuss a transitional deal by autumn . Ministers ' new stance on a transition , which broadly respect the EU ' s position on the need for some role for supranational judicial supervision and a continuation of free movement and budget payment , should make it easy to conclude a deal . it be now the EU ' S inflexibility that pose the big risk of a breakdown in the talk . on Thursday we learn that the European Commission ' s Brexit negotiator , Michel Barnier , have brief ambassador of the other @card@ EU state that the start of the second phase of Brexit talk could be delay by two month to December , which would further eat into the limited time available before Brexit day in March @card@ . Barnier reportedly note that it be ` ` very unlikely ' ' that the somewhat vague threshold set by EU minister of ` ` sufficient progress ' ' in the first phase of talk will be meet by October , which would allow discussion to advance from the issue of citizen ' right , the northern Irish border and the ` ` Brexit bill ' ' to the future UK-EU relationship . the obvious and most politically presentable way of settle the budget dispute , at least in the UK , be to tie the issue to that of the transitional period . the current EU budget formally expire in @card@ but , due to long-term commitment , require fund up to around @card@ . both side agree a transition be require and continue UK participation in the EU single market and programme could run alongside its continued contribution to , and receipt from , the EU budget . the number be a political negotiation , not easily define by the EU ' s legal text . despite Jean-Claude Juncker tell the Financial Times it will be at least ( Euro ) 60bn ( £53.7bn ) , we still do n't have an official figure from the Commission . the various number be bandy around be always go to be reduce in net term because , if the UK must honour its commitment to EU spending scheme , the EU must honour its commitment to UK farmer , university and so on . after this transitional period , reduce UK contribution could follow the Norway model whereby it contribute to any scheme it continue to participate in . it be important to remember Barnier ' S role be that of technocrat . he must rigidly stick to the political negotiating mandate set by EU minister back in May , which outline the EU ' s stance on the sequencing of the talk and be where the phrase ` ` sufficient progress ' ' come from . this be intend to send a message to the UK that the EU would not talk about the future trading relationship until it be confident the UK would act reasonably over the issue throw up by withdrawal , such as the potential hole in the budget . however , while the UK position have develop rapidly in the space of just a few day , the EU position have not be update to reflect the emerge consensus on the need for a transition . the other major issue be negotiate , the protection of citizen ' right in the UK and the rest of the EU , have reach an impasse over Brussels ' demand the ECJ supervise these right in the UK . this be despite the fact that Sigmar Gabriel , the German foreign minister , last month say that instead of extra-territorial ECJ jurisdiction over the UK , he would welcome ` ` a joint court that be staff by European and Briton , which in principle follow the decision of the ECJ ' ' . for all the EU ' s talk of transparency in the negotiation , and its publication of various technical position paper , there have be hardly any public debate in , or between , EU member state about the kind of long-term or even transitional deal they would like with the UK . this be why it be so difficult to compromise . the EU do not actually know what it want to have achieve at the end of the process . Stephen Booth be director of policy and research at Open Europe ' Barnier must rigidly stick to the political negotiating mandate set by the EU '
Corbyn force to dismiss three Brexit rebel ; Humiliated Labour leader remove shadow minister after they back Queen ' s Speech amendment
Jeremy CORBYN be force to sack three shadow minister last night when they join dozen of Labour MP rebel against the party over Brexit . in a serious blow to Mr Corbyn ' S authority , @card@ Labour MP defy the party whip to back a Queen ' s Speech amendment table by their backbench colleague Chuka Umunna . they include the shadow foreign minister Catherine West and shadow housing minister Ruth Cadbury and Andy Slaughter , all of whom be sack by Mr Corbyn , and shadow transport minister Daniel Zeichner , who resign . the vote expose a major rift within Labour over Brexit , as Mr Umunna have call for Britain to stay in the single market , in direct contravention of official Labour policy . it be a humiliation for Mr Corbyn , who have hope to defeat the Queen ' s Speech and force Theresa May ' S resignation , but instead find himself to be the victim of a revolt . the conservative pounce on the vote to accuse Labour of ` ` total chaos ' ' over Brexit . Mr Corbyn ' s decision to sack three people indicate the depth of anger feel by the leader and his team , who have issue a three-line whip order all Labour MP to abstain from the vote . it also burst the Labour leader ' s postelection bubble after his party have appear more unified as a result of its general election gain . Mr Corbyn will now be force to carry out another unintended reshuffle , as he do after shadow minister be among @card@ MP who defy him by voting against Article @card@ in February . Mr Umunna ' S amendment , which be defeat by @card@ vote to @card@ , call for Britain to remain in the single market and the custom union , but fail to tempt any Tory in favour of a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit . couple with the passing of the Queen ' s Speech , it mean Mrs May have now come through the first major parliamentary test of her pact with the DUP . James Cleverly , a Conservative MP , say : ` ` when it come to Brexit , Labour be in total chaos . there be deep division at the heart of the Labour Party on the most crucial issue face the country today - they still ca n't agree on the fundamental and would get the bad Brexit deal at the high price . ` ` whilst Jeremy Corbyn ' s chaotic team bicker over their position on Brexit , we ' re get on with the job of government . ' ' Mr Corbyn hit back by suggest it be the Tory who be ` ` in chaos ' ' after a week in which minister disagree over Brexit and Downing Street perform a double U-turn on public sector pay . Gareth Thomas , one of the Labour rebel , say he have vote against his own party because he want to ` ` send a message to Theresa May about the importance of access to the single market and custom union ' ' after Brexit . Mr Zeichner , the Labour MP for Cambridge , say : ` ` I ' m a passionate pro-European and straightforward politician so I ' ve take the hard decision to resign as shadow minister to back the single market . ' ' Labour ' S manifesto say the party ` ` accept the referendum result and will put the national interest first ' ' . Mr Corbyn want Parliament to be give a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal and say Britain should negotiate a deal that provide the same benefit as stay in the single market . ' there be deep division at the heart of the Labour Party on the most crucial issue face the country today '
Scotland Corbyn may be force to sack Diane Abbott over Brexit vote
Jeremy CORBYN could today be force to sack one of his close ally as he face a Brexit rebellion by more than @card@ Labour MP . the Labour leader have impose a three-line whip require his MP to support legislation that will enable the government to trigger Brexit . it mean he could be force to sack Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary who do not vote on Article @card@ last week because she say she have a migraine . Clive Lewis , the shadow business secretary , could also be force to quit the front bench after the government reject Labour ' S amendment . Theresa May will also face a rebellion with up a dozen Tory MP expect to defy the party ' S whip and vote for the right of EU citizen live in the UK to be guarantee before Brexit negotiation begin . the Government last night comfortably defeat attempt by Labour to give MP a ` ` meaningful ' ' vote on Brexit after Mrs May succeed in divide pro-European Conservative and Labour MP . minister head off a rebellion by commit to give MP a vote on a final Brexit deal before it be refer to the European Parliament . however , they insist that MP would have to ` ` take or leave ' ' the final deal , mean that Mrs May be prepare to leave the EU without a trade deal in place if Parliament reject it . Labour want the government to go back to Brussels to renegotiate the deal if Parliament reject it . Downing Street insist that the move do not represent a significant change in the government ' S approach . Labour be leave in chaos as Keir Starmer , the shadow brexit secretary , hail the move as a ` ` significant concession ' ' while Labour backbencher suggest it be meaningless . there be also significant split among pro-European conservative . Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general , be criticise by Ken Clarke after say he be persuade by the government ' S commitment . despite suggestion that up to @card@ Tory MP could defy their party whip and back the Labour amendment just seven choose to do so . there be a heated debate between Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , and Gavin Williamson , the chief whip , on the floor of the Commons shortly before the vote be call . Mrs Morgan abstain as the Labour amendment be defeat by @card@ vote to @card@ . George Osborne , the former chancellor who have say he be prepare to join the ` ` fight ' ' over Brexit , be absent from the vote . last week @card@ Labour MP defy Mr Corbyn by vote against trigger Brexit . the Labour leader be expect to allow junior shadow minister to rebel without significant repercussion . member of the shadow cabinet , however , will have to quit . determine Tory MP vote after chemotherapy session a Tory former minister diagnose with cancer leave hospital yesterday to back the government ' S Brexit Bill despite feel ` ` pretty grim ' ' . Nick Boles , the former business minister , have be off sick since October , but he be in Parliament to vote despite have spend the last week receive chemotherapy . colleague offer their support and thanks to him .
McDonald ' S back UK with move to London ; global fast-food chain demonstrate its faith in Brexit as it abandon its base in Luxembourg
the British economy have receive a post-Brexit vote of confidence from one of America ' s good known company after McDonald ' S announce it will move its non-US operation to London , abandon its base in Luxembourg . the fast-food giant have choose the UK to establish a new holding company to collect hundred of million of pound a year in royalty from its international franchise operation . announce a radical shake-up to its corporate structure , central to which be shift its tax domicile from Luxembourg to the UK , the company back Britain ' S prospect post-Brexit , say its strength would endure after it leave the bloc . ` ` the reason for change the location of the corporate structure to the UK be sound before Brexit and remain so beyond it . these strength be unlikely to change as the UK negotiate leave the European Union , ' ' say a McDonald ' S spokesman . McDonald ' S be the late multinational company to up its invest in the UK since June ' s Brexit vote , follow a string of technology giant include Apple , Google and Facebook . the announcement be welcome at no @card@ , with the Prime Minister ' s spokesman say continuing investment by international company would secure growth and boost job . McDonald ' S new UK domicile will collect the majority of the royalty from license the company ' s global intellectual property right outside the US and will be support by the ` ` significant number of staff ` ` the company already employ in the capital . ` ` this change have a clear business rationale in match our corporate structure to our new functional structure , ' ' the company spokesman add . the UK already have one of the low corporate tax rate among major economy at 20pc , compare with 35pc in the US , 33pc in France and a combined burden on profit in German of between 30pc and 33pc . McDonald ' s move to Britain , its big European market , come as complex international tax structure come under pressure from coordinate move to ensure profit be tax where they be make . in recent year Britain have throw its weight behind move by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to stamp out complicated tax avoidance scheme . the move have however be view by some as a rebuke to the EU , which be investigate the chain ' s tax affair and could yet demand nearly $ 500m ( £397m ) in back tax . EU official have claim McDonald ' s Luxembourg structure , agree with the Grand Duchy ' S government , amount to illegal state aid . the EU have be grill the burger giant as part of a crackdown on member state offer tax incentive for company to set up shop . McDonald ' S deny claim that it have avoid tax , say that between @card@ and @card@ it pay more than $ 2.5bn in corporate tax in the EU , at an average tax rate approach 27pc .
Brexit in doubt as May mire in Irish border row ; Crunch talk in Brussels as Hunt fear Brexit may fail
Theresa May go into a crunch meeting with EU leader today admit she be yet to find an answer to the Irish border problem . and a Cabinet minister have suggest for the first time that Brexit might not happen . the Prime Minister have until tonight to meet an EU deadline for Britain to make ` ` satisfactory progress ' ' on the issue of money , citizen ' right and Ireland in order to trigger trade talk later this month . she have hope today ' S meeting in Brussels with Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , and Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , would be the moment when trade talk would be unlock , but government source be highly pessimistic about the prospect of a breakthrough , leave the entire Brexit timetable in jeopardy . the news come as Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , tell Conservative rebel that if they do not back Mrs May in the negotiation , ` ` we will have no Brexit ' ' . an official government statement say there be ` ` plenty of discussion still to go ' ' and downplay the importance of today ' S meeting , describe it only as ` ` an important staging post ' ' on the way to trade talk . however , with just @card@ day to go until next week ' S European Council summit , when EU leader will decide whether trade talk can begin , Mrs May be rapidly run out of time to keep Brexit on track . with no agreement in sight between London , Dublin and Belfast on the border issue , the Prime Minister be likely to ask for a last-minute extension to today ' S deadline . Whitehall source bitterly complain last night that Leo Varadkar , the Irish premier , have ` ` move the goalpost ' ' by insist on guarantee over the future border arrangement now , have early say the issue could be thrash out once trade talk be under way . Ireland be hold out for an assurance that it will have ` ` regulatory convergence ' ' with Northern Ireland , effectively mean the border would move to the Irish Sea . but the Democratic Unionist Party ( DUP ) , on which Mrs May rely for her parliamentary majority , say it will not accept anything that be similar to stay in the custom union or the single market . one government source say there be ` ` absolutely no prospect ' ' of minister go against the DUP ' S wish , add : ` ` the thing that the Irish government want us to sign up to are thing that no British government could sign up to . ' ' Mr Hunt ' S warning be aim at Tory backbencher who have hint that they would vote against a deal that involve pay £40billion or more for the Brexit bill or that give the European Court of Justice any power in British law after Brexit . such a scenario would risk oust Mrs May from Downing Street and trigger a general election that could , if Jeremy Corbyn emerge as the victor , result in Labour call a halt to Brexit . Mr Corbyn say over the weekend that he have not yet decide whether Labour would hold a second referendum on Brexit if the party gain power . Mr Hunt be the first Cabinet minister to raise the prospect that Brexit might not happen , and his comment reflect nervousness in Tory rank as today ' S meeting approach . Mrs May will travel to Brussels with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who will meet Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator . Mr Barnier will compile a report on Wednesday on whether ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make , which will be send to the leader of the other @card@ EU member state before they meet at the EU Council on Dec @card@ and @card@ . Mrs May be desperate for the EU Council to agree that trade talk can begin , as any further delay would mean talk be unlikely to start before March , when the council next meet - a full year after Article @card@ be trigger and only @card@ month before Britain formally leave the EU . she may now ask Mr Barnier to delay today ' s deadline by @card@ hour , though Whitehall source say they believe they have until the date of the EU Council meeting to solve the Irish border issue . Ireland be threaten to veto trade talk unless Britain guarantee there will be no hard border , but Nigel Dodds , the DUP leader in Parliament , say any solution that involve an all-Ireland custom regime would force Northern Ireland ` ` further and further away ' ' from its main market , the UK . he say the Irish government have adopt an ` ` aggressive stance ' ' on Brexit which be ` ` cause real damage to Anglo-Irish relation ' ' . he add : ` ` they ca n't impose what be a good solution for the Irish Republic on the rest of us . ' ' ask if the DUP might threaten to withdraw support for Mrs May ' S government , he say : ` ` the DUP do n't need to issue any threat whatsoever , because we ' re very , very clear that the government understand that anything that result in the undermine of the Union ... we would n't go with that . ' ' Simon Coveney , the Irish foreign minister and deputy prime minister , be equally firm , tell the BBC : ` ` we can not allow some kind of collateral damage or unintended consequence of Brexit to have the re-creation of a border . ' '
Scotland Tories and Labour hold secret talk on soft Brexit ; the Telegraph Election @card@ ; Cross-party commission offer way forward , say Hague
senior Cabinet minister be engage in secret talk with Labour MP to secure cross-party backing for a soft Brexit , it have emerge . some of the most senior member of Theresa May ' S team have be discuss how to force the Prime Minister to make concession on immigration , the custom union and the single market . there have also be discussion of a cross-party Brexit commission to agree common ground between the party and ensure an orderly withdrawal from the EU . Labour be expect to use the talk as leverage to demand an end to the public sector pay freeze among a series of concession in next week ' s Queen ' s Speech . Mrs May be understand to have be ` ` aware ' ' of the plot for several day but so far have do nothing to stop it . meanwhile , Ruth Davidson use her newfound influence in Westminster to tell Theresa May she must pursue a soft ` ` open Brexit ' ' that prioritises free trade over cut immigration . the Scottish Conservative leader meet the Prime Minister before sit in on the political cabinet meeting at no @card@ after her @card@ Scottish MP effectively keep Mrs May in power . she claim afterwards there be a ` ` clear recognition ' ' that the government must seek a general consensus and that it must prioritise the economy . in an article today ' S Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary and staunch Brexiteer , say it be vital that the government can ` ` achieve a deal that can command the wide possible support ' ' . last night Mrs May be cheer at the first meeting of the @card@ committee of backbench Tory MP since lose her majority as she tell them : ` ` I get us into this mess and I ' ll get us out of it . ' ' ` ` in other development : Senior conservative suggest Mrs May will be allow to continue as Prime Minister until @card@ ; Downing Street announce the Queen ' S Speech could be delay by the need to reach an agreement with the DUP about what will be in it ; the start of Brexit talk be put back after the EU say the election result have cause uncertainty in Brussels ; Labour ' s policy on Brexit descend into chaos as two of Jeremy Corbyn ' s most senior frontbenchers contradict the Labour leader . Brexit will dominate whatever remain of Mrs May ' S premiership , and the conservative behind the talk with Labour MP believe Mrs May will have no choice but to accept their demand in order to ensure her Brexit plan be not block by Parliament . MP who favour a soft Brexit or oppose it altogether outnumber hard Brexiteers in the new commons . Labour and Tory MP forge alliance when they campaign side by side in the EU referendum , and last night senior source in both party confirm that talk be ongoing and look set to intensify over the come week . one senior Tory source say the election have make clear that the conservative be ` ` no long in control of the Brexit process . Conservative MP fear that lose a key vote on Brexit would weaken Mrs May ' S so much that she could be force to stand aside . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Lord Hague , the former Tory leader , continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ put forward a plan for how a crossparty commission would work . gain cross-party support , he say , will require a change in ` ` the emphasis give to the UK ' S objective , with a clear indication that economic growth will have priority over control the number of people enter the country for work ' ' . he also suggest that Britain could join the European Economic Area for two year as a stage post to full Brexit . Yvette Cooper , one of Labour ' s most senior and credible figure on immigration , also call for cross-party talk . Ms Davidson ' S position , put the economy ahead of immigration , would flip Mrs May ' S state priority in a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , and be very far from the Prime Minister ' s former position that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' . the bloc of @card@ Scottish MP will take the Tory whip , but Ms Davidson plan to use their influence to change government policy on Brexit . she say it be clear around the cabinet table that there be ` ` a recognition that , as we be in the minority , we will have to reach out and work with other ' ' . she tell BBC Scotland : ` ` there be also a clear understanding that the prime pursuit ... be to make sure that we look after the economy and that we prioritise free trade . ' ' Ms Davidson also make it clear that ` ` as we leave the European union we must leave the Common Fisheries Policy and ensure a good deal for our fishing community ' ' . it be understood Ms Davidson also discuss with the Prime Minister plan to keep up the pressure on Nicola Sturgeon to take a propose second independence referendum off the table . source close to the Scottish Tory leader believe Ms Sturgeon will have to break her silence before Thursday ' S First Minister ' S question , or face further political damage . yesterday Ms Sturgeon meet her much reduce group of @card@ MP outside the Houses of Parliament . the First Minister call for a ` ` short pause ' ' in Brexit negotiation in order to secure a cross-party , four nation agreement - a suggestion that be quickly reject . a spokesman for Mrs May say : ` ` we give a commitment right at the very outset of this process to consult with the devolve administration and that remain the case . ' ' Ms Sturgeon have be ask repeatedly since a disastrous election that see the SNP lose @card@ MP , include Alex Salmond and Angus Robertson , the party ' s Westminster leader , if she will now take indyref2 off her agenda . but she have so far only say she will reflect on the result , while admit that the issue play a part in the outcome .
Scotland Europe to hold no sway over UK court post-Brexit , insist May
the European court will have no influence over Britain after Brexit , Theresa May will promise in a major speech next week . the Prime Minister will declare in a speech due to be make on Tuesday that the UK will not be in the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) from the moment it leave the EU in @card@ , source say . her promise will be a direct rebuke to EU leader who have in recent day claim that Britain will remain under the rule of the European court for several year after Brexit . Joseph Muscat , the prime minister of Malta , which currently hold the EU presidency , this week say the ECJ would still be ` ` dish out ' ' judgment to the UK as part of any transitional deal with Brussels to allow access the single market after Brexit . however , Mrs May will make clear that Britain will no longer abide by the court ' S ruling , in remark that will be heavily criticise by EU leader . her speech will also set out a detailed plan for a new immigration system after Brexit , it be understand . source tell the Daily Telegraph earlier this month that she intend to make it clear to EU leader that the UK be prepare to walk away from the single market if Brussels attempt to insist that Britain continue to abide by freedom of movement rule after Brexit . Mrs May ' S speech be see by Downing Street insider as vital to define her leadership and be design to counter claim that she have no plan for Brexit . one source describe it as a ` ` gamechanger ' ' that will be her ` ` most significant ' ' intervention since walk into Downing Street last summer . Senior Tories who back the leave campaign be call for Mrs May to use the speech to say that Britain will leave both the single market and the custom union . Michael Gove , the former justice secretary , in a newspaper article yesterday warn Mrs May against a ` ` fake Brexit ' ' that be reject by voter . he call on her to tell EU leader that Britain will quit the single market ` ` because be in mean accept the unfettered free movement of people and the unchallenged supremacy of EU court ' ' . he say that she must also pledge to leave the EU custom union because membership ` ` mean accept high tariff barrier towards the rest of the world and no freedom to strike our own trade deal ' ' .
Brexit opponent accuse of be detach from reality
a Leading businesswoman have accuse politician and financial leader who dismiss the Brexit vote and election of Donald Trump of be ` ` detach from reality ' ' and operate in a ` ` narrow comfort zone ' ' . Helena Morrissey , a senior investment manager , say ` ` those at the top ' ' have fail to learn the lesson from the financial crisis and now risk ignore the significance of the Brexit vote . she be speak after Mark Boleat , the policy chairman at the City of London Corporation , say he have ` ` no doubt ' ' that London would remain the world ' s ` ` lead financial centre ' ' after Brexit . in another significant boost for Britain , Matt Brittin , the head of Google ' S business and operation in Europe , say his company would continue to invest in this country because it be ` ` good at the Internet . ' ' Ms Morrissey , who back Brexit , say : ` ` what have happen this year should not really be a surprise for anyone who examine the @card@ global financial crisis and its aftermath with any honesty . ` ` the banking collapse then should have be a wake-up call to expert , pundit and establishment figure everywhere , but the event of this past year suggest to me that many people in charge have remain detach from reality . ' ' her comment come after an economist who play a lead role in the Remain campaign admit that Michael Gove have be right to say that ` ` people be feed up with expert ' ' . Stephanie Flanders , a former BBC presenter who now work for JP Morgan , say that over the last few year economist have be ` ` wrong in some pretty big area ' ' . Ms Flanders , who appear in a Britain Stronger in Europe advert during the referendum campaign , say they have be ` ` victim of group think ' ' and ` ` out of touch ' ' . during the referendum campaign Mr Gove , the justice secretary at the time , be a fierce critic of ` ` project fear ' ' and say ` ` I think people in this country have have enough of expert . ' ' speak on the today programme during a debate , Ms Flanders agree that there be a ` ` long record ' ' of economist be wrong on their direct forecast . she say : ` ` you get group think , you can certainly get elite be out of touch , and we ' ve see all of that and that ' S why I think , in a sense , Michael have capture something with that phrase that he ' S explain good in this piece , about people be feed up with expert , I think people be feed up with expert . ' ' Business : page @card@
Scotland Sturgeon ' s chance to veto Brexit ; Devolved administration give role in Supreme Court case
Nicola Sturgeon could lay the groundwork for block Brexit by seek a legal ruling from Europe that the trigger of Article @card@ can be reverse , accord to a QC who help frustrate Theresa May ' s plan to bypass a vote in Parliament . Jolyon Maugham argue in an article in today ' S Daily Telegraph that the First Minister could ` ` explode the cosy consensus ' ' that the two-year process for leave the European Union can not be undo once it have be start by seek a reference to the Court of Justice of the EU . his intervention come as the Supreme Court confirm that the Scottish and Welsh government would be allow to intervene in the ongoing court battle over how the Brexit process should be trigger . in his article Mr Maugham claim that such a ruling would enable MP to withdraw the Article @card@ notification at a late date if they do not like the shape of the Brexit deal that emerge . Mr Maugham claim that if Ms Sturgeon win a case in the ECJ , it would leave the ` ` door ajar ' ' for the entire UK remain in the EU and give her a ` ` real bargaining chip in her negotiation with Westminster ' ' . he argue that the First Minister be right to demand that Westminster respect the will of the Scottish people , @card@ per cent of whom vote Remain , and conclude : ` ` this be how she get it . ' ' he write that before the High Court case it suit everyone to ` ` pretend ' ' that trigger Article @card@ would inevitably lead to Britain leave the EU . he suggest that Ms Sturgeon ask the European Court of Justice to answer the question , and if it decide that Article @card@ be reversible its MP can threaten to vote down any Brexit deal that ignore Scotland ' S interest . do so would mean withdraw the Article @card@ notification and remain in the EU . he add : ` ` although that vote would almost certainly fall in the House of Commons today , who know how Brexit will look in two year ' time ? it be possible that the ` ` sunlit upland ' ' promise by Boris Johnson will heave into view - but it may also be that they dissolve to mere mirage , ' ' he argue . if this be the case , he predict , MP will face strong pressure from the voter to keep Britain in the EU ` ` and the Brexiteers fear that ' ' . Mr Maugham initiate the crowdfunded people ' s Challenge group , which launch a legal challenge to Brexit alongside investment manager Gina Miller and hairdresser Deir dos Santos . earlier this month they win a case that see three High Court judge rule that the Prime Minister do not have the power to trigger Article @card@ , which start a two-year negotiation process , without the authority of Parliament . the UK Government immediately announce plan to appeal against the judgment , take the case to the Supreme Court . Michael Russell , Scotland ' s Brexit minister , yesterday welcome the decision to allow the devolve administration to take part , say : ` ` we recognise the decision of people in England and Wales to support Brexit , but the view of people in Scotland can not simply be brush aside . the Lord Advocate will be make the case on behalf of the Scottish government . ' ' James Wolffe , the Lord Advocate , be expect to argue that Article @card@ can not be trigger without a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) from Holyrood . this would allow MSPs to block Brexit , with a majority of member in the Scottish Parliament chamber vigorously oppose to leave the EU . however , academic expert have previously say the UK Government be not legally bind to seek LCMs from the three devolve administration
Brexit fuel a grow rift in the SNP ; with such a rebellion in the rank Sturgeon ca n't proceed with a second independence referendum
never one to miss an opportunity to embarrass or pick a fight with the UK Government , Nicola Sturgeon be quick off the mark when the High Court hand down its controversial judgment on Brexit . the ink be barely dry on their lordship ' ruling when Scotland ' S separatist First Minister announce that she be ` ` actively consider ' ' join attempt to stop Theresa May trigger Article @card@ without Parliament ' S agreement . yesterday she confirm that James Wolffe , the Lord Advocate , Scotland ' s senior law officer , be to seek permission to address the Supreme Court when it consider the case next month . but she be vague as to the precise nature of Mr Wolffe ' S submission , understandably so give the hugely embarrassing revelation - first make public in this newspaper - that her party , note for its iron discipline , be seriously split over EU membership . although Ms Sturgeon regularly trumpet the fact that @card@ per cent of Scot vote for Remain in the EU referendum , she choose to ignore the fact that of the one million north of the border who back Brexit , some @card@ be SNP voter . however , what she could n't dismiss be the announcement by Alex Neil , one of the most senior of all serve nationalist ( and a lead cabinet minister until sack by Ms Sturgeon in May ) , that he have vote for Brexit . nor could she ignore his revelation that he be not the only nationalist member of the Scottish Parliament to be a Brexiteer . indeed , Mr Neil have suggest that there may have be five or six MSPs who vote leave . the issue be easily the big split in SNP rank since devolution and be all the more surprising give that , since it have be in government since @card@ , there have hardly be a chink in the party ' s formidable armour . now we have the situation where , give that their party ' S suppose stalwart support for the EU be see to be dwindle , stalwart nationalist be wonder if they can trust each other . we have already see a number of nationalist - include a junior minister , the party chairman , who be also a member of the European Parliament , and a prominent MP - all refusing to answer question about how they vote in the June referendum . and to think that EU membership be for decade suppose an article of faith among the SNP membership ; something that would fuel a renewed referendum campaign after Brexit . in fact the issue be just sow confusion in the SNP ' s own rank . Mr Neil now claim that as many of as @card@ per cent of the party ' S @card@ member probably vote for Brexit . and there can be little doubt that some vote for Brexit in the belief that it would bring on an early second referendum , other really be genuine and longtime Eurosceptics . there have always be a not insignificant faction within the SNP that believe that there be little point in seek to break away from the UK , only then to be run from Brussels . Ms Sturgeon want ` ` her ' ' Parliament to have the same authority over Brexit as Westminster do , especially as the Welsh and northern Irish government be oppose Theresa May ' s appeal to the Supreme Court . Mike Russell , the Scottish Government ' s Brexit minister , say that it be ` ` important ' ' that Parliament scrutinise the decision of the executive but add , significantly : ` ` there be a number of parliament in the UK . ' ' yet , with such a public rift in her own party , can Nicola Sturgeon take the risk of have a full-blown Brexit debate at Holyrood , even if the Supreme Court justice agree to such a move ? the split in the SNP rank over EU membership give the lie to Ms Sturgeon ' s claim that she speak for all of Scotland , give that she ca n't even be say to be speak for her entire party . with such a rebellion she could hardly proceed with any confidence with her threatened second referendum on independence , a prospect already look doubtful thanks to Scotland ' s poor economic performance . far from be the sure route towards independence that many in that party have always believe , it be now begin to look as if Brexit have become an anvil on which the SNP take a real hammering . read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Brexit warning ' correct ' say Civil Service boss ; Civil Service put out propaganda on Brexit , say MP
the head of the Civil Service have draw fury from Eurosceptic MP after claim that official warning about the impact of Brexit during the referendum be ` ` factually correct and objective ' ' . Sir Jeremy Heywood say the ` ` Civil Service do its job ' ' and be ` ` scrupulous ' ' during the build-up to the referendum , produce work ` ` as we should , at pace and with accuracy ' ' . Eurosceptics have accuse him of promote ` ` Project Fear ' ' in an attempt to keep Britain in the European Union . the Treasury warn just week before the vote that household could be £4,300 worse off because of Brexit . in a blog on a government website , Sir Jeremy say : ` ` during the official referendum campaign , we be scrupulous in make sure that all document issue be factually correct and objective . ' ' he add : ` ` the question have still be ask : ' what be the Civil Service do before the referendum ? where be the Brexit plan ? ' this show little appreciation of the constitutional and continue on Page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ proprietary framework in which we operate , not to mention the practical difficulty of produce a comprehensive plan for such a multifaceted proposition as Brexit . ' ' Steve Baker , a lead Tory Eurosceptic , say : ` ` from my point of view as a leading ' leave ' campaigner , the government ' S argument be partisan propaganda . ` ` the entire Civil Service machine be mobilise to campaign as strongly as possible . ' ' Iain Duncan Smith , the Brexitsupporting Tory MP and former work and pension secretary , say : ` ` there be huge pressure from government and line get blur and break . ` ` but after purdah [ which restricted civil servant ] there be no question that the Civil Service be more comfortable be able to say no . ' ' it come as the High Court today give its ruling on whether the government must secure the consent of MP before formally trigger Brexit . campaigner claim that Mrs May must give MP a vote before she trigger Article @card@ , which will give Britain a two-year window before leave the EU . Mrs May have repeatedly reject the call and accuse pro-European group of try to undermine the will of the British people .
freedom of movement will end in March @card@ , insist May ; May move to end Cabinet ' S ' divorce ' term tug-of-war
Theresa May move to rein in Philip Hammond and soothe Cabinet unrest over Brexit yesterday as Downing Street insist free movement of people will end in March @card@ . No10 say it be ` ` wrong ' ' to suggest that free movement would continue ` ` as it be now ' ' once Britain leave the EU , in comment that appear to contradict Mr Hammond ' S state view that ` ` many arrangement [ will remain ] very similar to how they be the day before we exit ' ' . the Prime Minister ' S spokesman also say that Britain would not be seek an ` ` off the shelf ` ` deal similar to Norway ' s arrangement with the EU , turn a phrase use by the Chancellor on its head and expose crack between No10 and No @card@ . the first public comment by Downing Street on Brexit since Theresa May go on holiday a week ago appear design to calm Brexiteers include Boris Johnson and Liam Fox , who be reportedly anger by Mr Hammond ' S attempt to set a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit agenda while he be leave in charge of the country . it come as leak emails write by Emmanuel Macron , the French president , reveal that his military adviser tell him Britain should be keep onside after Brexit because it be the ` ` most important ' ' military player in Europe . another adviser tell Mr Macron the EU would be less appealing without Britain as a member . the Cabinet row over Brexit show no sign of abate yesterday as Mrs May ' s official spokesman set out her position on free movement of people and the transition period , which be at the centre of the tug-of-war between Europhile and Eurosceptic minister . Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Mr Fox , the International Trade Secretary , be understand to have be anger by Mr Hammond ' S comment last Friday that there be a ` ` broad consensus ' ' in Cabinet that the Brexit transition period would last up to three year . Mr Hammond also say he envisage Britain leave the EU ` ` with many arrangement remain very similar to how they be the day before we exit ' ' . some former leave campaigner warn that drag out the transition process to the next general election must not be use as ` ` a ruse to keep the door open to go back into the EU ' ' . but Downing Street say : ` ` free movement will end in March @card@ ... other element of the post-Brexit immigration system will be bring forward in due course . it would be wrong to speculate on what these might look like or to suggest that free movement will continue as it be now . ' ' ' other element of the post-Brexit immigration system will be bring forward in due course . '
Philip Hammond can not be allow to redefine the term of Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - in Theresa May and Boris Johnson ' S absence , Philip Hammond seem to have gain control of the Cabinet and be try to subvert the will of the people . he have show a lack of competence in his job as Chancellor and be now take Brexit in the wrong direction , with talk of a long transition period . he be in danger of give the EU negotiating team early concession that will encourage them to ask for more . as an avid Remainer , that may be his intention . he must be stop . Patricia Bateson Diss , Norfolk sir - Anyone who have have a senior role in business ( and Parliament have a dearth of such people ) know that , if a major transformation be necessary , the more rapidly and urgently it be do , the well . the pain be over in a short time , and the positive part can then occupy people ' S time and energy . a protracted Brexit transition will only drag out the uncertainty and anxiety - and give the Brexit saboteur , of whom there be many , every opportunity to ensure that Brexit never happen . Dr Peter Grey Hurley , Berkshire sir - I vote for ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' , which have now change to ` ` any deal be good than no deal ' ' - so we might just as well have accept what David Cameron be offer before the referendum and save the ` ` divorce ' ' bill . we can now see why Mr Hammond do not take part in the electioneer , as the plan be for the Treasury ' s ` ` puppet ' ' to take over after the election and impose its view on the electorate regardless of democracy . Philip Trow Stafford sir - while there may be a number of area in which business and individual require extra time to adapt after Brexit , the need to reduce immigration be a major issue even before the Brexit vote . people have have plenty of warning and need to start put alternative arrangement in place by our date of leave . contrary to what Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , suggest , completely free movement - with or without visa - should not be allow after @card@ . Jane Drew Bristol sir - Liam Fox say that Brexit supporter vote for restricted access to Britain for EU citizen , but the fact be that no one know what make people vote the way they do . bear in mind that the government , the Conservative Party and the Labour Party be split between leave and remain in the EU , and that both the Houses of Commons and Lords will have to vote on the final Brexit agreement , surely it be time for a second referendum to find out if people in Britain still want to leave the EU now that all the issue be become plain . Tony Blackman London SW11
Scotland ' disaster ' of quit EU must be halt , say Scottish leader
more than @card@ high-profile politician , academic and lead figure from across Scotland have call for Brexit to be halt as its ` ` disastrous consequence ' ' become clear every day . they warn yesterday that Brexit have seriously damage the UK ' s international reputation and call for a ` ` UK-wide debate about call a halt to the process ' ' . the signatory of an open letter that claim the UK have already be leave ` ` weak and diminished ' ' include Lord Kerr of Kinlochard , the author of Article @card@ , which set out the process for withdrawal from the EU . the peer , who be Britain ' s permanent representative at the EU from @card@ before become ambassador to the US , previously say he think it would only ever be use by a dictatorial regime , not by the UK . Lord Campbell of Pittenweem , former leader of the Liberal Democrats , the former first minister Henry McLeish , the SNP MEP Alyn Smith , the former Tory MEP Struan Stevenson , and the former defence secretary and ex-Nato secretary general Lord Robertson , also sign the letter . other signatory from the field of academia , business , art and NGOs include Scotland ' s former chief medical officer Sir Harry Burns and the historian Sir Tom Devine and Chris Smout . in the letter to the Herald they say : ` ` we see our society , economy and politics become ever more undermine due to the impact of Brexit . we recognise that a narrow majority vote to leave the European Union , but the disastrous consequence be now become ever clear - every day . even before the UK have leave the EU , we face fall live standard , rise inflation , slow growth and low productivity . ` ` Our international reputation have be seriously damage , leave the UK weak , with diminish influence , in an increasingly uncertain and unstable world . ' ' the letter continue : ` ` in a democracy , it be always possible to think again and to choose a different direction . we need to think again about Brexit , to have a UK-wide debate about call a halt to the process and change our mind . ' ' it conclude : ` ` we call for a national debate on Brexit . we ask our fellow citizen , and our politician , to think again . ' ' Mr McLeish tell BBC Radio Scotland ' S Good Morning Scotland programme that Brexit be ` ` tear Britain apart ' ' . he say : ` ` Enough be enough because we see Brexit take us towards a catastrophe , there be no perceive benefit , and in the meantime we see negotiation in Brussels go nowhere , we see a Cabinet and Government at Westminster shambolically handle affair . ` ` and one of the big issue for me be that , over the next two year , Parliament in London will face seven bill about exit the European Union . what happen then to housing ? what happen then to climate change ? ` ` what happen to the big issue that Britain face ? they ' ll be in the cupboard while we pursue this pointless distraction . ' ' the former first minister say it be ` ` possible ' ' that Parliament could overturn the Brexit vote , add : ` ` there will be a lot of opportunity over the next two year to derail and potentially reverse that decision . ' ' the letter coincide with a new report warn that Brexit be have a negative impact on the economy and the housing market as growth in Scotland lag behind the UK . the late projection from PwC put Scottish growth at @card@ per cent this year and @card@ per cent next year , behind UK GDP growth of @card@ per cent and @card@ per cent respectively . the economic outlook report attribute the figure to ` ` slow consumer spending growth and the drag on business investment from ongoing political and economic uncertainty relate to the outcome of the Brexit negotiation ' ' . ' we call for a national debate on Brexit . we ask our fellow citizen , and our politician , to think again '
Scotland David vow to squash the late Lords Brexit defeat
David Davis last night accuse peer of try to ` ` frustrate ' ' the process of trigger Brexit , as he insist the government would overturn the late Lords amendment to the Article @card@ bill . the Brexit Secretary be confident that a potential Tory rebellion in the Commons will be head off despite suffer a second parliamentary defeat on Brexit in the space of a week . the House of Lords pass an amendment to the Article @card@ bill that would force the government to give MP a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal before Britain ' s withdrawal from the EU . up to @card@ Conservative MP could vote in favour of the amendment , with rebel encourage other to abstain . they include Anna Soubry , the former business minister , who believe a ` ` significant ' ' number of Tory might defy the whip . the government have a ` ` Brexit majority ' ' of around @card@ MP - double its normal work majority - because it can count on the support of a number of MP from other party . the danger for Mrs May be that the Lords vote - in which the amendment be pass by @card@ vote to @card@ - could encourage Conservative MP represent pro-Remain constituency to abstain . thirteen Tory peer vote against the government as a new record be set for the number of peer take part in a vote , at @card@ . Mr Davis say it be ` ` disappointing ' ' that the Lords have make further change to the bill , add : ` ` it be clear that some in the Lords would seek to frustrate that process , and it be the government ' s intention to ensure that do not happen . we will now aim to overturn these amendment in the House of Commons . ' ' Ms Soubry say : ` ` I ' m hope a significant number of colleague who may not be able to vote against their government would consider abstain , and recognise that their lordship have consider the bill carefully . ` ` what do these hard Brexiteers fear ? they want to restore parliamentary sovereignty , but suddenly they seem terrify of Parliament have a say , never mind sovereignty . ' '
Scotland ' Sturgeon can cash in on Brexit with May ' ; SNP leader urge to drop referendum aim and use fund from Europe to create ' neo-independence ' ; ' government should publish List of Scottish Demands '
Nicola Sturgeon could win ` ` neoindependence ' ' for Scotland by abandon her referendum threat and focus on use Brexit to get major new power , one of her former Cabinet minister say today . write in the Daily Telegraph , Alex Neil say the First Minister should fill the political ` ` void ' ' create by the UK Government ' s silence over what they want from Brexit by issue a ` ` List of Scottish Demands ' ' . he argue that Ms Sturgeon seize a swathe of the power and spending money that will be repatriate from the European Union would leave Scotland with ` ` neo-independence ' ' . urge the SNP leader to exploit a ` ` golden opportunity ' ' , the former Scottish health secretary also say this strategy would provide the ` ` ideal platform ' ' for Scotland get full independence in the early 2020s . he write that she should press for all EU power that relate to devolve policy area to be ` ` automatically ' ' transfer to Edinburgh , include control over farming , fishing , employment law , consumer protection , social policy and the environment . the Airdrie and Shotts MSP argue that around £800 million of funding associate with these policy should be add to Holyrood ' s budget along with control of VAT , which EU law currently prevent be devolve . in addition , Mr Neil say Ms Sturgeon should pressurise Theresa May to honour the leave campaign ' s suggestion that some immigration power be devolve after Brexit . his intervention be the most detailed explanation yet of how the First Minister could use the Brexit vote as part of a ` ` long game ' ' towards independence . it be in stark contrast to Alex Salmond ' s proposal that Ms Sturgeon call a second independence referendum in the autumn of @card@ , after her demand that Scotland retain membership of the EU single market be reject . however , a series of senior SNP figure such as Kenny Macaskill have join Mr Neil in warn that a ` ` headlong rush ' ' towards a rerun of the @card@ vote to appease enthusiastic party member risk a defeat that set back the Nationalist cause for decade . opinion poll show a majority of Scot oppose a second referendum before Brexit take place , and they would reject independence again . Alyn Smith , an SNP MEP and candidate in the party ' s deputy leadership contest , warn yesterday that Scot might end up be ` ` quite happy ' ' with Brexit despite @card@ per cent vote to Remain . Mr Neil be one of the party ' s most eminent grandee , have stand against John Swinney for the leadership in @card@ and hold two Cabinet post in Mr Salmond ' S government , before be appoint part of Ms Sturgeon ' s top team . the 65-year-old write today that it be ` ` blatantly obvious ' ' three month on from the EU referendum that the UK Government have no idea how to proceed with Brexit , and this create a huge political opportunity for Ms Sturgeon that she ` ` should not let slip ' ' . ` ` rather than wait until Theresa May continue on Page @card@ Alex Neil : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ eventually get her act together , the Scottish Government should immediately publish its ' List of Scottish Demands ' for the Brexit negotiation , ' ' he write . ` ` do n't wait for Whitehall . set the agenda now . force the UK Cabinet to acknowledge Scotland ' S priority . preempt any attempt by the UK Government to place unacceptable limitation on Scotland ' s Brexit ambition . ' ' he argue that move quickly with the demand for the power and the associate funding would put them ` ` at the top of the UK/EU negotiation agenda ' ' . Mr Neil conclude : ` ` the accumulation of all these new power and finance would bring about ' neo-Independence ' for Scotland , create the ideal platform for advance to full sovereignty for the Scottish people in the early 2020s . ' ' the former minister also argue that the UK Government would find it ` ` difficult ' ' to deny Ms Sturgeon a special deal on access to the EU single market and freedom of movement ` ` if Scotland play its card right ' ' . to build pressure on Mrs May to agree to the First Minister ' S demand , he suggest that Ms Sturgeon organise a ` ` Brexit Coalition ' ' with representative from all the UK ' S nation and region . however , the Prime Minister argue today that the SNP need to accept its share of responsibility for voter disillusionment with the political establishment , which she claim lead to the Brexit vote . write in Holyrood magazine , Mrs May say that Scotland ' s status in the world will be enhance by Brexit because it will allow keynote industry such as financial service , food and drink and shipbuilding to take maximum advantage of global market . an SNP spokesman say : ` ` the First Minister have repeatedly make clear that the Scottish Government be explore all possible avenue to protect Scotland ' s place in Europe , in line with the overwhelming vote to remain - and those option must include independence if it become clear it be the good or only way of do so . ' ' ' Set the agenda now . force the UK Cabinet to acknowledge Scotland ' s priority '
no shortcut for firm move EU base after Brexit , warn watchdog
financial firm hope to avoid any Brexit aftershock by set up a ` ` letterbox ' ' office on the continent will not get away with it , the EU security watchdog have warn . business across the City be look at how they can minimise the impact of a hard Brexit , which would see UK-based firm lose the ability to service client in the EU , by set up licensed hub overseas . however , the European Securities and Markets Authority ( Esma ) yesterday list nine condition firm should meet if they want to do so , send a clear message that they will not be able to side-step the rule . in a move to crack down on shell or ` ` letterbox ' ' hub , the watchdog say EU country - which be compete to attract financial firm post-Brexit - need to be wary of office that still have critical function in London . this will make life difficult for country hope to win business over rival centre by offer post-Brexit sweetener , such as the opportunity to outsource chunk of work to London ; Esma warn that any outsourcing to a UK entity need to be strictly supervise . while it acknowledge that a number of company see their EU branch as a safety net , the Paris-based watchdog say there should be no ` ` automatic recognition of exist authorisations ' ' - mean many company might well have to start from scratch . Esma chairman Steven Maijoor say it be vital that firm be subject to the same standard across the EU , to avoid ` ` competition on regulatory and supervisory practice ' ' between member . ` ` the UK play a prominent role in EU financial market and the relocation of entity , activity and function to the EU27 create a unique situation require a common effort , at EU level , to safeguard investor protection , the orderly functioning of financial market and financial stability , ' ' he say . a number of company in the financial service sector have already outline post-Brexit contingency plan , with Luxembourg , Dublin and Frankfurt emerge as popular location . meanwhile , the Financial Conduct Authority have send out letter to @card@ of the UK ' s large asset manager ask for detail on their post-Brexit plan . a spokesman say the move be ` ` not a formal data request ' ' but be aim at help the UK regulator well understand what firm be do to prepare for Brexit .
Italy planning to lure City firm to Milan after Brexit
Italy be to set up a task force to lure business and investor from the City to Milan in the wake of Brexit , the country ' s foreign minister announce . Angelino Alfano say his government would aggressively promote Italy ' s financial capital as a viable alternative to London . ` ` we ' re go to set up a task force . the government be on Milan ' s side in the post-Brexit game , ' ' the minister say at a conference in Rome . ` ` who say that business that leave London should all go to Frankfurt ? we need to be able to attract Milan business that decide to leave London . ' ' Brexit offer many opportunity for Italy , ` ` and we need to work to make Milan a highly-competitive city in the post-Brexit era ' ' , Mr Alfano say . the capital of the wealthy Lombardy region , Milan be home to Italy ' s main stock exchange , have two airport and boast Bocconi University , acclaim for business study and finance . the city ' S profile be boost last year by the success of the Expo world fair , which attract 20m visitor . but Milan ' S ambition to lure away firm from the City face numerous obstacle , from language to labour law . Italy have one of the low level of English language proficiency of any country in the EU . only 34pc of Italian have a work knowledge of English , accord to a study by the European Commission , and firm look to leave the UK might instead opt for Dublin . high social security cost mean employee in Milan be more costly than those in London and labour law make it hard to make worker redundant . Italy ' s legal system be also notoriously slow and inefficient , with court case drag on for year and even decade . in the late annual ease of Doing Business Survey by the World Bank , Italy rank 50th out of @card@ country , behind Serbia , Belarus , Moldova and Armenia . Britain rank seventh . ` ` in the current cost-conscious environment , I think company will be concern at how much more it cost to set up a business in Milan and how much hard it be to get rid of people if need , ' ' say a British corporate lawyer familiar with both Italy and the City . ` ` I think Dublin be a much more attractive proposition . ' '
Brexiteers warn that @card@ million voter must not be betray
Theresa May have be warn she ` ` must deliver on Brexit ' ' or she will betray the @card@ million people who vote last month for Britain to leave the European Union . Eurosceptic Cabinet minister include Boris Johnson , the former Mayor of London , and Owen Paterson , a former Environment Secretary , say it be ` ` vital ' ' that Mrs may ` ` respect the will of the people ' ' . Owen Paterson , a supporter of Andrea Leadsom , say : ` ` if she fail to deliver on Brexit there will be massive disillusionment in the political class as a whole . she must deliver a Brexit for the @card@ million people who vote for it . ' ' Boris Johnson , one of the lead voice in the Vote leave camp , say : ` ` I have no doubt Theresa will make an excellent party leader and prime minister and I ' m encourage that she ' S make it clear that Brexit mean Brexit - that we will leave the EU . ` ` it be vital that we respect the will of the people and get on with exploit new opportunity for this country . ' ' Mrs May insist yesterday that she be ` ` go to make a success ' ' of Brexit . she say : ` ` Our country need strong , proven leadership to steer us through this time of economic and political uncertainty and to negotiate the good deal for Britain as we leave the EU and forge a new role for ourselves in the world . ` ` because Brexit mean Brexit , and we ' re go to make a success of it . ' ' the new Tory leader have campaign for the UK to remain inside the EU but do not make any high-profile appeal , earn her criticism for her lacklustre approach . but she have vow not to trigger Article @card@ , the formal mechanism to begin a Brexit , until the UK be ready to negotiate a new deal . Mrs Leadsom , her former opponent , have promise to do so more quickly in order to speed up the process of leave . Mrs May say there be absolutely no deadline for her to trigger the formal talk , add that the most important thing be to secure a good deal . she add : ` ` we should n't invoke Article @card@ immediately , I ' ve say it should n't be before the end of the year , we need to set our own negotiation position . ' ' Other pro-Brexit MP call for Mrs Leadsom to be give a position in Mrs May ' S cabinet and back the Tory leader ' s promise to put a Brexiter in charge of plan to leave the EU . Nigel Evans MP , who campaign for the UK to leave , say : ` ` there be no sidestep , there be no second referendum , we be go to respect the wish of the British people ... that ' s exactly what ' s go to happen and Theresa do give a guarantee that a Brexiteer would be in charge of that withdrawal . it have to be someone who vigorously campaign for us to leave the European union . ' ' Politicians in Brussels concede that Mrs May be a tough negotiator and will battle to get the good deal for the UK . one Italian newspaper describe Mrs May as the English equivalent of Angela Merkel . EU source be say to be please with Mrs May ' s appointment as prime minister-in-waiting because she be a known quantity follow her numerous talk and discussion during her time as a Cabinet minister . two week of turbulence how political history be forge June @card@ hour after the nation ' s historic vote to leave the EU , David Cameron resign as Prime Minister , say : ` ` I do not think I can be the captain to take the country to its next destination . ' ' June @card@ Jeremy Corbyn sack Hilary Benn , trigger a wave of resignation from shadow cabinet member , as part of a concerted effort by the Parliamentary Labour Party to bring down its leader . June @card@ as many as nine Conservative MP consider mount leadership campaign , as the bookmaker back the cheerleader of the leave movement , Boris Johnson , to be the next prime minister . June @card@ Labour MP overwhelmingly back a vote of no confidence in Jeremy Corbyn . he insist he will not quit , declare his victory in the leadership contest give him a mandate from party member . June @card@ crack begin to appear in the alliance between Boris Johnson and Michael Gove , as a leak email from Mr Gove ' S wife show her urge him to demand ` ` specific assurance ' ' from his Brexit colleague . June @card@ Michael Gove torpedo Mr Johnson ' S bid , claim he ` ` be n't capable ' ' of be PM and announce he will run himself . race be narrow to five candidate : Gove , May , Crabb , Fox and Leadsom . July @card@ Mrs Leadsom be the major beneficiary of Mr Johnson ' S departure , pick up dozen of pro-Brexit MP . Chancellor abandon his target to run a budget surplus by @card@ , cite instability cause by Brexit . July @card@ Nigel Farage quit as Ukip leader , say : ` ` I want my life back . ' ' Westminster source say that after the leave camp win the referendum , it be time Mr Farage could declare ` ` job do ' ' . July @card@ Liam Fox , right , eliminate from the leadership race in the first round of voting by Conservative MP , with Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb quit shortly afterwards . July @card@ Michael Gove eliminate from the contest , leave an allfemale race between Theresa May and Andrea Leadsom which would produce the first woman prime minister since Mrs Thatcher . July @card@ Mrs Leadsom criticise after give an interview in which she claim that be a mother differentiate her from Mrs May because it mean she have ` ` a very real stake ' ' in the future of the nation . July @card@ it be confirm that Angela Eagle will stand as a unity candidate for the Labour leadership , in an attempt to unseat Mr Corbyn , who insist he have the right to run again in any contest . July @card@ Theresa May be anoint as the next prime minister , after Andrea Leadsom pull out of the leadership race , say : ` ` we need a new prime minister in place as soon as possible . ' '
it be still not too late to change your mind on leave , EU tell Britain
Donald TUSK and Jean-Claude Juncker yesterday tell Britain that the door be still open for the country to change its mind over Brexit . appear to back a second referendum on UK membership of the European Union , Mr Tusk , the president of the European Council , say : ` ` if the UK stick to its decision to leave , Brexit will become a reality with all its negative consequence in March next year - unless there be a change of heart among our British friend . ' ' Mr Tusk , the former prime minister of Poland add : ` ` we here on the continent have n't have a change of heart . our heart be still open to you . ' ' Jean-Claude Juncker , who be president of the European Commission , tell MEPs : ` ` I hope that that will be hear clearly in London . ' ' they be speak a day after five Remain-supporting MP , include Tory Brexit rebel , visit Brussels . ` ` be n't it David Davis himself who say that if a democracy can not change its mind , it cease to be a democracy , ' ' Mr Tusk ask , refer to a speech give by Britain ' S Brexit Secretary in @card@ . meanwhile , European Parliament leader ruthlessly mock Britain for celebrate the return of its ` ` muchmissed ' ' blue passport , which Theresa May have say express post-Brexit ` ` independence and sovereignty ' ' . Manfred Weber , leader of the large political group in the European Parliament , say there be nothing in exist EU rule that demand passport be of a certain colour . ` ` the whole story be a scam , ' ' he crow . ` ` why do n't you tell the people the truth ? ' ' Blue passport appear to be Mrs May ' s ` ` only achievement ' ' since she trigger the Brexit process in March @card@ , say the Bavarian MEP , who lead the European people ' S party . on Monday , MP include Tory Brexit rebel Dominic Grieve and Anna Soubry meet Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator in Brussels . the allparty parliamentary group on EU relation raise the prospect of vote down the Brexit deal . speak in Brussels and deny she be undermine Mrs May ' s negotiate hand , Ms Soubry say : ` ` both political party have a number of backbencher who feel differently from their front bench . ' ' last week , Nigel Farage , the MEP and ex-Ukip leader , offer apparent support for a second referendum after a separate meeting with Mr Barnier .
ignore the doom-laden spin - Brexit be go remarkably well ; government chaos have lead critic to believe our exit from the EU be a disaster , when the opposite be true
strictly speak , Britain be not allow to hold trade talk with anyone until we have leave the European Union . but no one in London or Washington want to wait that long so , on Monday , talk to establish a free-trade agreement will begin . it ' S a fairly historic moment : Robert Lighthizer , the US trade representative , will meet Liam Fox to discuss what American official describe as ` ` way to strengthen trade and commercial tie ' ' . to have this happen so soon be more than any Brexiteer dare predict . rather than be at the back of the queue , as Barack Obama have rather absurdly threaten , Britain be sneak to the front . this fit a trend . Brazil be keen to start talk with Britain , as be Australia and Turkey . they might be bemuse at the political mess in Westminster but they seek close link to our economy , the fifth large in the world . we have a newly competitive currency , fuel demand for our good and help employment to an all-time high . there ' S even a consensus about what Brexit should look like : a clean break with the EU , untie our hand to strike new alliance . the journey be bumpy , but the direction be clear . so it ' S hard to portray Brexit as be an unmitigated disaster . but a great many people be do a rather good job of it . their mistake be to look at the state of the government and assume that the Brexit project be in the same dilapidated condition . negotiation with the EU , which finish their second stage yesterday , be always go to be tortuous . make more so , it ' s true , by the implosion of the Prime Minister ' S authority and the inability of anyone to make the case for Brexit . when critic carp , the government be unable to respond . give the scale of this task , Theresa May ought to have assemble a Bletchley Park-style cadre of expert to work out every detail . instead , the government have rely on a still-traumatised Whitehall machine . I recently meet one of the many civil servant deploy to Brexit and ask what it be , exactly , that he do . ` ` I do n't know , ' ' he reply , ` ` that have n't be make clear to me yet . ' ' the basic problem be that leadership have to come from the very top . and it ' S not be apply . yet in spite of all this , public opinion remain remarkably firm - perhaps because , political tragicomedy aside , thing have be go rather well . the country be as evenly split now as it be in last year ' S referendum , with Brexit just about edge it . which be perhaps understandable , give how many Brexit voter expect precisely this kind of disruption . they reject the advice of academic , economist , actor and every political party in Westminster - it always be a vote for the long term , sure to cause havoc in the short term . if anything , Brexit seem less of a risk now . HM Treasury ' s dire prediction have prove , to put it politely , unduly pessimistic . a fall pound annoy holidaymakers , but have help manufacturing increase every month since the referendum , while tourism spending be up @card@ per cent and export in general @card@ per cent . inflation have rise , but it now look set to peak - have never rise above @card@ per cent . in the great history of British inflation disaster , this will barely merit a mention . and what about the talented EU national supposedly be chase away ? a group of academic warn about this in a letter this week , but the late figure show more European work here than ever before . Mrs May have belatedly say she want to offer them all permanent residency - and we should hope they accept . while Europe be wrestle with unemployment , Britain ' S problem be a lack of worker - most company now say they struggle to fill skilled vacancy . a problem , yes , but a problem bear of success . and that exodus of financial service ? yes , some of the bank be send a few more staff to EU office but , overall , the City of London be booming . the late update from Morgan McKinley find that the Brexit referendum prompt an @card@ per cent hike in hiring , rather than a desertion . the dire state of the Westminster soap opera do n't alter a basic fact : London be the great financial centre in the world , rank even above New York . the official league table do n't show any EU city in the top @card@ . and if banker do go to Frankfurt , the EU might have some unpleasant surprise wait . it recently publish various plan for the future , include a financial transaction tax - the sort that Britain would never have tolerate . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' s Brexit representative , recently declare that the ` ` only way for the EU be to develop itself into a federal Europe ' ' . once Britain would have be work out how to sabotage such agenda . now , we can wish the EU good luck . those who have see David Cameron recently say that he ' S still very downbeat and can often be find in Dukes Bar in Mayfair , mournfully nurse its signature vodka martini . but he should not be so hard on himself . the EU be evidently head on a federalist path that Britain could never have follow ; Brexit would have happen sooner or later . the more the EU talk about great integration , the wise the Brexit vote seem . and this be true no matter how much of a mess the British government might find itself in . fundamentally , Brexit be about the country , not the government . the US be keen to open trade talk not as a love letter to Theresa May but because it seek close link to an economy without threaten American job . the Prime Minister have make this case very well to the Trump administration : this be her personal success . she have also keep her nerve on Brexit and have not be tempt to make a false choice between ` ` hard ' ' or ` ` soft ' ' version . she have a strong hand to play because the country have so much to offer . so there be two Brexit battle be fight : that of the spin , and that of the substance . the government be lose the former , but slowly win the latter . well that , at least , than the other way around . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
what to watch ; Television Thursday @card@ February Body : after Brexit : the battle for Europe BBC Two , 9.00pm Hard Brexit . soft Brexit . Red , white and blue Brexit . full English Brexit with choice of tea or coffee . as Britain continue to prepare for withdrawal from the EU , the BBC ' S Europe Editor Katya Adler present this special investigation into the rise of populist Eurosceptic movement and ask whether the union itself can survive . Adler begin in Sicily , where she chart the conflict between UKIPlike movement Five Star and pro-Euro centrist Matteo Renzi , who recently resign as Italian prime minister . she then travel across the continent , meet the politician pose a major threat to the EU establishment , as well as ordinary voter disenfranchise by year of Eurozone turmoil and the migrant crisis - from France , where the Front National ' S Marine Le Pen be in contention for presidency , to Hungary , where PM Viktor Orban be launch his own counter-revolution against Brussels . Adler also meet top Eurocrats include Germany ' S Martin Schulz and Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian PM charge with negotiate Brexit on behalf of the European Parliament . can the 60-year old union survive or will it be sweep away by a populist revolution ? Michael Hogan the Great Pottery Throw down BBC Two , 8.00pm last week , they make a 16-piece dinner set and decorate a pair of jug . now , in the second episode of the series , the amateur potter must throw a double-walled pot , create handle for casserole dish and make a large clock . the Cruise : sail the Mediterranean ITV , 8.30pm the up and down of the crew of the Royal Princess in this fly-onthe-cabin-wall series have keep us anchor to our seat in recent week . in the penultimate episode , there could be trouble as junior officer Lauren be in charge of engineer husband Mike during her first shift command the bridge . the series conclude tomorrow at 8.00pm . Unforgotten ITV , 9.00pm despite week of toil Unforgotten : Sanjeev Bhaskar and Nicola Walker over the murder of David Walker , the team be still leave with a puzzle to solve . in the series ' finale , DCI Cassie Stuart ( Nicola Stuart ) be increasingly unconvinced by teacher Sara Mahmoud ' S alibi . @card@ day in Jail Channel @card@ , 11.05pm as this docu-series , in which seven innocent volunteer go undercover in Indiana ' S Clark County Jail , draw to an close , Tami be on the verge of a meltdown after Maryum be release . meanwhile , a power struggle ensue when a ` ` boss ' ' be remove from D-Pod and a dispute erupt over a lunch tray . Lottie Hughes
Britain ' s fury at ' unhelpful ' Barnier ; Brexit talk descend into slang match as EU negotiator tell UK to behave ' seriously ' ; Barnier ' s claim UK will be less secure label ' risible nonsense '
Britain ' S relationship with Brussels appear close to break point last night as the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator be accuse of an ` ` ill-judged and unhelpful ' ' attack on the UK . the late round of Brexit talk descend into open hostility after Michel Barnier snipe at Britain for ` ` ambiguity ' ' in its stance on the socalled ` ` divorce bill ' ' and lecture the UK on take the issue ` ` seriously ' ' . Senior source close to the British negotiating team describe Mr Barnier as be ` ` stick with a headache of his own making ' ' over the Brexit Bill . they dismiss suggestion that Britain should pay to leave the EU while continue to make payment for access to the single market during a transition period . ` ` we be not go to pay twice , ' ' say one source . the source add that Brussels would simply ` ` pocket gain ' ' from any financial offer , ` ` as their reaction to our offer on citizen ' right show . we make a generous offer and get no credit ' ' . another senior source describe Mr Barnier ' s attack as ` ` inconsistent , illjudged , ill-considered and unhelpful for the next round of negotiation ' ' . Mr Barnier separately suggest the UK would be less secure as a result of Brexit , which be dismiss as ` ` risible nonsense ' ' in Whitehall . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , appear visibly irritate by Mr Barnier ' s remark as they make opening statement side by side in Brussels . he tell Mr Barnier : ` ` we want to make progress across all the issue . ' ' Peering at his opposite number over his glass he repeat : ` ` all the issue . ' ' this week ' S talk , the third in a series of monthly negotiation , be aim at reach an agreement on the ` ` divorce bill ' ' , citizen ' right and the Irish border so trade talk can begin in October . however , yesterday ' s public mudslinging do nothing to increase the chance of a swift resolution . one EU official say it be ` ` clearly worrying that we have major difference of core issue ... with very little time to land all this , even if Britain move ' ' . at a terse press conference in Brussels Mr Barnier , a former French minister , tell Mr Davis that the next phase of the Brexit talk can not begin until Britain provide a clear statement of its position on the ` ` divorce bill ' ' . he say : ` ` to be honest I be concern that time pass quickly . we must start negotiate seriously . ` ` we need UK paper that be clear in order to have constructive negotiation and the sooner we remove the ambiguity the sooner we will be in a position to discuss the future relationship and transitional period . ' ' the choice of word be deliberate . earlier this month , Mr Davis say that ` ` constructive ambiguity ' ' be necessary in negotiation . the Brexit Secretary call for ` ` imagination and flexibility on both side ' ' to make progress , but an atmosphere of suspicion appear to dominate yesterday . Mr Barnier also anger his British counterpart by write an article for a French newspaper in which he claim Britain would be less secure after Brexit . write in Le Monde , he say Brexit continue on Page @card@ William Hague : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ ` ` will have very practical consequence include on defence and security ' ' before list a series of what he see as negative impact for the UK . he say that the UK would no longer be part of the police agency Europol , or the European Defence Agency and would have no right to sit at the council of defence minister . he add : ` ` British defence research facility will not be able to benefit from EU funding , London will not be able to assume command of European operation . ' ' a Whitehall source say : ` ` this be risible nonsense . Mr Barnier know full well that the UK be the lead military and security power in Europe at a time when the threat to the continent have increase dramatically . after we leave , the UK will continue to guarantee European security and shape defence through bilateral relation - something Mr Barnier would do well to remember . ' ' a source close to the negotiation say : ` ` be n't that the EU want their cake and eat it ? they say ' you brit be out of this , this , this and this , but then they say ' we want the UK to work together ' . ' ' Tim Cross , a retire Major General , accuse Mr Barnier of drive a ` ` fear agenda ' ' while Gwythian Prins , emeritus research professor at the London School of Economics and a member of the Veterans for Britain campaign group , say : ` ` all of the example that he have outline be not benefit . ` ` they be all entanglement . they be thing that have impede the good use of our defence establishment and funding . ' ' he add that ` ` the primary alliance that matter to the UK ' ' be Nato and the Five eye intelligence partnership with Canada , New Zealand , Australia and the United States , and not EU institution . ` ` it ' S a very good illustration of how far out of touch these people in the Brussels bubble be , ' ' he say .
push for power to fine Britain for EU law infringement after leave ; the road to Brexit
EU NEGOTIATORS want to be able to impose huge fine on Britain for break European law for year after Brexit , it have emerge . the European Commission believe the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) should have the power to rule on British infringement of EU law that occur at any time before the March @card@ withdrawal , and to levy financial penalty . this attitude be a further hurdle for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who return to Brussels today for his second round of face-to-face negotiation . accord to EU negotiate paper , the European Commission , lead the talk for the EU , want the ECJ to be able to hear a case if ` ` fact relate ' ' to it occur at any point before Brexit day . EU official have put no statute of limitation on potential lawsuit . Bart Van Vooren , an associate lawyer in the Brussels office of the global law firm Covington and Burling , say : ` ` the way that infringement proceeding be bring be very much under the discretion of the commission ... and they be extremely politicise . ' ' Mr Van Vooren say there would be huge fallout in bring a case after Brexit . ` ` but never say never , ' ' he add . there be currently @card@ infringement proceeding against Britain , at different stage . the average duration of the case be @card@ month , accord to commission figure . end the supremacy of the ECJ over British law be a red line for the UK government in the negotiation . after Brexit , the UK would no longer have any British judge in the court . a Government spokesman say : ` ` it would be impossible to predict how long the ECJ would continue to issue judgment in respect of the United Kingdom . that be not in our interest . ' ' he add that the UK be clear the ECJ could only rule on ` ` pend ' ' case that be refer to it before Brexit day . but there be no agree UK-EU definition on when a case be ` ` pend ' ' . Mr Van Vooren say the EU would compromise on its current stance . ` ` this be a maximalist position , ' ' he say , ` ` when you ask for a salary increase , you do n't begin by ask for just ( Euro ) @card@ more - you go big than that . ' ' the Government spokesman point out that the ECJ have never fine the UK for non-compliance with EU law . the court ' S role will come up during today ' S talk between David Davis and his opposite number Michel Barnier , as the EU want the right of its citizen in the UK after Brexit to be guarantee by the European court . Britain insist these right will be guarantee under UK law and in the withdrawal agreement , which will be bind under international law and immune from parliamentary tamper . Mr Davis will tell Mr Barnier that the UK have make good progress since they meet a month ago , by introduce the Great repeal Bill into Parliament , and will make citizen ' right his personal priority for the talk . ahead of the negotiation , he say : ` ` Protecting the right of all our citizen be the priority for me go into this round and I ' m clear that it ' s something we must make real progress on . ' ' meanwhile , Fabian Picardo , Gibraltar ' s chief minister , say he have receive ` ` cast-iron assurance ' ' from Mr Davis that the territory will not be exclude from any agreement to secure a good post-Brexit trade deal by the EU and Spain ; a scenario that Mr Picardo warn would be a ` ` failure ' ' by the UK negotiating team . Tim Cullen : page @card@ talk timetable Divorce bill on the agenda Monday : David Davis , Brexit Secretary , will travel to Brussels to appear alongside Michel Barnier , the European Union ' S chief Brexit negotiator , to formally kick off the second round of exit talk . Monday to Wednesday : UK and EU official will engage in a series of ` ` working group ' ' , each of which will focus on a specific issue relate to Brexit . one will look at resolve the issue of what happen to EU citizen live in Britain after the date of departure , another will examine the thorny issue of the so-called ` ` Brexit bill ' ' and another will centre on the northern Irish border . negotiation be expect to be most difficult on the issue of the UK ' s divorce payment . official will seek to find common ground and identify area of difficulty . Thursday : Mr Davis will return to Brussels to take part in more talk to find solution to contentious issue . then : a round of talk will take place every month until October when both side hope to have finalise the term of Britain ' s exit from the EU . negotiation will then shift to focus on the UK ' s future trading arrangement with the bloc . it be hope a deal can be reach by summer @card@ so that there be time for the deal to be ratify by both side by March @card@ - the date of Brexit .
Scotland Mr Glum ' s view on Brexit ? oh , all right then ; Sketch h
if I have to choose a single word to describe Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow secretary of state for Brexit , it would be this . defeat . he look defeat . he sound defeat . each speech , and each interview , feel like one long heavy sigh of defeat . perhaps , behind closed door , he ' s different . perhaps , away from the camera , he thrum with vigour and verve . perhaps , among friend , family and his close colleague , he be a sunbeam in human form , a ceaseless , soul-nourishing source of energy , joy and inspiration . but not in public . in public , he radiate all the hope and optimism of a puncture bouncy castle . yesterday , Sir Keir drag himself to a conference hall near Parliament to set out Labour ' s position on Brexit . aside from glum , it be fairly long and dull , so let me summarise it . Labour ' s position on Brexit be essentially : ` ` oh , all right then . ` ` no Labour MP would ever put it like that . but - underneath all the noblesounding waffle about ` ` respect the result ' ' - that ' s what it amount to . ` ` oh , all right then . you win . we tell you Brexit be a bad idea . we still think it ' s a bad idea . but a lot of us be in seat that vote leave , and we ' re scare , and confuse , and our leader be useless , and our support be collapse before our eye , and we do n't know what else to do . so , in the extremely unlikely event that you let us form a government on June @card@ , we ' ll give you your precious Brexit . but , just so you understand : the Brexit we ' d negotiate would be as close as we could possibly get to stay in the EU . ' ' that ' S how Labour ' S message come across . they be , however , prepare to make one big concession - although not with any obvious enthusiasm . ` ` we have to be honest enough , ' ' sigh Sir Keir , ` ` to accept that the referendum result be largely a result of concern about freedom of movement . we have to listen to what people be tell us about immigration . ' ' because the truth , he groan , be that Labour could n't ` ` rub out what ' S happen ' ' . and , sometimes , ` ` you have to make choice about how you react to something you do n't want to happen . I do n't want us to leave . the Labour party campaign to leave . but ... ' ' that be a slip , of course . the Labour party campaign to remain . but with Jeremy Corbyn in charge , I admit it be sometimes difficult to tell . what a state they ' re in now , though . back Brexit , but in the most reluctant manner possible . which mean that if Brexit go well , they ' ll get none of the credit . and if it go badly , what be they go to say ? ` ` Yeah , we think this would happen . but we go along with it anyway . ' ' ' sometimes , you have to make choice about how you react to something you do n't want to happen '
May dare rebel to defy her on Brexit ; EU date to be set in law as PM shore up Eurosceptics in Cabinet with Mordaunt Customs union dilemma could put Good Friday Agreement in jeopardy
Theresa May today warn pro-European Tory rebel that she will not ` ` tolerate ' ' any attempt to undermine Brexit as she unveil plan to enshrine in law the date that Britain leave the EU . the Government last night table an amendment to commit Britain formally to leave the European Union at 11pm on March @card@ @card@ ahead of a debate and vote in the Commons next week . the amendment will effectively force pro-European MP to declare publicly if they oppose leave the EU in March @card@ . write in the Daily Telegraph , the Prime Minister warn MP that they must not use the passage of the EU Withdrawal Bill through Parliament over the next month to try to ` ` slow down or stop ' ' Brexit . the Prime Minister be also attempt to reassert her authority after lose two Cabinet minister in the space of a week while Brexit talk with Brussels remain deadlock with no sign of a breakthrough . she yesterday bow to the demand of Eurosceptic Tory MP by appoint Penny Mordaunt , a Brexit supporter who serve as a Royal Naval reservist , to replace Priti Patel as International Development Secretary . Mrs May say in her article : ` ` we will not tolerate attempt from any quarter to use the process of amendment to this bill as a mechanism to try to block the democratic wish of the British people by attempt to slow down or stop our departure from the European Union . ` ` the British people have be clear.Parliament itself vote for Article @card@ - and for this bill at its second reading . we be leave the European Union on March @card@ @card@ . ' ' she say that the government ' S amendment , which have cross-party backing , will set out in ` ` black and white ' ' that Britain will leave the EU . the comment will be see as a direct challenge to Tory rebel , who have say that they be prepare to defeat the government by siding with opposition party to secure a legally-binding vote on the final Brexit deal . the UK will leave at 11pm - an hour earlier than previously think - because the timing of Brexit under the term of Article @card@ be determine by Brussels . the Prime Minister say that while she be prepare to work with MP to ` ` improve ' ' the bill , they must ultimately ` ` come together ' ' and help single market and the custom union , which be ` ` necessary for North-South co-operation , the all-island economy and the protection of the Good Friday Agreement ' ' . the hardline Irish position , which be discuss at the EU ' s Brexit work group ahead of yesterday ' S talk , be describe by a senior EU source as reflect the ` ` state of play ' ' on the Irish question and reflect the ` ` guiding principle ' ' of the EU ' s approach to the problem . the Telegraph understand that Dublin be demand that Britain sign up to around @card@ EU rule and regulation , include many cover custom and agriculture , in order to ensure an open trade border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland . Dublin ' S demand present an apparently impossible dilemma to London , require either the UK remain in the EU Customs Union and accept the rule for the entire UK , or give Northern Ireland special status in the EU that would undermine the territorial integrity of the UK . British official have warn that any attempt to create a ` ` special status ' ' for Northern Ireland would have a potentially catastrophic destabilising effect on the Good Friday Agreement , pit unionist and nationalist against each other . in August , the UK propose create an invisible border that would use technology to create as ` ` frictionless and seamless a border as possible ' ' , but the proposal be swiftly dismiss as ` ` magical thinking ' ' by senior EU official . the Irish pushback come at a crucial moment in the Brexit process , which be deadlock over the Brexit bill , but now risk founder or be delay afresh over the question of Northern Ireland . a second EU source say that Dublin be ` ` pull the lever ' ' and have decide to use tension over the bill as the moment to ` ` exert maximum leverage ' ' and extract concession from the UK . ` ` Dublin see their leverage point be now , as Britain fight to get a ' sufficient progress ' designation , not in phase two , ' ' the source add . the gambit come just day after James Brokenshire , the Northern Ireland Secretary , travel to Brussels , and appear to dismiss the Irish position , tell a seminar that it be ` ` difficult to imagine how Northern Ireland could somehow remain ' in ' [ the EU ] ' ' .
this result have put the Brexit process in peril
we win the Brexit referendum through a genuine cross-party campaign . the message be clear : Brexit be not about leave or right , but right or wrong , and this message bring together people who have previously fight against each other in election contest . but Theresa May use this general election to try to turn the Tory party into the standard-bearer of Brexit , with the aim of wipe out Ukip , despite be a Remain supporter when the crunch come last year . what she misread be that many Ukip voter have come across from Labour . they want to hear more than just Brexit , they want a message of change . something that the ` ` strong and stable ' ' line simply do n't deliver in any way . once Jeremy Corbyn have say he would leave the EU and that free movement of people would come to an end , he begin to be see as an equal option to Mrs May . Mrs May lose the ensue personality contest . frankly , she be useless . but what particularly worry me , as the result pour in , be comment make not by her , but by David Davis . at 2:30am , as the election picture begin to emerge , he suggest Britain might not leave the single market and the custom union after all . if the only cabinet minister I think might hold the Brexit line be backslide , then the prospect be grim . there be no doubt that Mrs May , as a severely weaken prime minister , will now be treat as a joke in Brussels . her speech yesterday afternoon outside Downing Street border on the delusional , with virtually no recognition of the fact that the British people have fail to deliver her a mandate to negotiate Brexit . I have no doubt that the champagne cork have be pop in Brussels and that Jean-Claude Juncker ' S mood be buoy . as we enter tough negotiation , the Prime Minister be now vulnerable to her own eurofanatics keen to inflict commons defeat . that be a tragedy . before this election , nearly @card@ per cent of Briton have a settle view that Brexit should happen whether they have vote for it or not . the country have largely come together and be look ahead to an independent , self-govern future . but Mrs May ' S gamble have now reinvigorate a political class which never believe in Brexit . this be because she never do either , as become clear during the course of the campaign . when ask four time by Jeremy Paxman whether as a Remain voter she have change her mind , she could only mouth : ` ` I be follow the will of the people . ' ' do not underestimate the strength of opinion among Brexit voter follow all of this . they will be furious if we stay in the single market and the custom union , and if we keep pay money into a club whose court can overrule ours . this unnecessary election have imperilled a Brexit process that seem to have pass the point of no-return . so Ukip , which yesterday be consider irrelevant by voter who judge that the party have do its job , suddenly have bright prospect . it be , however , in need of serious reform . it be run by a bunch of amateur volunteer elect virtually at random on to a govern National Executive Committee ( NEC ) . the last NEC election see @card@ candidate vie for six place . you may as well play the child ' s game of pin the tail on the donkey . all professional campaigning structure have evaporate and the leader be simply not allow to lead . in January @card@ , for example , I oppose put Neil Hamilton at the top of the proportional representation list for the Welsh Assembly , but be outvote . I urge sanction against Douglas Carswell , who be clearly work against us , but be outvote . from early @card@ until the referendum campaign , I have to campaign on my own , without work with the official party structure . if I , back by considerable public support , be unable to lead the party , then we have a real problem . as I ponder whether to stand for leader again , I have to ask myself : ` ` be Ukip capable of serious reform ? ' ' if it be , it could become far big in the next general election than it have ever be before . the party of ` ` fruitcake and loony ' ' , as David Cameron famously dismiss it , achieve national victory in the European election of @card@ ; backslide on Brexit could see it or a successor reach even great high . the little people speak on June @card@ @card@ . if necessary they will speak again with an even loud voice .
Remainers ' pay lip service ' to Brexit vote ; Davis attack Labour MP in bitter Commons debate as timetable for trigger Article @card@ be approve
David Davis have accuse europhile MP of pay ` ` lip service ' ' to Brexit while do ` ` everything they can ' ' to stop it . the Secretary of State for Exiting the European union commit to produce a ` ` strategic plan ' ' for Brexit before trigger Article @card@ and formally begin Brexit negotiation . however he say the government would not do anything that might ` ` jeopardise our negotiate position ' ' as he warn that a second referendum would be ` ` destructive ' ' to negotiation . Mr Davis speak as MP embark on six hour of debate before wave through Theresa May ' S plan to trigger Brexit by the end of March next year . more than @card@ MP speak in the debate , which reveal bitter division in the Labour Party over migration and see Tory MP trade insult with one another on the floor of the Commons . MP vote overwhelmingly in favour of the government ' s Brexit timetable , in a motion that also commit the government to revealing detail about its plan . however a hardcore group of pro-Remain Labour MP vote against the motion , despite the fact it be first table by leader Jeremy Corbyn and largely accept by the government . Mr Davis say : ` ` many on the bench opposite pay lip service to respect the result of the referendum , while at the same time try to find new way to thwart and delay . ` ` the shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respect the will of the people . today we will see whether they be prepare to back Britain , support our plan to follow the instruction of the British people and leave the European union . ' ' Government ' on notice ' Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , call the government ' s decision to give more information about its plan for leave the EU a ` ` victory ' ' . he claim that he do not want to ` ` frustrate or delay ' ' Brexit , only to demand that the government must spell out its plan on the Single Market , transition and the Customs Union . he say he be put minister ` ` on notice ' ' that Labour would try to write its own plan for Brexit into law unless minister disclose more information . while Labour ' s official position be to back the government ' s amendment to invoke Article @card@ by March next year , many of its MP choose to rebel . ' Democratic outrage ' Twenty-three Labour MP vote against the motion , warn that it would enable minister to push ahead with Brexit without give away any more detail about their plan . Ben Bradshaw , a Labour MP , say : ` ` it in effect give a blank cheque for us to invoke Article @card@ by March without any of us be any the wise about the government ' S intention today . ' ' Mike Gapes , another Labour MP , say the government ' S amendment be a ` ` democratic outrage ' ' . Heidi Alexander say she support a second referendum on the term of leave the EU as she condemn the government ' s ` ` arbitrary ' ' timetable . labour divide on migration Ms Alexander say Britain need immigration because it be ` ` not have enough baby ' ' . she say : ` ` I be a 41-year-old woman without child . ` ` baby grow up to become taxpayer . who will be contribute to my pension and my care ? the answer be migrant and their child . ' ' by contrast Andy Burnham , Labour ' s candidate for the Manchester mayorality , criticise the party ' s ` ` paralysis ' ' over migration . ` ` reluctance to confront this debate be undermine the cohesion of our community and the safety of our street , ' ' he say . ` ` I be no longer prepared to be complicit in that . ' ' it come after Mr Corbyn suggest at Labour ' S conference last year that he favour uncontrolled immigration . Tory MP trade blow lead europhile Conservative MP come out in force during the debate , but Ken Clarke be the only member of the party to oppose the amendment . the former Tory chancellor say Mrs May ' s Brexit plan be ` ` extremely vague ' ' as he call for a White Paper . he mock the suggestion that she want a ` ` red , white and blue ' ' Brexit as he question whether the government have a plan at all . Peter Bone , a eurosceptic MP , attack Anna Soubry , a lead Remain campaigner and former employment minister . he say she ` ` have no time for this place ' ' while in government but be suddenly a ` ` great ' ' supporter of parliamentary sovereignty . Ms Soubry say she and her colleague be ` ` sick and tired ' ' of the abuse direct at them as she warn that many young people feel ` ` the old generation have steal their future ' ' . she say she be prepare to back Brexit but warn the Prime Minister against play ` ` silly game ' ' , add that she must publish a White Paper . remain be ' full of anger ' Eurosceptic Tory MP set out some red line of their own . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader , say he would rather stay in the EU than leave and remain part of the Customs Union . he say : ` ` it seem completely pointless to me to actually embroil ourselves on the Customs Union , go through all this rigmarole of argument and debate and row , only to find at the end of the day there be no jewel in the crown at the end . ' ' Michael Gove , a former chief whip , say Remain campaigner look back in ` ` anger , remorse and regret ' ' . MP who vote against Ken Clarke the only Conservative rebel ? Tory ( @card@ ) : Ken Clarke ? Labour ( @card@ ) : Rushanara Ali , Graham Allen , Ben Bradshaw , Ann Coffey , Neil Coyle , Stella Creasy , Geraint Davies , Jim Dowd , Louise Ellman , Chris Evans , Paul Farrelly , Mike Gapes , Helen Hayes , Meg Hillier , Peter Kyle , David Lammy , Chris Leslie , Ian Murray , Barry Sheerman , Tulip Siddiq , Angela Smith , Catherine West , Daniel Zeichner ? liberal democrat ( @card@ ) : Alistair Carmichael , Nick Clegg , Tim Farron , Sarah Olney , Mark Williams ? Green Party ( @card@ ) : Caroline Lucas ? SDLP ( @card@ ) : Mark Durkam , Alasdair McDonnell , Margaret Ritchie ? Independent ( @card@ ) : Natalie McGarry , Michelle Thomson ? plaid Cymru ( @card@ ) : Jonathan Edwards , Liz Saville-Roberts , Hywel Williams ? SNP ( @card@ ) : Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh , Hannah Bardel , Mhairi Black , Ian Blackford , Kirsty Blackman , Philip Boswell , Deidre Brock , Alan Brown , Lisa Cameron , Doug Chapman , Joanna Cherry , Ronnie Cowan , Angela Crawley , Martyn Day , Martin Docherty , Stuart Donaldson , Marion Fellows , Margaret Ferrier , Stephen Gethins , Patricia Gibson , Patrick Grady , Peter Grant , Neil Gray , Drew Hendry , Stewart Hosie , George Kerevan , Calum Kerr , Chris Law , John McNally , Angus MacNeil , Stuart McDonald , Callum McCaig , Anne McLaughlin , Carol Monaghan , Paul Monaghan , Roger Mullin , Gavin Newlands , John Nicolson , Brendan O'Hara , Kirsten Oswald , Steven Paterson , Angus Robertson , Alex Salmond , Tommy Sheppard , Chris Stephens , Alison Thewliss , Michael Weir , Eilidh Whiteford , Philippa Whitford , Corri Wilson , Peter Wishart ' the shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respect the will of the people '
Cheer up : a Brexit would help British GDP
as Lenin famously put it , a lie tell often enough become the truth . for some in the City , Brexit be a bit like bad weather , or major sport tournament : a convenient excuse for business face a tough time . of course , bad weather can depress a retailer ' S sale and football game can distract worker - but four time out of five , such ` ` explanation ' ' be merely trot out to camouflage deep , more genuine problem . the same be true of the uncertainty surround a possible Brexit : some investor be doubtless wait for the result before they allocate capital . so Brexit jitter will be have some , marginal impact on the economy , in the same way that some transaction be doubtless delay by a few week before last year ' S election . but most of what ' s happen in the economy have nothing to do with our national debate about the European Union . the top of the housing market have primarily be affect by a sharp hike in stamp duty and reduce demand from emerge market buyer . bank be lay staff off because high capital requirement and rock-bottom interest rate have hurt their business model , and there have be a global downturn in capital market activity . it be true , though , that some company have start to believe their own scare story about what would happen be we to quit the EU and have put some project on hold . more fool them : the UK will be fine regardless of how we vote , but unfortunately this will have a small impact on overall GDP . it be time to nail one myth , however : the idea that there have be no serious economic analysis suggest that we would be good off outside of the EU . that be n't so : most economist be pro-Remain , but there have be some excellent - and in my view - far more persuasive work on the Brexit side . five report in particular stand out , but there have also be other , as well as various analysis of our post-Brexit trading option . Open Europe have publish a range of estimate of the economic effect of Brexit . its comprehensive analysis suggest that we could be anywhere between 1.6pc well off and 2.2pc bad off . the good scenario be contingent on striking lot of free trade deal around the world and deregulate the economy ; the bad one if we fail to keep trade liberal and if we be to embrace protectionism . in my view , the first scenario would be by far the likely ; Open Europe ' S analysis be much more balanced and sensible than the Treasury ' S . the Centre for Economics and Business Research have also publish a nuanced report on the matter . it believe that there would be a shortterm hit from Brexit , last maybe two year , and sterling would fall 10pc to 15pc - but once the business community get use to the new arrangement , the low exchange rate would help attract foreign investment and ` ` most of the lose GDP would be recover and quite likely the economy would settle on a slightly fast growth path ' ' . by @card@ , GDP would be high than it be if we remain in the EU , though as ever the result be contingent on striking trade deal and remain an open , promigration economy . Andrew Lilico of Europe Economics , who also back Brexit , have point out there be many more such study . the one publish by the Mayor of London ' s economist ( lead by the excellent Gerard Lyons ) argue cogently that Brexit would enhance our economy compare with stay in the unreformed EU deliver by the Prime Minister . as to Capital Economics , run by our columnist Roger Bootle , its study commission by Woodford Investment Management argue that Brexit would n't have much of a net effect on the economy ' S performance . Capital Economics expect us to continue to outperform the rest of the EU either way . another fascinating approach be that of Patrick Minford in the new edition of ` ` Should Britain leave the EU ? economic analysis of a troubled relationship ' ' : his cost benefit analysis use a general equilibrium model suggest that we would be massively good off if we leave the EU and declare unilateral free trade . our consumer waste 4pc of GDP on excessive cost because of EU protectionism , and we would benefit greatly from deregulation also . last but not least , the Change or Go report from Business for Britain serialise in this newspaper contain much excellent analysis . it be untrue that there be no serious economic study that support the Brexit case . we need more , of course . but in the meantime take the pro-EU doom-mongers with a bucket of salt . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk ' it be untrue there be no serious economic study that support the Brexit case '
Brexit Big Band might not be music to taxpayer ' ear
if BREXIT negotiation be not painful enough , an experimental musician fund by the taxpayer have set Article @card@ to music . Matthew Herbert ' S Brexit Big Band have be give a share of a £182,000 grant , pay for by the Department for International Trade , to bankroll a tour of Europe . the tour be design to heal any rift cause by Brexit and will culminate in the release of an album in March @card@ to coincide with the day Britain formally leave the European Union . Mr Herbert ' S Brexit Big Band project be launch earlier this year and he have already set the word of Article @card@ to music and play the ` ` gently swing number ' ' to a devoted audience at the Barbican theatre in London . another number involve rip up hundred of copy of the Daily Mail , give the effect of a drumbeat . the Department for International Trade , preside over by Dr Liam Fox , a Brexit supporter , say the cash give to Mr Herbert , who oppose Brexit , be part of a £181,944 award divide among @card@ artist to help them ` ` achieve success as international artist ' ' .
May : it be EU ' s duty to agree a Brexit deal ; PM to lay out ' bold new economic and secuity partnership ' in crucial speechPM to highlight Britain ' s strength in key speech
Theresa May will today tell European Union leader that they share a ` ` profound sense of responsibility ' ' to forge a Brexit deal for the benefit of those who ` ` inherit the world we leave them ' ' . the Prime Minister will use a speech in Florence to tell European negotiator and head of state that ` ` the eye of the world be upon us ' ' and that they must use imagination to make a success of ` ` this chapter of our European history ' ' . employ positive rhetoric that evoke Boris Johnson ' s intervention in the Daily Telegraph last week , Mrs May will insist that ` ` the future be bright ' ' as she set out her vision of Britain ' s post-Brexit relationship with Europe . Downing Street say the speech - her most significant on Brexit since January - would include a blueprint for a ` ` bold new economic and security partnership ' ' and set out plan for a timelimited implementation period , offer ` ` certainty and clarity to business and citizen ' ' . the speech will contain no concrete offer on the Brexit bill , only an initial promise that Britain will continue to pay into EU fund during a two-year transition period - a sum likely to be around £20billion . although EU negotiator will continue to demand more , Mrs May will reassure them that no EU member state will have to pay more to Brussels before @card@ as a result of Brexit . Downing Street say the Florence speech would build on the vision Mrs may set out at Lancaster House in London in January , detail a bright future for both the UK and the EU . she be expect to say that if they can make a success of Brexit , ` ` then when this chapter of our European history be write , it will be remember not for the difference we face , but for the vision we show ; not for the challenge we endure but for the creativity we use to overcome them ; not for a relationship that end but a new partnership that begin . while the UK ' s departure from the EU be inevitably a difficult process , it be in all of our interest for our negotiation to succeed ... so I believe we share a profound sense of responsibility to make this change work smoothly and sensibly , not just for people today but for the next generation ' ' . Mrs May will also highlight Britain ' S strength such as its legal system , openness to investment , ease of do business and its university and research . Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , use a speech in Rome yesterday to pile pressure on Mrs May , say that ` ` settle account ' ' with the EU - in other word agree the so-called ` ` divorce bill ' ' - be the only way to ` ` build trust ' ' as Brexit talk continue . Mr Barnier also say there be ` ` only one year left ' ' to seal a deal , add : ` ` I ' m wonder why - beyond the progress we ' ve make on certain point - there be still today major uncertainty on each of the key issue of the first phase . ' ' however , he strike a note of optimism by quote the Florentine politician Niccolò Machiavelli - one of history ' s great plotter - by use the phrase : ` ` where the willingness be great , the difficulty can not be great . ' ' meanwhile in Ireland Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' s Brexit co-ordinator , criticise Boris Johnson over comment he make in his Telegraph essay on Brexit last Saturday , call him ` ` old-fashioned ' ' . the Telegraph understand that Mrs May be unlikely to repeat her claim that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' as she accept the phrase have be counterproductive . the Cabinet be yet to agree on the exact length of the transition period .
Scotland Ministers prepare for snap election ; Cabinet discuss spring vote after Tory MP quit to leave May face battle for Brexit ; May will win by landslide if election repeat Brexit vote
minister be prepare for an early general election after the first Conservative MP resign in protest at Theresa May ' s handling of Brexit . the prospect of the Prime Minister be force to call a national vote in order to deliver Brexit be now be ` ` openly discuss ' ' by minister , senior source say . it come after Stephen Phillips , the Leave-supporting MP for Sleaford and North Hykeham , bring about a byelection , say that he have ` ` irreconcilable policy difference with the current government ' ' . Mr Phillips say that he be resign because Mrs May have fail to ` ` appreciate the constitutional necessity ' ' of consult Parliament before invoke Article @card@ , which begin formal Brexit negotiation with Brussels . it prompt fear that Europhile Tories who oppose Brexit could follow him and trigger their own by-election to pile further pressure on Mrs May . the Prime Minister be face a battle to deliver Brexit after three high court judge rule on Thursday that Britain ' s departure from the EU can not take place without a parliamentary vote . Mrs May be now fight on several front , with battle against the court , MP who be demand an early election , peer who be threaten to water down her Brexit plan and Europe-an leader who say Britain will not find any concession during negotiation to leave the EU . but it be the prospect of an early election which now loom large . minister believe Mrs May need to win a mandate from the country to deliver a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . one member of the government say minister be discuss whether Mrs May will go to the country early in the spring . he say : ` ` the problem we have continue on Page @card@ report : page @card@ Charles Moore : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ get be we have a Brexit majority in the country and a Remain majority in Parliament . I have believe until this week , that we would be able to avoid an early election . give this court judgment , and the likelihood that we wo n't win the appeal , and give the intransigence in the Lords particularly , I be now openminded to an early election , as many colleague be . ' ' another member of the government add : ` ` if I be the Prime Minister I would go for it , but I do n't think her natural caution be go to allow her to do that . ' ' another minister say that Mrs May and her senior adviser be ` ` not minded ' ' to call an election , despite the grow pressure . ` ` all of her inclination be not to call an election , ' ' the minister say . ` ` she ' s only just get in the job . people who have just get a job that they want for a long time do n't want to re-apply for it . ' ' an analysis of the Brexit referendum have find that Mrs May would win a ` ` landslide ' ' if the June result be replicate across the country ' S constituency . with some poll suggest that a narrow majority of voter would now support remain in the EU , it have be argue that Mrs May would not win an overwhelming victory against Jeremy Corbyn if she go to the country . she have a slim commons majority of just @card@ . however , analysis find that if the referendum result be replicate use the @card@ general election boundary , leave would win @card@ seat and Remain would win just @card@ . if voter cast their ballot on this basis , Labour and the Liberal Democrats could struggle while the Conservatives and Ukip would be likely to boost their share of the vote . analysis by the University of East Anglia suggest that @card@ of Labour ' s current seat vote to leave while @card@ back stay inside the union , the party ' s official position . for the conservative , @card@ constituency vote leave , while just @card@ back Remain . meanwhile , peer and MP include Nick Clegg , yesterday openly say that they be now plot to delay or even block Brexit . they plan to amend a bill that Mrs May will be force to bring before both the Commons and Lords if the government lose an appeal against the ruling at the Supreme Court . the Prime Minister remain defiant and tell Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , and Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , she believe she will win the Supreme Court appeal and be able to trigger Article @card@ by the end of March next year . however , just after 11am yesterday she be deal another blow when Mr Phillips resign as a Conservative MP because of the government ' s refusal to discuss its Brexit plan in Parliament . minister and ally of Mrs May last night dismiss Mr Phillips as a ` ` loner ' ' and say he be ` ` incandescent ' ' when overlook for the role of Attorney General despite his legal qualification . one source say the resignation be ` ` contrived ' ' and that he ` ` simply want to go and earn more money ' ' . Mr Phillips do not inform No10 that he be intend to quit . in a resignation letter to his local constituency association , he criticise the government ' s failure to ` ` properly consult Parliament ' ' over Brexit . he also accuse the government of ` ` shirk ' ' its ` ` responsibility for unaccompanied child refugee ' ' . Nigel Farage have rule out a political comeback by fight the Sleaford and North Hykeham by-election . he tell the Daily Telegraph he be ` ` not interested ' ' in standing . the decision would appear to leave the way open for leadership hopeful Suzanne Evans to put her name forward as a Ukip candidate . @card@ vs @card@ how leave would overwhelm Remain in number of seat if a general election replicate the Brexit referendum result
Telegraph reader back Brexit and Johnson as next Tory leader ; Sovereignty key concern for reader back Brexit
more than two third of subscriber to the Daily Telegraph will vote for Britain to leave the European Union , accord to a survey . a survey of nearly @card@ subscriber find that @card@ per cent be intend to back Brexit at the June @card@ referendum . respondent also overwhelmingly back Boris Johnson to become the next leader of the Conservative Party , with @card@ per cent say they would ` ` prefer ' ' him to succeed David Cameron . Michael Gove , the Justice Secretary , who be back Brexit , be in second place on @card@ per cent of the vote , while Theresa May be in third place on @card@ per cent of the vote . George Osborne be trail on just @card@ per cent . the survey also find that @card@ per cent will ` ` definitely vote ' ' in the EU referendum . of those , @card@ per cent say that they have already decide how they would vote , with @card@ per cent yet to make up their mind . among all age group survey , the majority of people say they would back a leave vote . of those age between @card@ and @card@ , @card@ per cent say they would vote for Brexit , and @card@ per cent would back the Remain campaign . of those continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ subscriber age between @card@ and @card@ , @card@ per cent favour Brexit and @card@ per cent back Remain . people over the age of @card@ overwhelmingly back Brexit , with @card@ per cent say they would ` ` vote to leave the EU . question about the key issue in- fluencing their decision , @card@ per cent say that ` ` sovereignty of the British Parliament ' ' be key to determine their position ahead of the vote . of those survey , @card@ per cent say ` ` security ' ' be a key issue , @card@ per cent cite ` ` immigration ' ' , @card@ per cent say ` ` trade policy ' ' and @card@ per cent identi- fied Britain ' s ` ` ability to influence the EU ' ' . Mr Johnson be the clear favourite to become the next Conservative Party . leader among all age group survey . male subscriber be slightly more likely to back Mr Johnson , with @card@ per cent say they would ` ` prefer ' ' him to be the next party leader , compare with @card@ per cent of female subscriber . although Mrs May trail just behind Mr Gove among all subscriber , she be marginally more popular that the Justice Secretaryamong female voter . of the woman survey , @card@ per cent say that they back Mrs May , compare with @card@ per cent who say that they support Mr Gove . Mr Cameron have say he will serve a full second term before step down as Prime Minister . however , many Conservative MP believe he will have to bring forward his departure after the referendum , regardless of the result . more than @card@ MP be expect to table a vote of no confidence in Mr Cameron even if Britain vote to stay in the EU . they be angry at the way Mr Cameron have conduct the referendum campaign and believe he have make it an ` ` unfair fight ' ' by use government resource to make the case for a Remain vote . ? ? David Cameron ' s failure to meet the government ' s migration target be a ` ` crime ' ' , Boris Johnson have say . Mr Johnson say all Tory MP be ` ` convict of the same crime ' ' after stand on a ` ` no if , no but ' ' election platform that pledge to bring net migration to below @card@ . last month official figure reveal net migration have rise to the second high level on record .
find your voice and kill off Brexit , Blair tell MP ; Kill Brexit if you see a good way , say Blair
tony Blair , who call on MP and minister to rise up against Brexit on the eve of a vital commons vote , be brand ` ` beyond parody ' ' for demand tough control on migration yesterday . the former Labour prime minister tell politician to ` ` find the leadership within yourself ` ` ahead of the Brexit debate in Parliament and offer voter an alternative to leave . he claim people want a new party that consider broad issue and not just the decision to leave the EU , fuel claim he be on the verge of set one up himself . however , he be brand a hypocrite by minister for call for tight immigration rule after he fail to set limit when in office - something his own report conclude contribute to the vote to leave . speak on the BBC ' S Andrew Marr Show , Mr Blair , whose think tank come up with the plan to curb migration over the weekend , say politician should show leadership and resist the urge to support the government ' s Brexit plan at every turn . he say : ` ` if you believe there be a good way through ... there be good way of deal with the country ' S problem than Brexit , then at least try and explain that to the country . ` ` find the leadership within yourself ` ` to say to people there be a different and good way . what I ' m say to those in position of political leadership and those member of Parliament at the moment be guy , this be not an ordinary decision , so make this one where you ' re prepare to go out and if you think that there be a different and good way , put it before people and argue for it . ' ' his plea come on the eve of what will be a difficult few day for the government as it attempt to get the EU Withdrawal Bill through its first stage in the House of Commons . Labour be plan to oppose the bill , which seek to transpose EU law onto UK statute book , amid concern about how much power minister will be give . however , Ken Clarke , the most ardent opponent of Brexit on the Tory bench , claim it be ` ` hopeless ' ' to expect that Brexit could be reverse . he tell Sky News that the country be set on leave and opposition be a waste of time . and Sir Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , call Mr Blair a hypocrite , accuse him of be responsible for high level of EU migration in the first place . Brandon Lewis , the Immigration Minister , tweet : ` ` comment by Tony Blair this weekend be beyond parody in light of his action as PM . ' ' but Mr Blair refuse to apologise and say the country have change as a result of the economic crash , lead to a need for tight control . write in the Sunday Times , he say : ` ` Intelligent politics take account of such change . ' ' he call on Jeremy Corbyn to oppose leave altogether and suggest alternative way to address the concern which lead to the leave vote . Mr Blair also appear to call for a second referendum , say : ` ` this thing will go ahead unless it start to become obvious that the public be have second thought . ' ' he add : ` ` surely it ' S a very common sense thing to say that we take our final irrevocable decision once we see what the alternative be . ' ' he do not rule out the formation of a new political party , say : ` ` there be a huge amount of political energy out there in the country that be search for a home . if the two main party do n't give it a home it ' s go to search for a different home . ' '
US brewer apply for ' Brexit ' trademark
David Cameron could soon be drown his sorrow in his local over a ` ` Brexit ' ' cider , after the American brewer behind Samuel Adams submit a trademark application for the word . accord to the United States Patent and Trademark Office , the Boston Brewing Company file an application for the Brexit trademark on Friday , the day the surprise result of the EU referendum be announce . the brief filing say the application relate to ` ` hard cider ' ' . talk of the UK ' s loom secession from the EU have dominate Westminster , trading floor across the City , and home and business up and down the country . Briton ' surprise decision to vote for Brexit prompt Mr Cameron ' s shock resignation on Friday , and have spark a political crisis . the ramification of the referendum be likely to last for year , if not decade . if the Boston Brewing Company have its way , politician and trader exhaust from deal with the implication of Brexit will one day be able to lift their spirit by down a Brexit too . the Boston-based company plot the cider be list in the US and worth $ 2.1bn ( £1.6bn ) . Samuel Adams be its flagship brand , but it also produce Angry Orchard hard cider and Twisted Tea iced tea . it generate $ 966.5m in revenue last year and net profit of $ 90.7m . a spokesman for the company could not be reach for comment .
a second referendum would be a disaster ; Tories ' fragile commons majority have energise Remainers determine to reverse Brexit
' the public have vote and I do think it ' S seriously disrespectful and politically utterly counter-productive to say ' sorry guy , you ' ve get it wrong , we ' re go to try again ' . ' ' so say Vince Cable in September @card@ . since then , though , Cable have become Liberal Democrat leader . now he ' s push hard for a second referendum on European Union membership . earlier this week , Cable ' S party try pass a Commons amendment to hold a referendum on the final Brexit agreement in December @card@ , vow to campaign to stay in . the Liberal Democrats , it seem , be n't democrat at all . and they ' re only ' ' liberal ' ' until the electorate make a decision they oppose . despite recent progress in negotiation , the campaign to reverse Brexit be still gather pace . run by ultra-Remain MP and peer , it ' s back by big corporation which , benefit from the status quo , be determine to maintain it . after pious claim about ' ' respect the referendum ' ' , some now openly admit they want to upend the big vote in British history . ' ' first step towards defeat Brexit , ' ' tweet Lord Adonis after the government ' s recent commons defeat . these Brexit negotiation be tough . the self-serving Brussels bureaucracy be make it difficult for Britain to leave - to discourage other . but rocky departure talk do n't justify ignore a ' ' once in a generation ' ' vote , win by a margin of @card@ million people . ' ' this be your decision , ' ' say the Cameron government ' S outrageously pro-Remain mailshot , send to every UK household ahead of the June @card@ vote . ' ' the government will implement what you decide . ' ' in @card@ , Parliament vote by six-to-one to give the people the decision on the UK ' s EU membership . after the referendum , in February @card@ , Parliament vote again , overwhelmingly , to implement Article @card@ . in the June general election , the Conservatives and Labour both stand on a platform to leave the EU , include the single market and custom union . between them , they win over @card@ per cent of all vote . the two party call for a second referendum , the Liberal Democrats and Scottish Nationalists , both see their vote share fall . but the Tories ' fragile commons majority have energise those determine to reverse Brexit . Labour ' S policy constantly change , and currently amount to do or say anything necessary to topple the government . this week , deputy leader Tom Watson argue for a second referendum , just as Diane Abbott rule it out . amidst such chaos , some Remainers sense an opportunity . the scary Brexit be make to look - the difficulty constantly exaggerate , the potential economic gain utterly ignore - the great the chance the public can be railroad into vote again . then , with much of the political and medium establishment on side , and mass of campaign cash , Brexit can be block . a second Brexit referendum , though , would be an economic and political disaster . if agree , the UK ' S article @card@ negotiation would be destroy . the EU would have every incentive to offer the bad deal imaginable - ensure the term be reject by the electorate , with Britain ( and our money ) then stay , exactly as Brussels want . if , in contrast , the UK commit to leave the single market and custom union with no question of a second referendum , there be a huge incentive for EU government to strike agreeable trade term , give the value of British market to their exporter . the prospect of a second referendum would also seriously prolong business uncertainty , harm investment and job . if voter reject ' ' the deal ' ' , would there be another negotiation and yet another referendum ? the good of three , or five ? our political system would become paralyse by split , confusion and rancour . the ongoing uncertainty and instability would impact on financial market , hit sterling , equity and the broad business environment . and if Brexit be reverse , our subsequent EU membership would surely be on far bad term - with no rebate and perhaps no opt-out from the dysfunctional single currency . what do the Brexit-blockers say about recent renewed call from Germany ' S Martin Schultz , now on course to share power with Angela Merkel , for ' ' a United States of Europe ' ' ? be in no doubt , the drumbeat for a second EU referendum be get louder . Tony Blair be on manoeuvre , as be Vince Cable ' S predecessor Nick Clegg - who , since he lose his Commons seat last June , seem to be give more television airtime than ever . early in @card@ , ultra-Remainers in the Lords will do their utmost to thwart Brexit . those agitate for a second referendum must be call out , their argument expose as disastrous and anti-democratic . and minister need to move the conversation on from the process of leave to the outcome itself - present Brexit as what it be , an opportunity for national economic renewal . follow Liam Halligan on Twitter @ LiamHalligan ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Brexit be become a hostage to fortune Body : if the Europeans be get ready for the prospect of Jeremy Corbyn , so should Britain . we report today that EU official be prepare themselves for a scenario in which it ' S not a Tory government they have to negotiate with but a Labour one - a dystopian vision that would be bad for Brexit and bad for the country . what might seem at this moment like an internal Tory debate over the future of Theresa May could have long-term consequence . MP and voter need to think those consequence through . Britain can not afford socialism . the Conservative government can not afford to fail . cool head might say that little have change . yes , the Prime Minister ' S speech be an embarrassment , but most people have react with sympathy . and , yes , Mr Corbyn have a confident conference , but he ' S still Mr Corbyn . after two eventful week , YouGov put Labour on @card@ per cent in the poll and the Tory on @card@ per cent . the Tory , believe it or not , have actually go up one point . but this do n't mean British politics have find equilibrium . it mean it be stick on a knife edge . the Tories still have a thin parliamentary majority cobble together with the DUP . if there be an election , the result could still go either way . Eurosceptics might ask : ` ` so what ? the negotiation will continue regardless of who lead the country . ' ' but the very fact that the EU be think ahead to a change of government highlight how much Brexit be a hostage to fortune . it be clear from the very start of negotiation that Britain want to use talk to forge a free trade deal while the EU want to squeeze some goody out of us first . the British , be British , have generally be accommodate and practical . the Europeans have delay and prevaricate and kick up a stink in press conference . now they will exploit Mrs May ' s bad week and any backbench plot to insist that they ca n't even trust that the prime minister will be in office in a month ' S time . it ' S an old negotiate ploy : the reality be that the EU be in a considerably bad shape than Britain . its economy be stagnate ; the French , incredibly , have call for more integration to fix it . as for political stability , the Germans do n't have a government yet , the Dutch have n't have one for several month and Catalonia be on the brink of a secession that would make Brexit look like a walk in the park . nevertheless , there be no doubt that the quality of British political leadership will make a difference in regard to the quality of Brexit . under Mrs May , Britain have already make concession to the EU and there be obvious dispute between minister over the transition period and the settlement to follow . this be n't a strong negotiating position . there must be clarity on Britain ' s red line . there must be clarity about the transition deal it be willing to sign . and there must be clarity about the kind of Britain to be build afterwards . will we purchase access into the single market ? surrender legal sovereignty to smooth thing along ? or cut the chord completely ? Europe be watch and plan ahead . even if British politician talk down a hard Brexit , German business be prepare for one . Britain need a strong government to get the right Brexit . if the Tories collapse , Brexiteers should abandon any fantasy that Mr Corbyn could pick up the baton and do any well . his position on Europe be as concrete as jelly , his position on immigration or the European Court of Justice be as clear as mud . he would n't allow a proper vote on Brexit at his conference for the very good reason that he - a Marxist Eurosceptic - be at odd with most of his party over it . and even if Mr Corbyn be able to put together a novel governmental coalition of fanatic who love him and moderate who hate him , his domestic policy would doom the country . on top of any economic uncertainty cause by Brexit , he would add renationalisation and soar tax . perhaps the most sobering news from his conference week be that the shadow chancellor be prepare for a run on the pound if Labour win . even the Left acknowledge that Corbynism be n't just an oldfashioned , socialist moral crusade . it ' s a kamikaze mission . the success of Conservatism , the success of Brexit and the success of Britain be all entwine . that be why the next few day in Westminster be so important . it be n't good enough to adopt the ` ` muddle through ' ' perspective - to cross one ' S finger and hope that Labour remain stick around @card@ per cent and Brexit will go OK and the Tories can pull it all off in the end . that be not how politics work . government constantly have to make the case for themselves and to contrast their vision with that of their opponent . that be why the Tory party have to pull itself together and do what it fail to do at the election and fail to do at the conference : restore its authority . Catalonia be on the brink of a secession that would make Brexit look like a walk in the park it be n't good enough to cross one ' S finger and hope that Labour remain stick around @card@ per cent
Scotland Tusk say he ' s a dreamer about Britain stay - but it look like he ' S the only one
Donald TUSK yesterday invoke John Lennon as he say he ` ` dream ' ' that Britain could still say in the European union . the president of the European Council say it be not ` ` impossible ' ' that Brexit could be abandon , add : ` ` you may say I ' m a dreamer , but I ' m not the only one . ' ' it come on the day that Theresa May make a ` ` fair and serious offer ' ' to give EU citizen live in the UK the right to stay permanently after Brexit and be treat like British citizen . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , say that as a committed Anglophile he ` ` hate Brexit from every possible angle ' ' . Mr Tusk say : ` ` you can hear different prediction come from different people about the possible outcome of these negotiation - hard Brexit , soft Brexit or no deal . some of my British friend have even ask me whether Brexit could be reverse and whether I could imagine an outcome where the UK stay part of the EU . I tell them that , in fact , the European Union be build on dream that seem impossible to achieve . so , who know . you may say I ' m a dreamer , but I ' m not the only one . ' ' however , he be almost immediately contradict by other European leader include Jean Claude-Juncker , the president of the European Commission , who say : ` ` in Europe I never have illusion because I do n't want to lose them . ' ' Charles Michel , the Belgian prime minister , say : ` ` I be not a dreamer . and I be not the only one . ' ' it come as Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , say that Brexit be less of a ` ` priority ' ' than the future of the European Union . she say : ` ` I want to say clearly that , for me , shape the future for the @card@ take priority over the negotiation with Great Britain over withdrawal . naturally we will conduct these negotiation quickly and we will conduct them intensively . we will do everything to ensure that - as have be successfully do so far - the @card@ state stick together . ` ` we want this negotiation to take place in a good spirit . we know that we will want to work with Great Britain later . but the clear focus must be on the future of the @card@ , so that we have the good result . ' ' Emmanuel Macron , the French president , say he prefer to talk about Europe ' S ambition and plan than get involve in ` ` discussion last day and night on its dismantle ' ' . Mr Macron repeat his position that the door remain open for a U-turn on Brexit , but warn that it will be-come more difficult the long talk between David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Michel Barnier , the EU negotiator , continue . ` ` the door be open until the moment you walk through it . it ' S not up to me to say it ' S close , ' ' Mr Macron tell the Guardian . Mr Rutte suggest that he respect the outcome of last year ' S referendum , even if he regret it . ` ` I be an Anglophile , ' ' say Mr Rutte . ` ` you be one of our most beloved partner , so I hate Brexit from every angle . but you ca n't argue with democracy . ' ' Arriving at the European Council summit for the first time since this month ' s snap election leave her in a weakened position at the head of a minority government , Mrs May insist that talk on withdrawal have begin in a ` ` constructive ' ' way . ` ` what I be go to be set out today be clearly how the United Kingdom propose to protect the right of EU citizen live in the UK and see the right of UK citizen live in Europe protect , ' ' she say . ` ` that ' s be an important issue . we ' ve want it to be one of the early issue to be consider in the negotiation . that be now the case . that work be start . ' ' the Prime Minister also urge European leader to put pressure on social medium websites such as Whatsapp and Facebook to give security service access to encrypt message so they can tackle terrorist . Mrs May call on the EU to help ` ` rid terrorist material from the Internet in all our language ' ' in the wake of the Manchester , London Bridge and Finsbury Park terror attack . speak at the European council she say that the terror threat be ` ` evolve quickly ' ' , highlight the fact that in Manchester an improvise explosive device be use while in London the attack involve vehicle and knife . she say that technology company must ` ` fulfil their responsibility ' ' and automatically remove extremist content instead of act ` ` reactively ' ' once they be notify by user . she say that ` ` concerted pressure ' ' be need to stop end-to-end encryption , where even the social media company themselves can not access the content of message . Mr Juncker yesterday hail a new deal on EU defence co-operation which will see Europe sharing defence procurement and work together on small project such as logistic and officer training . he say : ` ` what be start in @card@ be happen now ... I say this be ' the sleeping princess ' of the Lisbon Treaty . well , the Princess be now awaken . ' '
Johnson tell by his deputy to stop ' play game '
Boris Johnson ' S deputy have tell the Foreign Secretary to stop ` ` playing game ' ' and describe claim by minister that Brexit will be straightforward as ` ` knuckle-headed lunacy ' ' . Sir Alan Duncan , a Foreign Office minister , say he believe that get a deal on Brexit will be ` ` fraught with difficulty ' ' and suggest that those who believe Brexit will be ` ` pain-free ' ' should not be in politics . his comment will be see as an attack on Mr Johnson , who have present one of the most optimistic vision of Brexit in government and say that the UK can ` ` have its cake and eat it ' ' . in the interview with the BBC ' S Brexit Means Brexit programme , which be broadcast tonight , Sir Alan also issue a warning to Mr Johnson . on the election result , he say : ` ` it ' S very easy to say , oh no , let ' s get rid of her [ Theresa May ] , but it be very difficult to say , ' this be what should follow ' . ` ` so unless we risk have split everywhere , complication , it do n't bear think about . just be sensible , be steady , no plot , no manoeuvre , make this work . ' ' Sir Alan add : ` ` he ' s [ Boris Johnson ] get to resist the temptation to play game . he must n't do that . he must just be part of the stable Cabinet government we want to see . ' ' Sir Alan , who insist in the documentary that Mrs May should ` ` absolutely not ' ' resign , also say Brexit will ultimately be a success . he say : ` ` you have see it in the way news have react over the last year . ` ` Everything be ascribe to Brexit.There will be bump in the road and the plaster will come off the ceiling from time to time . and there will be excitable headline , but we will end up in a very good place . ' '
IMF accuse of try to ' bully ' Briton into stay in the EU ; Europe @card@ ; Fund ' s ` ` anti-Brexit ' ' report warning of recession and risk to UK market will be release on eve of vote
the International Monetary Fund have be accuse of try to bully British voter into stay in the EU after it pledge to publish a report warning of the risk of a Brexit on the eve of the EU referendum . Christine Lagarde , the head of the IMF , say yesterday that a vote to leave the EU would have ` ` pretty bad to very , very bad consequence ' ' and could lead to a recession . she say that a Brexit would lead to a stock market crash and a steep fall in house price as she pledge to publish a more detailed analysis a week before the referendum on June @card@ . she defend the decision to intervene so close to the vote despite have delay a report ahead of the general election amid concern it would affect the result . Priti Patel , the Eurosceptic employment minister , accuse George Osborne of encourage the IMF to ` ` bully ' ' the British people . she say : ` ` the IMF warn Britain it be play with fire when it set out a plan to deal with the deficit . now our economy be strong than nearly every other major economy . ` ` today , the IMF be talk down Britain because we want to take back control from Brussels . they be wrong then , and they be wrong now . ` ` the EU-funded IMF should not interfere in our democratic debate a week before polling day . it appear the Chancellor be cash in favour to Ms Lagarde in order to encourage the IMF to bully the British people . ' ' the full report will be publish during purdah period , the @card@ day in the run up to the referendum in which the government be bar from make announcement that could affect it . Mrs Lagarde say she have ` ` not see anything that ' S positive ' ' about Brexit and warn that it could ` ` lead to a technical recession ' ' . she say that a Brexit could have a ` ` negative and substantial effect ' ' and lead to ` ` severe regional and global damage ' ' . she insist that she have a duty to assess the risk of a Brexit . when ask whether the Treasury have an input into the report , she reply : ` ` Heck , no ' ' . a vote for Brexit would result in a ` ` protracted period of heightened uncertainty ' ' and could lead to a sharp rise in interest rate , the IMF say , while . London ' s status as a ` ` global financial centre ' ' would be at risk of be ` ` erode ' ' . the IMF suggest that concern about a Brexit may have affect UK market in recent month . it point to a @card@ per cent decline in the number of commercial real estate transaction in the first three month of the year . the Chancellor say : ` ` the IMF also put to rest the fallacy that have be peddle by those who say Britain will have more money for public service if we be not pay into the EU budget . ` ` the IMF be very clear today , the hit to growth we could expect from a vote to leave would cost our public fi-nances more than the amount we would gain from no longer contributing to the EU budget . ' ' however , Lord Lamont , the pro-Brexit former chancellor , say : ` ` this daily avalanche of institutional propaganda be become ludicrous and pitiful . important institution be be politicise and use to make bloodcurdling forecast . ' ' Charles Moore : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
as haven of sensible regulation , the City might even gain from Brexit
Xavier Rolet , chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , think Brexit might end up cost the City @card@ job . Bank of England estimate be scarcely any more reassuring . collate contingency planning by City firm for a hard Brexit , the Bank put the cost at a possible @card@ job . Lloyd Blankfein , chief executive of Goldman Sachs , have also suggest in a tweet that thanks to Brexit , his new partially complete European headquarters in London may be leave substantially empty . it all sound and look pretty grim , and for certain , intra-European , activity it probably be . but it do n't mean the City be doom ; the clever operator be already look through the legal and economic quagmire of Brexit to the more conducive regulatory environment for international capital that could lie beyond , give the political will . a case in point be the European Union ' S so-called Solvency II directive , the subject last week of a deeply critical report by the UK parliamentary Treasury select committee . Brexit provide the opportunity to reform this 3,200-page piece of regulatory gobbledegook in a manner which put the competitiveness of the UK insurance industry first , rather than the misguided and destructive notion of consumer and systemic safety the directive be intend to give tooth to . but first , the negative . the City , it scarcely need say , be far from happy about Brexit , and particularly unhappy about the way the talk seem to be go . one senior banker I recently speak to put the chance of a decent deal for financial service at less than 10pc . I ' d be a bit more optimistic , but not much ; the government ' s narrative on this issue be instruct by little more than wishful thinking . it may be true that the City provide Europe with an invaluable service that it would be hard to replicate , but it do n't cut much ice with Europe ' s political class , where the ` ` Anglo-Saxon speculator ' ' be still routinely blame for almost any ill . a similar argument be often apply by Brexit optimist to trade in good ; they ' ve get more to lose than us because we ' ve get a whacking great deficit with Europe while Europe ' S get a whacking great surplus with us . as a statement of fact , this too be true , but it draw the wrong conclusion . a parallel can be make with my mother ' s home town of Cholsey , which be it - like Catalonia - to declare independence would no doubt argue that the rest of the country would be stupid not to continue with free trade because its export to Cholsey far exceed Cholsey ' S export to great Britain . indeed so , but the rest of the country would scarcely miss Cholsey if it be entirely wipe from the map , whereas Cholsey would suffer a crippling loss be it suddenly to be deny access to market elsewhere in Britain . on both good and service , the EU unfortunately hold most of the card . there be not a free trade agreement anywhere in existence that include the sort of deal that Britain be look for in financial service . it stretch credulity to think that an internal market determine that Britain - pour encourager les autres - be see to be bad off once it leave than before be about to set the precedent . remember , in the EU the politics always trump the economics . the same go for Liam Fox ' S hope of focus free trade talk with the US on service rather than good . the international trade secretary ' S suggestion be naive in the extreme . that the US be about to roll over and allow its financial service to be run out of London be about as likely as Elon Musk ' S plan for colonise Mars ; it ' S not go to happen in our life time . fortunately , financier , like business people , be first and foremost pragmatist ; when push come to shove , they will attempt to turn any loss into an opportunity . friendly regulation be one such chance . solvency II provide a particularly glaring example of European , regulatory overkill . it ' s be under construction since the turn of the century , and at quite shocking cost , recently come fully into operation . in total , HM Treasury have estimate a one-off cost to UK business of ` ` £2.6bn ... and ongoing cost at approximately £196m each year ' ' . the directive be not entirely without merit ; it may have improve risk management in Europe and it allow firm to write business in other EU member state without need to go through local regulator . but in other respect it be have some deeply negative consequence , considerably add to the cost of capital , undermine value to the consumer , and make the UK an increasingly unattractive place for insurance . the directive also unnecessarily drive insurer into safe , liquid asset - mainly government bond - to the detriment of long term business and infrastructure investment , for which the industry ' S nearly £2 trillion of asset under management be ideally suit . furthermore , the directive ' S impact be far great in Britain because of the mix of business in UK company and the number of firm require to adopt its model . insurance be simply a much big industry in Britain than elsewhere in Europe , and it be be force feed a particularly ill-suited form of regulation . the same may be true of other financial service . by liberalise accountancy rule , for instance , the City might be able to attract risk management of huge amount of additional , offshore international capital . my suggestion here be merely that of change the regulation , not abandon it entirely . nobody be advocate complete deregulation ; by make the system unsafe , this would be more likely to deter capital than attract it . but put the competitiveness of the City back centre stage as a regulatory priority - something that virtually disappear with the creation of the Prudential Regulatory Authority - have plenty to commend it over the alternative of seek regulatory equivalence with Europe , an approach which condemn the UK to rule take with no say in the way the rule be make . that ' S the bad of all possible world . what the Continental fear most be that the City break away entirely and compete on its own term for international business , leave the EU an entirely close zone for finance . get the regulation right , and what the UK lose on the one hand , it may gain on the other . ' what the Continental fear most be that the City break away entirely and compete on its own term for global business '
Germany value its identity just as much as all the car it export ; Mrs May be finally adapt to European sensitivity , and must use informal backchannels to aid Brexit
the worship of economics have always be see as an ideological illness of the Left . ever since Karl Marx , the Left have insist that economic relation define everything , from tension over immigration to cultural norm . Brexit have , however , bring to the fore another kind of economic idolatry , and now it be on the Right . once upon a time , we think that culture and religion drive international relation just as much as prosperity . in the age of secularism and the free market , we have convince ourselves that only trade matter . this be the argument of the Brexit campaign . we will get a deal , say the optimist , because trade trump everything . just wait till after the election in Germany , they say , and we ' ll see Berlin start to prioritise its carmaker , Paris its cheesemakers and vintner . the German and French election have now happen . Angela Merkel be wound but be head back to office . the go be suppose to get easy now . in reality , the hard part be yet to come . to understand why , do n't blame Brussels bureaucrat . ultimately , Europe ' s powerful capital call the shot . our problem be that many European , and particularly Germans , be still deeply sad and angry about Brexit . Germany ' S nationalist might have do unexpectedly well in yesterday ' S vote , but even they do n't dare argue in this campaign for leave the euro or the EU . the vast majority of Germans still see the EU as a treasure part of their identity and Brexit as a direct attack on it . this sound strange to British ear . but Germany be a young nation with a guilty history . for its national glue , it can not look back . instead , it look to the EU as the idealistic vehicle of its foreign policy . Germans might be reluctant to subsidise the euro , but they still do not see a tension between their strong , regional identity and their national or European self . take national border . in Britain , we associate border with security . in Germany , with its nine neighbour , it be more complicated . One German who grow up close to the Netherlands recently describe to me what the EU mean for her hometown . it go from be a backwater to a ` ` real place ' ' , she say . instead of drive an hour to Cologne , resident start to visit nearby Maastricht . the local economy boom . to such people , the idea of EU oppression or collapse be absurd . when Theresa May stand in Florence and wish the EU well , when she call the four freedom ` ` indivisible ' ' , she be recognise what the EU mean to these Europeans . and for the first time , she try to explain Brexit to them . Britain ` ` have never totally feel at home ' ' in the EU , she say , and its voter ` ` want more direct control ' ' of its government . this be shockingly overdue . just as we misunderstand German identity , many Europeans see Brexit purely as an act of aggressive , isolationist nationalism . Brexit , I be tell recently by a Swiss national , mean that Britain have vote to be ` ` selfish ' ' . this conflation of sovereignty with selfishness stem from a failure to understand British democracy . tell that Briton think the EU be undemocratic , this same Swiss national say : ` ` your government be undemocratic . look at the House of Lords . ' ' it be easy to explain legal limit on the Lords ' power . it be hard to explain the role of convention in British politics . the Queen do n't veto legislation . the Commons and Lords pass the Article @card@ bill , despite oppose Brexit . why ? well , it ' S instinctive to most British voter . we understand that , whatever the legal position , if the Lords veto Brexit , they risk abolition . likewise , we understand that our ancient court can be trust to protect the right of EU citizen even after Brexit . it be obvious to us that Brexit negotiation should focus on practical outcome over technical procedure . none of these thing be obvious across the Channel , where procedure be very important . the EU and Germany will , of course , selectively interpret law to suit their interest . but , operate in the Napoleonic legal tradition , they can not publicly admit that procedure come second to political priority . after all , without legal nicety , Britain might still exist , but the EU would n't . that do not mean the EU have none of its own unwritten convention . for example , ambitious official seek advancement do not just lobby people with formal , decision-making power . they also pay their respect to the ` ` father ' ' of the project . figure such as Helmut Schmidt , the late German chancellor and an early supporter of the euro , have no formal role in EU governance in late life , but still expect to be see by candidate seek high office . similarly , a London lawyer work in Paris soon learn that even small decision might need to be pass through senior manager to avoid trample on jurisdictional sensitivity . that these norm feel so alien to us owe a lot to our habit of look west , rather than east . ambitious young brit dream of pass a few year in New York . they do not study in Maastricht or seek internship in Brussels . our elite holiday in British enclave and rarely find themselves dine with their European counterpart after a day ' S skiing . exception to this rule have either marginalised themselves by refuse to accept Brexit or be neglect by the government . as a result , our government do not know what informal backchannels or helpful dinner date might unlock progress in the Brexit talk . our politician mock Jean-Claude Juncker ' S drinking , instead of find out where he do it and send a charming official to buy him a round . this might sound like a dirty world , but it be how diplomacy work . it do not mean we should be weak in negotiation . but sit in London compare the EU to the Nazis stir up a needlessly toxic mood among people whose support we want . Germany ' S carmaker be not just businesspeople : they be also proud Germans and Europhiles . with Mrs May ' s Florence speech , the government have finally start to realise that cultural cue matter . economics do , too , of course . but , as conservative thinker have always tell us , idea also drive history . it may be that Germany be so attach to its European ideal that it will risk tariff by insist on condition that Britain can not accept , such as the supremacy of EU law . I still think , in the end , that this wo n't happen . but instead of continue with its pointless infighting , our government should be work out how to let Germany concede ground while keep its pride intact . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Labour ' s show of unity as party claim credit for PM ' S speech ; May ' s Brexit speech
labour attempt to take the credit for Theresa May ' s Florence speech last night , claim it be identical to an article write by Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary . unusually , the party be unite on the issue of leave the European Union , state the Prime Minister should have commit to a transitional period a year ago . voice on the Right , Left and centre of the party come together after month of confusion over Brexit to claim Mrs May ' S speech offer nothing new . Jenny Chapman , the shadow Brexit minister say Mrs May , ` ` could just as easily have WhatsApp-ed Keir Starmer ' s article from the Observer and say exactly the same thing ' ' . Jeremy Corbyn say the speech show only that she have , ` ` listen to Labour and face up to the reality that Britain need a transition on the same basic term to provide stability for business and worker ' ' . Mr Corbyn add : ` ` that ' S because Theresa May and her Conservative Cabinet colleague be spend more time negotiate with each other rather than with the EU . ' ' the surprise show of unity come after month of confusion over where the party stand on Brexit , largely prompt by Mr Corbyn ' s ambiguity around whether the UK should seek permanent membership of the single market and custom union or not . Tom Watson , the deputy leader of the party , say Labour be the party of ` ` soft Brexit ' ' , add it should seek to remain inside both organisation even after Brexit . however this position be later slap down by Mr Corbyn ' S office , which make clear that while Britain should stay in both during the transition period , anything else be up for negotiation . now the party face a crunch vote at its conference this weekend when MP Alison McGovern and Heidi Alexander , couple with union and local party group , attempt to force the leader to back a pledge to continue membership of both . in do so Mr Corbyn would have to accept continued freedom of movement , which concern Labour MP in the North and Midlands , whose constituency back the decision to leave and want to see tough rule on migration . but the party be unite in pan Mrs May ' S speech , which be bill as a chance to re-set the negotiation with Brussels . Chris Leslie MP , who have speak out in favour of a soft Brexit , say : ` ` Need for transition pre-Brexit be obvious more than year ago . today ' s begrudge acknowledgement from PM say little about long-term deal . ' ' Ms chapman add : ` ` we be @card@ month in , the speech she give today have one hell of a build-up and it be very , very weak , disappointing , empty and ... clearly leave so many question unanswered , and I think many people will be scratch their head and wonder what on earth the fuss have be about with this speech . beyond commit to transition , which frankly everybody know be an inevitability , there really be n't very much to it . ' ' ' the speech she give today have one hell of a build-up and it be very , very weak , disappointing and empty '
lack of leadership put Brexit at risk , say watchdog ; Watchdog warn of Brexit ' horror show '
Theresa May ' S administration be put a successful Brexit at risk by fail to show ` ` active and energetic ' ' leadership , the head of the National Audit Office ( Nao ) have warn . in an unprecedented intervention , Sir Amyas Morse say Whitehall department be be leave to ` ` struggle on their own ' ' with Brexit because of a failure of leadership and direction . he say Brexit pose the ` ` big challenge ' ' to the nation since the Second World War , but government could ` ` come apart like a chocolate orange ' ' unless department be give more support . they should not be leave to decide which of their many project to prioritise , he say . Sir Amyas also reveal that David Davis ' s Brexit department fail to show him a plan for leave the European Union , despite his request for one , and could only offer a ` ` vague ' ' explanation as to why it be unable to do so . ` ` Government will need to be fast and flexible and act in a unified way , ' ' Sir Amyas say . he add that he have serious doubt about the likelihood of a unified approach , say : ` ` we have an issue here because of departmental government and what we do n't want to find be that at the first tap it come apart like a chocolate orange . ' ' Yesterday Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , hit back at Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson ' s declaration that the EU can ` ` go whistle ' ' if it think the UK will pay a large exit bill . Sir Amyas ' S remark follow week of speculation about the Mrs May ' s ability to lead after the election defeat and plot to replace her at no @card@ as well as fear of a rift between the PM and her Cabinet colleague over Brexit strategy . Sir Amyas say the scale of the task be ` ` only just start to click into people ' S awareness ' ' and that leave the EU mean minister would not have ` ` space for legislate on other issue ' ' . he also highlight fear that UK custom would descend into a ` ` horror show ' ' as Britain leave the union because a new £150million system may not be ready in time and without it million of trade transaction could be delay and tax lose . however , a Government spokesman say minister be ` ` alive to the task ahead ' ' . the criticism come as the Great repeal Bill come before the Commons today , in what Mr Davis call ` ` a major milestone ' ' . the Bill will convert EU law into UK law . meanwhile , the Office for Budget Responsibility be also publish a key policy paper today detail the fiscal risk of Brexit .
' I ' m investing in this Brexit basket of stock ' ; political turmoil offer many opportunity , Old Mutual ' S Dan Nickols tell Laura Suter
dan Nickols Old Mutual UK SMALLER COMPANIES vs benchmark index over five year since the EU referendum British stock market have soar to record high . however , there be some company that be still undervalue - have not rebound after the dramatic sell-off in market follow the vote . follow this week ' s announcement of a general election on June @card@ , the value of the pound rise , a move that some fund manager have anticipate . Dan Nickols , manager of the £1bn Old Mutual UK Smaller Companies fund , say this ` ` Brexit basket ' ' of UK company have the potential to outperform once the pound rise , after Brexit actually happen . Telegraph Money talk to him about the advantage of invest away from the FTSE giant , what this week ' s general election announcement mean for stock and his good ever investment . how do you pick stock ? I like to mix find good company with how I think the economy will perform . underpin the fund be the belief that company in our area be generally less well research than large company , so there should be good opportunity to identify those that be misprice . the average FTSE @card@ stock be cover by around @card@ analyst , in our world it ' S just three . this give us an opportunity to understand the investment case good than other in the market . how have you invest since Brexit ? one area we have pay particular attention to be the ` ` Brexit basket ' ' of domestically-focused UK stock . this grouping of stock , such as housebuilders , real estate , retail and leisure stock , be trade at a discount to the wide FTSE @card@ . these name be very sensitive to the value of the pound . give that the economy have perform pretty well since the referendum , I think it be fair to contend that sterling ' S fall be due to political development rather than economic development . if , over the next few week , month or year we get a soft Brexit or an extended transition period , I think that will be very sterling friendly , so very helpful for that collection of Brexit stock . among the stock we hold in this area be Crest Nicholson , the housebuilder , and Johnson Service , the drycleaning business , which be trade very cheaply . what do the general election mean for UK stock ? the calling of the election and the bounce in sterling do n't change my overall thinking about the composition of the portfolio . campaign ahead of the election may give us a good feel for the outcome of Brexit and the likely impact , particularly for the more economically-sensitive part of the portfolio . many small company will remain unaffected by the nuance of the debate , however . what other area do you like and dislike at the moment ? we see the ` ` reflation ' ' trade at the end of last year [ the expectation that inflation will return and boost market ] . that trend be clearly here to stay , even if it be temporarily pause for now . we increase our exposure to oil , mining company and capital good . example include Vesuvius , Senna , Bodycote , Cairn Energy and Hurricane Energy , although not all be large position . one place we be really avoid be travel and leisure , the pub and restaurant space . I think they just have a whole host of headwind that be here to stay for the foreseeable future , such as high food and energy cost , the national living wage , the apprentice levy , change to business rate . Life remain very difficult for company in that space for some time to come . we also do not hold many storebased retailer . operate in a conventional high street or retail park be increasingly tough . what have be your good and bad investment ? Fever-Tree have to be one of the good . we buy at the time it float on the stock market for £1.34 - now it trade above £15 . probably the bad be Blinkx , an advertising technology firm that be the subject of an aggressive piece of research argue that the stock should be short . we exit and lose money . do you have money in the fund ? how much ? yes I do . I ' d rather not say how much , but it ' S very meaningful to me and my family . what would you have do if you have n't be a manager ? teaching would have appeal . how to buy the fund as cheaply as possible the trust have a total cost ( the ` ` OCF ' ' or ` ` TER ' ' ) of 1.03pc a www.year.Be sure to buy the right ` ` share class ' ' , which be ` ` R ' ' . the investment shop through which you buy the fund will also levy a charge . some will charge a percentage of the amount invest , other will apply a flat annual fee . our colour code table at www.telegraph.co.uk/investing will guide you to the cheap fund shop for your circumstance .
Scotland Voters more concern about Brexit than Union
BREXIT be more of a concern to voter than keep the United Kingdom together , a poll for the Daily Telegraph have find . almost two third of people agree that Britain ' s EU departure matter more than stop the UK ' S break-up , while just @card@ per cent disagree . furthermore , a majority of respondent say they would still vote for Brexit even if they know it could trigger Scotland ' S independence . the result indicate that voter agree with Theresa May that no independence referendum should be hold until Brexit be complete . it also suggest there be no ` ` buyer ' S remorse ' ' for pull Britain out the EU despite a dramatic week in which the UK ' S future have be call into question . Theresa May yesterday pledge to fight ` ` heart and soul ' ' to keep the ` ` precious , precious Union ' ' together after the SNP demand a second referendum . the Prime Minister have reject a demand from Nicola Sturgeon for a vote before spring @card@ , when Britain be likely to leave the EU . an ORB poll of @card@ voter conduct on Wednesday and Thursday give an insight into how the week ' S event have affect their view . ask whether they would still back Brexit ` ` even if I know it could lead to the breakup of the UK ' ' , @card@ per cent of voter agree and @card@ per cent disagree . the rest say they do not know . there be also support for Mrs May ' s stance that a Scottish independence referendum should not be hold before spring @card@ . almost @card@ per cent think do prepare for a referendum would undermine negotiation for Brexit , while just @card@ per cent disagree . however , most voter also say that they do not want Scotland to become independent . when ask if Brexit be more important than the potential break-up of the UK , a majority of voter in every part of Britain except Scotland say yes . Mrs May yesterday dismiss Ms Sturgeon ' S plan for a new independence referendum as ` ` muddle on muddle ' ' as she reject the ` ` divisive , obsessive ' ' nationalism of the SNP . the Prime Minister in her speech to the Conservative Spring Forum in Cardiff d to suggest that Ms Sturgeon have be plot since last year to use Brexit as a ` ` pretext ' ' for a referendum . she also defend the ` ` precious , precious Union ' ' and say she want the country to become more , not less , unite . Mrs May tell delegate : ` ` Our party believe heart and soul in our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . the precious bond between four nation : England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . but that union be more than just a constitutional artefact . it be a union between all of our citizen , whoever we be and wherever we ' re from . ' ' Ms Sturgeon say her ` ` intention ' ' be to get the legal power from the Prime Minister to stage another vote and she would not outline possible plan B to the Scottish people ` ` at this stage ' ' .
Britain urge unbroken talk to clear Brexit bill deadlock
Britain be press for ` ` continuous ' ' Brexit negotiation in a bid to unpick the continue deadlock between the two side over the so-called ` ` Brexit bill ' ' , the Daily Telegraph can disclose . the British gambit come as senior UK and EU official seek to agree a new timetable for talk yesterday , while Germany continue to hold a hard line on Brexit talk , delay discussion on a new EU negotiating mandate for the next phase of the negotiation on trade and the future relationship . Senior UK source say continuous talk could help to ` ` clear the thicket ' ' of the issue between the side . ` ` we need to create an administrative process that give both side room to move , ' ' the UK source say , acknowledge that the political impasse over EU demand for a ( Euro ) 60billion ( £53billion ) settlement have leave official ` ` little to discuss ' ' . the Department for Exiting the European Union yesterday disclose that the government be examine the potential impact of Brexit across @card@ sector , include defence and agriculture . cabinet minister will today discuss Brexit ` ` preparation for all contingency ' ' . it come as three of Britain ' S lead Europhile politician - Nick Clegg , Ken Clarke and Lord Adonis - meet with Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , in Brussels . the all-party trio , dub ` ` the rebel ' ' by Mr Clegg , deny they be undermine the government or the vote for Brexit .
Scotland Britain could face second Brexit bill - and @card@ year before any money back
Britain could be force to pay a ` ` second Brexit bill ' ' of £30billion and make to wait @card@ year before get any money back from the EU bank , a senior European official have claim . Alexander Stubb , vice-president of the European Investment Bank , say that the UK could be force to pay billion of pound after Brexit if project to which it have contribute fail . he also say that Britain could have to wait until @card@ before the EU ' S bank return £3billion the country have pay into it since @card@ . Eurosceptic Tory MP say this be ` ` completely absurd ' ' and would make a no-deal Brexit more likely . there be further turmoil in David Davis ' s Brexit department yesterday as he be force to replace his third minister in five month . baroness Anelay resign as Minister of State for Exiting the European union as a result of an injury suffer while climb out of a Black Hawk helicopter two year ago when she be a Foreign Office minister . Mr Davis ' S team be shake up in June when David Jones be sack by Theresa May and Lord Bridges resign in the aftermath of the general election . the Brexit Secretary have already lose James Chapman , his former chief of staff , who quit during the campaign . last month Oliver Robbins , the top official at the department , leave to take up a role report directly to Mrs May . Lady Anelay say she be ` ` certain ' ' that Brexit would be a success . write on the ConservativeHome website , she say : ` ` we be get more control of our border , our money and our law , and at the same time the course the European Union be take - bold as it may be - be deeply integrationist , and increasingly unpalatable . ' ' meanwhile , Mr Stubb reject a suggestion make by the European Union Committee of the House of Lords earlier this year that the EU bank may actually owe the UK £9 billion ( ( Euro ) @card@ billion ) . the UK have a @card@ per cent share in the bank which fund project in the bloc but will leave after Brexit because only EU state be allow to be member . the Lords committee say in a report that ` ` the UK might expect its ( Euro ) 3.5billion in call up capital to be return ' ' if it stop be a shareholder , and suggest the sum due could even be in the region of ( Euro ) 10billion . but Mr Stubb say the latter figure be ` ` incorrect ' ' when it be put to him on BBC Radio @card@ ' s today programme yesterday . Philip Davies , the Tory MP for Shipley , say the legal ground for the first bill for Brexit have not yet be demonstrate , let alone the justification for a second one . he say : ` ` I think it have already be establish that there be no legal basis for any bill to leave the EU . it ' S highly unlikely that there be a legal basis for this one . ' ' ( Euro ) @card@ bn the amount of money the EU say Britain may still have to pay if project it have previously contribute to fail
May refuse to say if she would vote leave now ; No-deal Britain could join North American alliance
Theresa May have repeatedly refuse to say whether she would vote for Brexit in a second EU referendum . the Prime Minister , who back Remain during last year ' s Brexit vote , say she would ` ` look at everything ' ' and ` ` come to a judgment ' ' . meanwhile , Donald Tusk , the European Council president , have signal for the first time that EU negotiator be take a ` ` no deal ' ' outcome seriously , with Brexit talk be put on hold today . Mr Tusk say that if the talk continue at a ` ` slow pace ' ' without sufficient progress be make , ` ` we will have to think about where we be head ' ' . Mrs May yesterday initially decline to answer the question about how she would vote , dismiss it as ` ` hypothetical ' ' . but after be press she say : ` ` I could sit here and I could say I ' d still vote Remain or I ' d vote leave , just to give you an answer . I ' m be open and honest with you . what I do last time round be I look at everything and come to a judgment and I ' d do exactly the same this time round . ' ' she add : ` ` but we ' re not have another referendum . that ' S absolutely crucial . we be go to deliver on the vote of the British people , we be go to deliver Brexit . March @card@ @card@ , we come out of the European Union . ' ' the comment risk antagonise Eurosceptic Tory MP already concern about the UK be bind by the European Court of Justice during a transition period . it will also put pressure on other Cabinet minister who vote Remain . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , suggest on the BBC ' s Newsnight that he would vote Remain again . ask if he believe the country would have be good off in the EU , he say : ` ` it would have be . ' ' add : ` ` I do n't resile from my view . ' ' Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , snap that ` ` Brexit be not a game ' ' in an ill-tempered riposte to Theresa May ' s comment that ` ` the ball be in their court ' ' . Mrs May will arrive in Brussels next Thursday for a meeting of the European Council , at which she be likely to be tell that insufficient progress have be make for trade talk to begin . negotiator have be expect to talk about the so-called Brexit ` ` divorce bill ' ' during this week ' s round of talk , but it have emerge that after discussion on citizen ' right and the Irish border on Monday and Tuesday no talk on money will be hold today . ask whether the ball be in his court as he leave a lunch meeting in Brussels with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , Mr Barnier say : ` ` Brexit be not a game . do n't forget . ' ' the Chancellor Philip Hammond say the treasury be prepare for ` ` every outcome ' ' include a no-deal scenario . ` ` we will find any necessary funding and we will only spend it when it ' S responsible to do so , ' ' he write in the Times . he appeal for European leader to be ` ` more flexible and creative ' ' . it also emerge yesterday that Britain could join a formal trade alliance with the US , Canada and Mexico after Brexit under plan be consider by minister . the Daily Telegraph understand that the government be examine the possibility of join the North American Free Trade Agreement , know as Nafta , as part of its planning for a ` ` no deal ' ' scenario . join Nafta would enable the UK to boost its trade with three of the world ' s economic powerhouse , which have a combined gross domestic product of £17.2trillion , compare with the EU ' s GDP of £15.7trillion . together , Britain , the US , Canada and Mexico account for more than @card@ per cent of the entire global economy . ' we ' re not have another referendum . March @card@ @card@ , we come out of the European Union '
Scotland find your voice and kill off Brexit , Blair tell MP
tony Blair have call on MP and minister to rise up against Brexit on the eve of a crunch commons vote as he be brand ` ` beyond parody ' ' for demand tough control on migration yesterday . the former Labour Prime Minister tell politician to ` ` find the leadership within yourself ` ` ahead of the Brexit debate in Parliament and offer voter an alternative to leave . he claim people want a new party which consider broad issue and not just the decision to leave the EU , add fuel to claim he be on the verge of set one up . however , the anti-Brexit campaigner be brand a hypocrite by minister for call for tight immigration rule after fail to set limit when he be prime minister - a fact his own report say contribute to the Brexit vote . speak on the BBC ' S Andrew Marr Show , Mr Blair , whose think tank produce a plan to curb migration , say politician should show leadership and resist the urge to support the government ' s Brexit plan at every turn . editorial comment : page @card@
Scotland Sturgeon ' s plan risk referendum before Brexit uncertainty end ; Report warn that First Minister ' S timescale could see separation vote hold before full picture emerge
there will still be ` ` substantial uncertainty ' ' about the implication of Brexit by the time Nicola Sturgeon want to hold a second independence referendum , a think tank have warn . the Scottish Centre on European Relations ( SCER ) say a substantial amount of information would be available by March @card@ . but it also say the effect of leave the European Union and Scotland ' s future relationship with the EU would not yet be clear . the independent think tank publish its late policy paper amid a stand-off between Scotland ' S First Minister and the Prime Minister over the prospect of another vote on breaking-up Britain . Ms Sturgeon have insist that hold a vote some time between autumn next year and spring @card@ would allow Scot to make an informed choice between Brexit and independence . Theresa May , however , have make clear that ` ` now be not the time ' ' for Scotland ' s future in the UK to be put to the vote . Dr Kirsty Hughes , an expert on European politics and founder of the SCER , say : ` ` if there be a second independence referendum in March @card@ , Scottish voter would know a lot more than now about the outcome of the Brexit talk , and about whether an independent Scotland would definitely aim to re-join the EU . it will not be a moment for fudge that choice . ' ' in the paper , she argue : ` ` overall , by early @card@ , there will be substantial information available on the UK ' s exit deal ( if there be one ) , include the transition phase and the outline of the propose future UK-EU27 trade deal . ` ` if Scotland do hold an independence referendum in March @card@ , then Scottish voter would have more information on Brexit , and on the goal for an independent Scotland vis-a-vis the EU or EEA ( European Economic Area ) , than they do now . ` ` but there would be some substantial uncertainty still and plenty of room for debate about the implication of the UK ' s Brexit deal in @card@ and of the potential impact - positive and negative - if an independent Scotland join the EU or EEA and the risk it might fail in such an attempt . ' ' if the UK and the other @card@ EU country ` ` agree and ratify a divorce deal within the two-year timetable ' ' lay down by Article @card@ , Ms Hughes say many detail of this would be clear by March @card@ , include over issue such as the right of EU citizen live in the UK , the objective of future trade deal between the UK and Europe and what transition arrangement will be put in place when Britain depart . the UK ' s Brexit transition phase will be ` ` significant ' ' to the debate over Scotland ' S future , she add . ` ` if Scotland be to vote ' yes ' in March @card@ to independence , it would take at least @card@ month or long to become independent , ' ' she state in the paper . a spokesman for the Scottish Government say Ms Sturgeon have make clear that the choice over Scotland ' S future ` ` must be an informed one ' ' . he add : ` ` that mean that both the term of Brexit and the implication and opportunity of independence must be clear in advance of the referendum . ` ` the First Minister will set out the next step to parliament in the come week as we continue our work to protect Scotland ' S economy and our public service from the impact of Brexit . ' ' ' there would be plenty of room for debate about the implication of the UK ' s Brexit deal in @card@ '
warning on single market ' ignore ' in Brexit report
remain MP on a powerful Brexit committee have be accuse of ignore expert evidence about Britain leave the single market and custom union as a major report be publish today . the report from the Exiting the European Union committee urge Theresa May to publish a detailed White Paper on her plan for Brexit by the middle of next month . the MP also ask the Prime Minister to make clear whether she want to keep Britain in the European single market and custom union . the report be sign off by senior Conservative Brexiteers include John Whittingdale , Michael Gove , Dominic Raab and Peter Lilley . there be frustration among Conservative member of the committee that the report ignore expert who have say Britain would have to quit the custom union and single market after leave the EU . one MP say the committee leave out ` ` the most interesting bit of evidence ' ' and that Conservative effort to address this be ` ` rebuff ' ' . Mr Raab say : ` ` the expert witness consensus be Britain will not stay a formal member of the single market or custom union , but aim to maintain barrier-free trade . ' ' the Prime Minister sign up to a Labour motion require her to publish detail of her plan for Brexit before the invocation of Article @card@ by the end of next month . she have so far hold back from say whether MP will be grant a vote on the Brexit deal . the report say minister should seek an outline framework of the future trading relationship with the EU as part of the Article @card@ negotiation , with transitional arrangement to allow trade to continue if a deal be not reach in time for the expect Brexit in @card@ . Hilary Benn , Labour chairman of the committee , say Parliament need to be give a vote on a deal ` ` and the government should make this clear now ' ' . it come as Bill English , New Zealand ' s prime minister , say he be impress by the ` ` clarity and determination ' ' Mrs May have bring to Brexit . while Mrs May have face criticism for reveal little about her Brexit plan , Mr English praise the way his government have be keep inform and say he hope negotiation could start soon on a ` ` high quality ' ' trade deal . @card@ the year that Britain be expect to exit the EU . the MP ' report say a plan for trade must be in place before then
Boris : cash saving from Brexit be million more than estimate ; ' there be an error on the side of the bus , ' claim Foreign Secretary , allude to campaign promise
the leave campaign ' s claim that £350million a week would be save by Britain leave the EU be ` ` grossly underestimate ' ' , Boris Johnson say last night . the Foreign Secretary say the UK ' s weekly gross contribution to the EU would in fact rise to £438million by the end of a post-Brexit transition period , as he continue to pledge the NHS would be ` ` top of the list ' ' when the spare cash become available . his claim , in an interview with the Guardian , threaten to reignite the row with Remain voter who claim Leavers be trick by the promise into voting for Brexit , after the figure be print on the side of a campaign bus . but Mr Johnson , who insist the UK ' s EU contribution be already up to £362million and set to rise annually through to @card@ , say : ` ` there be an error on the side of the bus . we grossly underestimate the sum over which we would be able to take back control . ' ' his remark come on the day when it emerge freedom of movement in Britain could continue for up to two year after Brexit , if British negotiator cave to fresh demand from Brussel ahead of talk over an UK-EU transition deal . the bloc want EU citizen arrive in the UK before @card@ to be allow to live and work in the UK indefinitely as the price for a Brexit transition period . Theresa May must secure a transition to reassure anxious business , but agree to the demand risk the fury of Brexiteers who want March @card@ @card@ to spell the end of freedom of movement in Britain . capitulation would mean an extra @card@ month to two year of unlimited EU migration , with people arrive benefit from the same protected status as EU citizen live in Britain before ` ` Brexit Day ' ' . draft instruction for Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , have reveal the bloc ' S toughen stance ahead of transition period talk . the transition agreement will come into force after Brexit Day , effectively ` ` deep-freeze ' ' the UK ' s membership of the single market and custom union for about two year , give business and the government time to prepare for departure . in December , the UK and European Commission agree that EU citizen live in Britain before the cut-off date would have their residency right protect after Brexit . the EU now want the cut-off date to be push back to the end of the transition period and the special status for EU citizen extend to those arrive in the UK before the last day of transition at the end of @card@ . people arrive in Britain after Brexit but before @card@ could stay and work in the UK indefinitely . central and eastern European country , include Poland , be behind the demand , accord to the Financial Times .
May head to Brussel for talk to save Brexit ; MP take aback as the Prime Minister leave for meeting with EU leader today to break deadlock
Theresa May will travel to Brussels today for talk with EU leader amid report that she have personally urge Angela Merkel to end the Brexit stand-off . the meeting come day after Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the EU Commission , and Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , say talk about Britain leave the EU in March @card@ be deadlock . Mrs May be take Oliver Robbins , the civil servant lead the Brexit talk , with her for the dinner - the first since a frosty meal in Downing Street in April . Mr Juncker be report to have launch a scathing attack on Mrs May during the April dinner , say that Brexit ` ` can not be a success ' ' . Mrs May , who will also be join by Brexit Secretary David Davis , be expect to have discussion with European counterpart over the come day ahead of a meeting of all EU leader later in the week . Downing Street source insist today ' S meeting have ` ` be in the diary for week ' ' but the announcement cause surprise in Westminster , and come after last week ' S negotiation end with little movement . the visit come a day after Mrs May phone Mrs Merkel , the German Chancellor , to urge her to help end the Brexit stand-off at this week ' s EU summit in Brussels . France and Germany be understand to have push for change to a draft paper prepare for Thursday ' s summit to avoid give the impression that the EU will agree guideline on a transition period as soon as ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make in issue relate to the exit . No10 be keen to open the next stage of talk about Britain ' s relationship with the EU after Brexit . a colleague of Mrs May tell the Financial Times : ` ` we ' ve almost run out of thing to talk about . it come down to money : by discuss the transition deal at the same time , you create a broad framework for talk about the money . ' ' the news come amid concern a nodeal Brexit could place added strain of up to £500million a year on the NHS . a report back by the NHS Confederation suggest that ten of thousand of British pensioner live in Europe could return home if the government be unable to strike a deal with the EU to continue exist healthcare arrangement . under EU law , European citizen benefit from reciprocal right to healthcare when they be in any of the @card@ member state . Brussels and the UK be currently negotiate on what will happen to those right after Britain ' s withdrawal in March @card@ . the report , compile by the Brexit Health Alliance , warn that patient could suffer dramatically if reciprocal right to healthcare be scrap , because they could face huge medical bill if they fall ill while travel abroad , while the cost of travel insurance could prove prohibitive for people with exist condition . the £500million figure be base on analysis that estimate the cost of care for everyone who could return to the UK at £1billion a year , minus the £500million that would no longer have to be pay to European health system . it do not take into account any income that could be generate from EU citizen potentially have to pay for NHS care when they be in the UK .
Scotland May ' s Brexit plan in disarray ; Two of Prime Minister ' s most senior minister refuse to back radical plan to restrict EU migration
Theresa May ' S Brexit plan be in chaos last night as two of her most senior minister distance themselves from leak immigration policy amid a backlash from Brussels and business leader . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , and Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , both have misgiving about radical plan to curb migration , which include a two-year maximum stay for low-skilled worker , whose overall number could also be cap . Ms Rudd have ` ` reservation ' ' about the migration blueprint even though it be draw up by official in her own department , and may favour light touch regulation that make it easy for business to hire EU worker . Mr Green , who be one of Mrs May ' s most trust adviser , have hint the government could row back on the proposal - which have prove popular with Brexiteers - because he be concern at the effect they will have on EU withdrawal negotiation . the migration plan be describe as ` ` toxic ' ' in Brussels , where Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , have suggest Britain now have no chance of a ` ` bespoke ' ' transition deal . Mr Barnier have tell colleague the UK will have to ` ` photocopy ' ' the agreement that Norway have with the EU . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Nick Timothy , Mrs May ' s former chief of staff , say that Britain ` ` must be prepare for a ' no deal ' scenario ' ' because ` ` hardliner in Brussels , Paris and Berlin might prevail in their pursuit of a punishment deal that Britain can not accept ' ' . and there be embarrassment yesterday for Mrs May when the leader of some FTSE @card@ company disclose that they have refuse a request from Downing Street to sign a letter back the government ' s position on Brexit . the battle for Brexit enter a new phase today when MP begin debate the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill , also know as the repeal bill , which Labour will oppose when it be put to a vote next week . Mrs May will today appeal to MP from all party to ` ` help get the good Brexit for Britain ' ' by voting for ` ` the single most important step we can take to prevent a cliff-edge for people and business , because it provide legal certainty ' ' . but as well as face opposition from Labour , Mrs May face turmoil within her own party and in Brussels over Brexit plan for immigration . a Home Office document leak on Tuesday contain proposal for a cap on low-skilled worker and three-year to five-year work permit for highly skilled EU migrant . it also call for fingerprint and criminal record check for foreign worker . one minister tell the Daily Telegraph that Ms Rudd ` ` have reservation about it ' ' and want to wait for the finding of a Migration Advisory Committee report next year - which may recommend less strict rule on foreign worker - to enable government policy to ` ` ensure continuity for business ' ' . another source say Ms Rudd be ` ` absolutely commit to reduce net migration to sustainable level and deliver what people vote for at the referendum ' ' . Damian Green , the de facto deputy prime minister , have tell friend that minister will have to do ` ` some smooth over ' ' with Brussels , where the proposal in the document meet with hostility . one source say Mr Green believe that the leak paper have not ` ` commit us to thing we ca n't resile from , it be not that exact ' ' . in Brussels the Britain-first migration plan provoke fury and be describe as ` ` simply toxic ' ' by an influential group of Liberal MEPs who say it would poison ongoing negotiation on citizen ' right , while Sandro continue on Page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
May must explain how Brexit can strengthen , not overturn , the West ; the EU do n't seem to realise that our capitalist , liberal democratic framework be under threat
this be n't the way Theresa May want it to be . like most politician , she covet power for year . now that she have it , her carefully consider domestic agenda keep disappear under heavy file mark ` ` Brexit ' ' . but as Margaret Thatcher find in the Falkland , unexpected adventure abroad can make a premiership . if Mrs May want to win the authority need for domestic reform , she must seize the moment . Brexit call not just for technical squabble in Brussel and platitude at home , but for leadership on a grand scale . what kind of world do Mrs may want us to live in ? how will her leadership help get us there ? and , vitally for Britain ' S interest , how will she defend the Western order ? over and over , Mrs May ' S enemy claim that she must lay out a vision for Brexit , but they be focus on the wrong kind of vision . we do not need or want a Prime Minister who foolishly lay out Britain ' S demand , fall-back position and red line . what be require be not a Westminster row about the single market and the EU ' s legal structure , but to elevate the debate . the country and the EU need to understand what be at stake . the capitalist , liberal democratic framework that have serve us so well since @card@ be under threat . Brexit do not mean , as the EU assume , that Britain want a revolution to throw it all away . we want to build a new model of co-operation with a great a role for the nation state , to defeat the corrupt authoritarianism and state-rigged trading model of China and Russia . to that end , Brexit should not be about punishment , but must revitalise the alliance between freedom-loving Western nation . this be the unambiguous message Mrs May need to deliver before negotiation begin . the Prime Minister understand the domestic piece of the puzzle very well . after the financial crisis and year of wage stagnation , capitalism be threaten not just by foreign power , but by disillusion at home , which be why Mrs May keep call Brexit ` ` a vote for change ' ' . her initial instinct push her towards ineffective socialist idea like worker on board , energy price cap or state bailout for industry . but unlike many politician , she be good at listen to her Cabinet colleague and be slowly move in the right direction : a radical shake-up of the housing market , much more investment in skill and education , and an energy policy that serve consumer and the economy , not just emission target . so Mrs May be right not to ignore the domestic anger the referendum lay bare . fundamentally , though , Brexit be a matter of foreign policy - one of the few brief she have never hold . the government must rethink how Britain manage all of its dealings with the outside world , from trade to immigration and defence . the EU ' S ideologue insist that there be only two possible model . the first be that we be govern by supranational organisation within the single market . the second be total isolation . the define feature of this argument be that it an obsessively legal one . it assume that Brexit can create no new legal form of co-operation or trade , but must rely on the current available option . it ignore that fact that we be not deal with lawyer and statute on a two-year timetable . Brexit be about the fate of nation over decade . it be for elect politician to make the decision , not lawyer . so far , the lead elect politician on the continent have be extremely reluctant to admit this fact . they be defer to the lawyer when they repeat the mantra that the EU ' s ` ` four freedom ' ' be inseparable ; in other word , there can be no free trade of good , capital and service without the free movement of people . they be convince , for the moment , the legal edifice be what matter and if they allow it to be alter , the whole European democratic order will crumble . Mrs May ' s central task be to make Brexit a matter of politics , not legal technicality . in this mission , she do have potential ally on the continent , even in some of Brussels ' staunch pro-EU circle . in August , five author publish a paper argue that Brexit be a chance to create a ` ` continental partnership ' ' between Europe ' s EU and non-EU nation . the author include two top thinker from the Bruegel Institute , Brussels ' most influential think tank ; Jean Pisani-Ferry , a former EU official and French government adviser ; Norbet Röttgen , a German MP and chairman of the Bundestag foreign affair committee , and former Bank of England deputy governor Paul Tucker . it would be easy to assume that this list of author be capable only of parrot EU dogma . it would also be wrong . ` ` free movement of worker , ' ' they write , ` ` be not indispensable ... free movement of worker can be separate from [ free trade ] . ' ' the ` ` continental partnership ' ' they describe would let the UK set quota on EU immigration while allow British firm to operate freely in the single market . as with any modern trade agreement , it would establish an arbitration system to ensure we have sufficiently similar trading standards.But it would not allow foreign judge to interpret human right law here or decide whom we deport . this might still sound unpalatable to some Brexiteers . it do , however , provide a crucial advantage over a straightforward ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . it mean Britain can continue to exert a strong influence over geopolitical decision that will make or break Western power , like whether to impose sanction on Russia , the imperative for EU country to stop free-riding and contribute more to Nato , and whether the West should compete with China by embrace protectionism and massive state subsidy programme . the ` ` continental partnership ' ' might not be the exact model we adopt , but it provide the key insight : even after Brexit , Britain need a platform to influence our EU ally and nudge them in the right direction . the task be certainly daunting.Mrs May must engineer a Brexit that strengthen , rather than weaken , the West ' s resolve to tackle threat from disruptive , anti-democratic power . if she fail , Britain could quit the EU declare that it want to be a beacon of free trade only to find that free trade , capitalism and the rule of law be in retreat across the world . ultimately , our prosperity do not depend on a ` ` soft ' ' or ` ` hard ' ' Brexit . it depend on openness and security . for the first time since the Cold War , the West be enter a battle of idea . Mrs May must explain how we will win it . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
voter know what they want from Brexit - but it will be a tall order ; they say yes to control immigration and access to the EU single market - no to financial contribution
four month before the last election I conduct a survey which find Ukip voter to be the most pessimistic in Britain . three quarter of them say they think the country be head in the wrong direction . my late research reveal a stunning turnaround : @card@ per cent of them now say we be on the right track , make them the most optimistic of all . it do not take much to figure out what be behind this transformation . and the ' Kippers be not alone , even if most do not share their degree of exuberance : since the referendum , a majority of British people say the country be on the right path , and expect the economy to do well over the next year . but a majority do not mean a consensus . seven in ten of those who vote to remain in the EU say the country be head the wrong way , and though more than four fifth of leaver expect the British economy to do well over the next year , just three in @card@ remainers agree . while leaver chuckle that they be still wait for the world to end , many remainers fear that the real impact of Brexit have yet to be feel . one response to this be that the remainers will just have to get over it . and plenty of them feel the same way - they may not like it , but they know they be go to have to get use to the idea of Brexit . in my focus group , few of those who have want to stay in the EU now think it desirable , let alone realistic , to try to reverse the outcome . yet while rightly insist that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' , the government can not disregard those who be anxious about the future . this be not just because its job be to govern for the whole country , as Theresa May have say , but because to do so would be politically foolish - on June @card@ , the remain column include two fifth of those who vote for the Conservatives last year , all of whom will need to do so again to keep the party in office . the Tories can be the good party to negotiate Brexit on the right term without be a party only for Brexiteers like me . the key , then , be to fashion a Brexit agreement that the whole country can get behind . my research give some indication of what this would look like - and how hard it will be to achieve . so far , progress towards the exit seem slow , to the frustration of some and the relief of other . though some suspect a plot to thwart the voter ' will , the more likely explanation be that the referendum result have take the government completely by surprise so no contingency plan have be make . still , I find most people agree that when it come to a Brexit deal , it be more important to get it right than to do it quickly . in this , Mrs May have the public behind her , at least for now . in my research people spontaneously describe her as smart , tough , confident and very much up to the job . two third of our poll respondent , include more than four in @card@ of those who vote Labour last year , say she be the well available prime minister of the party leader . labour voter despair of the ` ` shambles ' ' and ` ` farce ' ' that their party have become , and hold out little hope of it offer any decent opposition , let alone return to office , under their principled but ` ` totally unelectable ' ' leader . though the PM campaign ( if somewhat ambivalently ) to remain in the EU , nobody doubt her intention when she say Brexit mean Brexit . which just leave the question of what Brexit mean . it be probably easy to start by ask what Brexit do n't mean , and here the public be quite clear . more than four fifth of people in Britain , include three quarter of those who vote to remain , say Britain would not really have leave if we continue to pay into the EU budget . almost as many say that continue to allow free movement - in which foreign national from other European country still have the automatic right to live and work in the UK - would mean the referendum result have not be honour , though large majority of both leaver and remainers say they be happy for EU citizen already live and work in Britain to stay . meanwhile , a clear majority think retain access to the EU single market would be compatible with Brexit . indeed , leaver be even more likely to think this than remainers . what if the negotiation come down to a trade-off between control immigration and single market access ? overall , most say set our own term for immigration be the more important priority . but here again there be a division : while three quarter of leaver would choose immigration control over the single market , remainers prioritise continue free trade by a 22-point margin . yet what really throw down the gauntlet for British negotiator be that many people do not accept that such a trade-off exist . as an independent country outside the EU , they argue , it go without say that we should be able to say who can and who can not enter , and under what condition - this principle be much more important to most than the number involve . at the same time , they reason , everyone benefit from trade , and as thing stand - since EU country sell more to us than we do to them - our European neighbour benefit 1from it even more than we do . so , whatever the single market ' S technicality , why , they ask , should we need to make any concession at all for the privilege of continue to provide a market for their export ? in a nutshell : yes to full control of immigration , yes to unfettered trade , and no to any further contribution to the EU budget . the deal the voter want with the EU be certainly unique . it may also prove a tall order . the New Blueprint : the Conservative agenda in Post-Brexit Britain be launch today at www.LordAshcroftPolls.com . Lord Ashcroft ' s book on the referendum , ' well you do Ask : why the UK Voted to leave the EU ' , be publish this month by Biteback FOLLOW Lord Ashcroft on Twitter @ LordAshcroft ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Brexit would halt ' dangerous ' EU army , insist French
a BREXIT vote would make Europe more secure as it would stop the ` ` dangerous ' ' integration of EU member state ' army , two senior French admiral have say . in a letter in the Daily Telegraph , Vice Admiral Michel Debray and Rear Admiral Claude Gaucherand say the UK would not be ` ` diminished ' ' by a vote to leave and it would prevent the ` ` inevitable and dangerous ' ' development of an EU fighting force . they say the UK ' S neighbour would still want to ` ` cooperate on close and friendly term ' ' because Britain be such a strong military and economic power . the admiral also warn that ` ` scaremongering ' ' about the UK ' s military prowess after a possible Brexit ` ` make no sense ' ' because Britain would ` ` remain a major force ' ' . they say : ` ` Viewed rationally and dispassionately from Paris , the scaremongering that we have see the British people subject to make no sense . ` ` the UK will remain a major force after Brexit , a major military , security and economic power that its neighbour will want to cooperate with on close and friendly term . ` ` a leave vote will apply screech brake to those push for the integration of the armed force of the EU ' s member state and the otherwise inev-UK airborne troop on a Nato drill in Poland . a Brexit would not stop such cooperation itable and dangerous development of a ' common defence ' as the treaty predict . ' ' they say Charles de Gaulle and Sir Winston Churchill ' s view of Britain would be ` ` vindicate ' ' if voter opt out of the union on June @card@ . both believe that the nation state be the foundation of good security policy . the letter follow speculation that plan for a European-wide force , to which the UK would be force to contribute , be be hold back until after June @card@ . David Cameron have say it be ` ` not true ' ' Britain would be make to contribute to such a force if the UK vote to remain in the EU , but last week Penny Mordaunt , the armed force minister , warn it be a serious prospect . letter : page @card@
Brexit be not a one-off , look at Europe ' S woe
there be a way of think about Brexit that have prove popular because it be of comfort both to the UK and to the remain @card@ member state of the EU . this be to view it as a uniquely British affair , one that realign this country with its old tradition - in Europe , but not a direct part of it ; a bridge between Europe and the US . the continental version , meanwhile , view Brexit as a liberation for the EU after put up for decade with grumble brit . as one French journalist put it a day after the referendum : ` ` my English friend , thank you for your sacrifice . ' ' this be wrong . far from be an isolated event , Brexit be representative of grow economic and political tension within Europe on the matter of European integration . look at the political tremor now shake the EU ' s keystone nation , Germany , which have even threaten the position of Angela Merkel . importantly , both Britain and nation of the continent have economic frustration with the EU . as there be no single European economy , citizen in Europe experience ` ` ever close union ' ' through their national growth model . in Britain ' S case , the economy grow by expand the labour market . this inject life into the country ' S service sector-dominated economy but make the UK dependent on very high level of net migration . this model deliver low unemployment but also low productivity and low wage growth . the tension produce by this growth model be important driver of Brexit . Germany ' s experience of the Single Market be quite different , but also problematic . lie behind Germany ' s success in export market be an economy characterise by low aggregate demand and high saving rate . Labour market reform have lead to a decade-long squeeze on wage , mean that most Germans do n't feel rich . this be why there be so much opposition in Germany to a European fiscal transfer union . ` ` we ' ve not have it easy , ' ' go the argument , ` ` so why should we help out the Greeks and the Italian ? ' ' Further integration of the eurozone will run up against ordinary Germans ' experience of life in the single market . there be also frustration common to Britain and the continent with government which seem more focus on striking deal in Brussels than in represent the wish of their citizen . the European orientation of the administrative British state be on show throughout the referendum campaign , with major British institution - such as the Bank of England and the Treasury , and the ` ` deep state ' ' of the high education sector - openly back the Remain campaign . since the Brexit vote , British diplomat have be push to act as if the UK be a 19th century nationstate , when in fact it be a 21st-century EU member state , accustom to the pursuit of consensus and compromise . their refusal to consider Brexit as a challenge to transform the state continue . British civil servant currently work within the Department for Exiting the European Union ( DEXEU ) be only second , for a term of two year , from their original ministry - the implication be that their service will only be need for a short transitional period . this be clearly a dramatic under-estimation of the administrative , constitutional and economic challenge pose by Brexit . Brexit reveal in a dramatic fashion the way in which EU member state struggle to fulfil even the most basic function of self-government associate with the model of the modern sovereign state . this be by no mean only a British affair , as we see it also in @card@ when the Greek government be unable to translate the wish of its own people into a new deal with its creditor . this be an urgent issue for all European citizen who believe in the capacity - and duty - of government to represent the will of their citizen . Brexit should not be treat as a stand-alone phenomenon , isolate from the rest of the European continent . it be unlikely that other country will follow suit in the near future , not least because of the difficulty in leave an integrated currency union . but Brexit nevertheless express fundamental tension at the heart of ` ` ever close union ' ' . ironically , it be precisely in its decision to exit the EU that the UK have identify itself most as a European state , whose fate have many lesson for the EU ' S @card@ remain member . Chris Bickerton be a fellow of politics at Queens ' College Cambridge . this be adapt from an essay in Brexit and Beyond : rethink the Futures of Europe , available to download free from UCL Press from Jan @card@ Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Davis will be sideline in reshuffle , ally fear ; Brexit Secretary face new blow to authority as Prime Minister look at diffe rent role for Boris Johnson
David Davis ' S ally fear that he risk be ` ` marginalised ' ' if Boris Johnson be hand a new ` ` super-charged ' ' Brexit role in a Cabinet reshuffle . the Prime Minister be say to be consider move Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , in a ` ` renewal ' ' reshuffle in which she could axe as many as five minister . Mr Johnson could be ask to replace Greg Clark , the Business Secretary , with the portfolio significantly bolster to give him more direct ` ` ownership ' ' of Brexit . however , ally of the Foreign Secretary say that he be likely to reject the move because he be ` ` very happy ' ' in the foreign office after several turbulent month . ` ` the difficulty they will have be that they know they ca n't sack him , ' ' a source say . there be also concern that Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , could be sideline if Mr Johnson be give a significant Brexit role . it come after Olly Robbins , Mr Davis ' s former chief of staff , leave his department to lead a newly form European unit in the Cabinet Office . he now report directly to Theresa May rather than Mr Davis and be regard by some in Brussels as the man effectively run Brexit negotiation . an ally of Mr Davis say : ` ` the role of the Brexit Secretary be be impinge on right , left and centre . I be seriously concern that David Davis be be marginalised . ` ` if you look at the way Olly Robbins have usurp his function , and now you have this . I ' m get really quite concern about David ' S role ... it do seem to me that there would be a loss of focus if Boris be to take on a big Brexit role . ' ' Mrs May be reportedly prepare to axe Sir Patrick McLoughlin , the chairman of the Conservative Party , Justine Greening , the Education Secretary , Mr Clark , Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , and Andrea Leadsom , the leader of the Commons . there be also suggestion that Sajid Javid , the Communities Secretary , could be axe . Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , be tip to replace Damian Green in the Cabinet Office after he be force out before Christmas . minister also tip for promotion include Brandon Lewis , the immigration minister , along with Dominic Raab , a justice minister , and Damian Hinds , the employment minister . Mrs May will also be acutely aware of the need to appoint more woman . at present only five member of the 21-strong Cabinet be woman . the timing of her prospective reshuffle have prompt concern among some member of the Cabinet . the Prime Minister be next week expect to launch a series of high-profile domestic policy in a bid to prove that she will not be define by Brexit alone . the minister say : ` ` if you do a reshuffle you upset @card@ people who do n't get promote , and cheer up a dozen . I just ca n't quite see why the PM would create these problem for herself . ' '
Scotland Drinks giant deny loss of @card@ job be consequence of Brexit Body : DIAGEO be to cut more than @card@ job across its Scottish operation - a move that a trade union blame on Brexit . worker be tell that @card@ redundancy will be make at the drink giant ' s Leven plant in Fife and a further @card@ at its Shieldhall site , near Glasgow . select white spirit production will be move to the company ' S Santa Vittoria plant in Italy and to plant in the United States . the GMB say it have warn David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , earlier this year about the need for special measure to protect Scotland ' S drink manufacturing sector against the backdrop of Brexit uncertainty . but a Diageo spokesman deny the decision be a consequence of Brexit , add : ` ` this be a business decision take for business reason . ' ' the company say : ` ` follow the disposal of our wine business and the subsequent end of the wine bottling contract , we have review our spirit bottle footprint to ensure we not only deliver lead performance for both our domestic and export supply chain around the world , but also to strengthen our business for the future . ` ` regrettably , these change may impact some role in our European bottling plant towards the end of the year and we will now enter a period of consultation with our employee and their representative to discuss the proposal in more detail . ` ` we be commit to our three spirit bottle site in Europe - two in Scotland and one in Italy . ' ' Jenny Gilruth , the Nationalist MSP for Leven , say : ` ` this announcement by Diageo be concern and will cause great uncertainty for many people in our community throughout Fife - and it be doubly concern that these possible redundancy appear to be down to Brexit . ` ` the suggestion by the GMB union that it have warn David Mundell over the need to take action to protect Scotland ' s drink manufacturer against Brexit long before this announcement be yet another sign that he be happy to support the Tories ' Brexit plan no matter the damage they will inflict on our community and economy . Willie Rennie , the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader , say : ` ` this be the cold sober reality of a hard Conservative Brexit . this be a huge employer in part of Fife and Glasgow that need the job . ` ` the conservative need to explain to the worker at these plant why they soon wo n't be get a wage at the end of the month . ' ' a spokesman for the UK Government say : ` ` we have be in contact with Diageo and understand the company have begin a consultation with staff about propose operational change that be not drive by the UK ' s decision to leave the EU . ` ` the UK Government continue to support the Scottish economy and key sector such as the drink industry . ' ' ' this announcement by Diageo be very concern and will cause great uncertainty for many '
our post-Brexit forecast may be too gloomy , the OBR admit ; Economy ; official force to make broad judgement , as Eurosceptic MP say they be protect their back
Britain ' s official economic forecaster admit it make a series of ` ` gloomy ' ' Brexit warning without any information about the government ' S plan . the Office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) say it have be force to make a series of ` ` broad-brush judgement ' ' because minister refuse to provide any information about the government ' s ` ` goal and expectation ' ' . Theresa May have repeatedly refuse to disclose information about the government ' s negotiate strategy amid concern that it would be the ` ` good way to get the bad result for Britain ' ' as it leave the EU . the OBR be force to make a series of assumption about Mrs May ' S approach , which be yesterday brand ` ` totally wrong ' ' , while eurosceptic Conservative MP highlight the fact that previous forecast by the OBR for economic growth have be ` ` notoriously ' ' inaccurate . the OBR ' s post-Brexit forecast include an assumption that the pace of import and export growth will slow for a decade as the government negotiate new trading regime , cause the value of the pound to continue to fall and household income to drop . it claim that economic growth will be @card@ per cent low over the next five year , while national income will fall from @card@ per cent in @card@ to @card@ per cent next year , significantly low than previously forecast . it also suggest that inflation will rise from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent in mid-2018 , put great pressure on household finance and reduce people ' S spending power . a total of @card@ more people will be unemployed as a result of Brexit , it suggest . the OBR claim the overall cost of Brexit will mean £58.7 billion worth of additional borrowing over the next five year , include £26.2 billion because of the economic ` ` slowdown ' ' and £15 billion because of low migration . Robert Chote , the OBR ' S chairman , admit there be a @card@ per cent chance that the forecast be ` ` too gloomy ' ' . however , the OBR say its forecast be justify because it be base on exist trend , such as the fall in the value of the pound . it suggest the fallout from Brexit could be even more severe . it say : ` ` in the near term , as the negotiation get under way , we assume that GDP growth will continue to slow into next year as uncertainty lead firm to delay investment and as consumer be squeeze by high import price , thanks to the fall in the pound . ` ` but we do not assume that firm shed job more aggressively or that consumer increase precautionary saving , both of which be downside risk if the path to Brexit be bumpy . ' ' however , it concede : ` ` Our economy forecast be not base on a precise prediction of the outcome of the Brexit negotiation , but rather on broad-brush judgement consistent with a range of possible outcome . ` ` we have be give no information about the government ' S goal and economic and fiscal outlook expectation for the negotiation that be not already in the public domain . and we would not in any event wish to base our forecast on assumption we could not be transparent about . ' ' Peter Bone , a eurosceptic Conservative MP , say : ` ` the forecast be gloomy because if they be gloomy and it be good , then they do n't get as much flak as if it be optimistic and they fail . ` ` they could not produce a forecast base on what appear to be happen in the economy with inflation fall and growth up . they could not do that because it would mean that all they do before be just so totally wrong . ' ' Bernard Jenkin MP , who help lead the Vote leave campaign , say : ` ` the government must accept OBR forecast . but if they turn out to be too pessimistic , then the UK will be in an even strong position . ' ' Steve Baker , a prominent Eurosceptic and chairman of the Conservatives ' European Research Group , add : ` ` Recent pessimistic economic forecast have be consistently wrong . I welcome this high forecast for the current year than pre-vote and I welcome confirmation there will be no post-vote recession after all . ' ' the Chancellor announce that the government will put the public finance back in the black ` ` as early as possible ' ' in the next Parliament as part of a new draft Charter for Budget Responsibility . however , Mr Chote say that his plan will pose ` ` quite a challenge ' ' for Mr Hammond if he need to borrow more during this Parliament . he say the government will face mount pressure to increase spending on an age population , and that the number of people set to receive the state pension could rise by about nine per cent in the next Parliament . the OBR forecast the Chancellor to overshoot previous target for public sector borrowing for this year , revise its outlook from £55.5 billion to £68.2 billion for @card@ . it also hike forecast from £38.8 billion to £59 billion for @card@ , from £21.4 billion to £46.5 billion for @card@ , from a surplus of £10.4 billion to a deficit of £21.9 billion for @card@ , from a surplus of £11 billion to a deficit of £20.7 billion for @card@ and a deficit of £17.2 billion in @card@ . the OBR also pencil in people to be about three per cent poor compare to its March forecast . the government ' s own analysis of the impact of its statement show that Mr Hammond ' S policy have have almost no impact on the income of most household . it show that low earner have see their income rise by a maximum of @card@ per cent , while there be little income difference for most other household .
divorce bill far from the big Brexit issue , stress OBR
Britain ' S EU divorce bill be relatively insignificant to the economy or even to the government ' S finance compare with the much large question of the UK ' s growth prospect after Brexit , accord to the head of the official fiscal watchdog . Robert Chote , boss of the Office for Budget Responsibility , warn MP that it be easy to become fixate on the exact settlement agree with Brussels , rather than the big picture . the bill be expect to be between ( Euro ) 45bn ( £39bn ) and ( Euro ) 55bn , with a debate over whether it be extra money or a continuation of payment that Britain be plan to make in any case . but the financial watchdog say that , in the grand scheme of thing , this payment be far from the most important aspect of Brexit . ` ` if it be an extra amount , you be talk here about presumably a one-off payment of some billion of pound which would be dwarf by the consequence of Brexit , positive or negative , for the long-term outlook for economic growth , ' ' Mr Chote tell the Treasury select committee . ` ` there be a kind of analogy here with the financial crisis - it be very easy to get very focus on the one-off , the particular bail-out period , when actually what matter much more be the impact on the economy and the underlie impact on receipt , flow and spending . ' ' in turn , that Brexit effect be itself much less important than find a way to boost productivity growth and escape the stagnation in output per hour work that have grip the economy for the past decade , Mr Chote say . ` ` there be a small productivity effect [ in the OBR ' s Brexit forecast ] but it be tiny compare to the scale of the change that we have make on this occasion , and it be tiny compare to the scale of the shortfall in productivity relative to a continuation of pre-crisis trend , ' ' say Sir Charlie Bean from the OBR . ` ` I think it be very important to realise that the big issue economically for the British economy be productivity , it be not come from the Brexit assumption or anything like that . ` ` that be the really big challenge ; if we could do something to address that successfully , it would completely swamp the Brexit consequence , whatever they be . ` ` the scale could not be big enough compare to the productivity slowdown . ' ' Mr Chote note that poor productivity growth have afflict developed economy across the world , make it hard to pin down precisely why growth have be so slow and how to fix it . ` ` you can overdo it by focus on particularly UK-specific explanation of this ; there be a lot more go on , ' ' he say .
Scotland Fishing quota scrap after Brexit ; hundred of thousand of ton more fish can be catch after ' unfair ' rule overhaul ; Fishing quota face post-Brexit overhaul
British fisherman will be able to catch hundred of thousand of ton more fish after Brexit because it will be able to overhaul ` ` unfair ' ' fishing quota , the fishery minister have say . George Eustice say Brexit will provide a ` ` good deal ' ' for fisherman because current quota give a ` ` disproportionately large ' ' share of catch to fisherman from the European Union . he say after Brexit the UK will strike new ` ` reciprocal ' ' arrangement with the EU , which will give fisherman a great share of catch in British water and abroad . he say that during Britain ' s membership of the EU negotiation about fishing quota have stall because of the ` ` institutionalise inertia ' ' of Brussels . he tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` it ' s pretty clear Brexit can be a good deal for British fisherman because we regain control . the equation be they have one million ton of UK fish and we get about @card@ ton of various specie . ' ' Leaving the EU will spell the end of the hate Common Fisheries Policy and enable the UK to assert control over its 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) . this mean that foreign vessel could not then fish in the zone without express consent . more than half of the UK ' S EEZ be around Scotland and fishing leader north of the border be furious with Nicola Sturgeon ' S attempt to somehow bypass the Brexit vote and keep Scotland in the EU . a major report publish earlier this month find that more than half the fish catch in British water be currently land by trawler from the rest of the EU . Mr Eustice say : ` ` there be area we would hope to get a good deal , particularly with cod and plaice . ` ` the truth be , thing will change in a very fundamental way . in the Channel the French get twice as much plaice and three time as much Dover sole as we do . there be an imbalance . ' ' Mr Eustice believe that fisherman in the Channel and the West country in particular could benefit from reform to fishing quota . he highlight Britain ' s ` ` incredibly low ' ' share of plaice and sole in the English Channel , with a similar situation for cod and haddock in the Celtic Sea . he say that here be no ` ` balance ' ' to Britain ' s fishing agreement with the EU , and that it ` ` benefit more from access to the UK than the UK benefit from access to them ' ' . it come as French fisherman accuse their British rival of ` ` plunder ' ' continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ scallop in the Channel , say Brexit could leave UK trawler free to increase their catch without the constraint of EU regulation . Daniel LefÈvre , head of the Lower Normandy Fisheries ' regional committee , say : ` ` not only be the English pillage a resource that we ' ve be protect for more than @card@ year , but the scallop they fish and freeze be come back to be sell in France , compete with our fresh scallop . ' ' the French be aggrieve because they say they be already subject to strict fishing limit than the British , and they fear Brexit will disentangle UK boat from the web of EU rule . Mr LefÈvre explain that under national regulation to prevent overfishing , French fisherman be oblige to respect strict quota . these rule do not apply to the British , who be subject to ` ` more lenient ' ' British and EU regulation . ` ` after Brexit , Britain would perhaps not be bind by EU regulation . we hope we can agree on a solution with our British friend before the UK leave , ' ' he say . ` ` the problem be that the British see only the business side of thing while we be think about conservation too . French fisherman be only allow to catch scallop six month a year but the British can fish them all year round . ' '
Scotland Davis : MP must end this ' blame Brexit ' festival ; Secretary for Leaving the EU insist Commons will not be allow to thwart the process , amid grow revolt on Tory backbenches
parliament must not be allow to ` ` thwart ' ' Britain ' s exit from the European Union , David Davis say yesterday amid a grow rebellion from conservative who back the failed Remain campaign . Mr Davis , the Secretary for Leaving the EU , warn of a ` ` blame Brexit festival ' ' as he reject demand from a cross-party coalition of MP that backbencher should be allow to vote on the term of Britain ' s exit from the EU . Theresa May also attack MP for not ` ` accept ' ' the Brexit vote , tell the commons : ` ` we be side with the British people who vote to leave the European union . ' ' yesterday , a succession of Tory MP face criticism from their colleague over their ` ` weasel word ' ' as they attack the government ' s handling of the aftermath of the Brexit vote . Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , hit out at ` ` the briefers and spinner at the centre of this government ' ' for criticise conservative push for a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' which would see Britain retain membership of the single market . Anna Soubry , a former business minister , urge the Prime Minister to abandon attempt to reduce immigration in the wake of the referendum while Claire Perry , another former minister , accuse the government of put ` ` ideology ' ' before national interest . Mr Davis tell the commons : ` ` I ' m afraid in the immediate aftermath of the vote to leave there be an extraordinary outpouring almost of grief - a blame Brexit festival , if you like . ` ` we see it range from the Italian finance minister - who blame us for the state of his bond market - more significantly to bank in this country , say they ' re lay people off because of Brexit , which , of course , it turn out to be entirely untrue . ' ' he add : ` ` while we welcome parliamentary scrutiny , it must not be use as a vehicle to undermine the government ' s negotiate position or thwart the process of exit . ' ' meanwhile , Tom Scholar , the Treasury ' s permanent secretary , warn that official forecast be likely to show that there will be a ` ` period of weak growth over the next few year ' ' . but he also admit to MP that figure in leak draft Cabinet paper suggest Brexit could cost the Treasury £66 billion in tax revenue be ` ` not directly applicable ' ' . separately the Bank of England be accuse of ` ` talk down the economy ' ' after warn that Britain be likely to leave the single market and job could go to New York . Sir John Cunliffe , the Bank ' s deputy governor , raise concern that Britain ' s financial market could lose the ` ` frictionless ' ' trading relation they currently enjoy . Steve Baker , a Tory member of the Treasury committee , say the Bank have a duty to stop ` ` all comment which could be see as talk down the prospect of the UK economy ' ' . Allister Heath : page @card@ Blue-on-blue how Conservative malcontent criticise minister during Commons debate Nicky Morgan Ex-education secretary and MP for Loughborough ( where @card@ per cent of voter back leave and @card@ per cent back Remain ) ` ` Those who be ask question about the scrutiny by this Parliament of these fundamental negotiation be not try to thwart the will of the people . ` ` I resent that implication . I resent it from newspaper , I resent it from minister , and I resent it from the briefers and spinner at the centre of this government . ' ' Dominic Grieve Former attorney general and MP for Beaconsfield ( leave @card@ per cent , Remain @card@ per cent ) ` ` as a lawyer I see the repeal process as a legal nightmare , it undoubtedly impinge on the devolution settlement and competence . the rule of law will be jeopardise . ' ' Claire Perry Extransport minister and MP for Devizes ( @card@ per cent leave @card@ per cent Remain ) ` ` I think the problem the Secretary of State be not acknowledge be that many people in the country do n't think there be a policy to put the national interest first , they think there be a policy to put people ' s narrow ideological interest first . ` ` what he should be set out be quite clearly how we be go to protect British job and business , and put ideology in the past , where it belong . ' ' Anna Soubry Former employment minister and MP for Broxtowe ( leave @card@ per cent , Remain @card@ per cent ) ` ` we have to abandon that target [ on migration ] . we ca n't keep it , we know the reality : people come here to work , and , in simple term , who be go to do the job that these people who come here do ? ' '
Scotland May ' s Brexit dilly-dally offer a golden opportunity for Scotland ; if it act now , the Scottish Government can put its demand at the top of the UK-EU negotiation agenda
three month on from the European Union referendum it be blatantly obvious the UK Government have n't a clue about how or when to proceed with Brexit . Theresa May ' S Cabinet ca n't even agree amongst themselves what their definition of Brexit be , as witness by their contradictory statement on the future relationship between Britain and the European single market . the Scottish Government therefore have a golden opportunity , which it should not let slip , to fill the void by put Scotland ' s Brexit demand at the top of the UK-EU negotiation agenda and do so now . rather than wait until Mrs May eventually get her act together , the Scottish Government should immediately publish its ` ` List of Scottish Demands ' ' for the Brexit negotiation . do n't wait for Whitehall . set the agenda now . force the UK Cabinet to acknowledge Scotland ' S priority . preempt any attempt by the UK Government to place unacceptable limitation on Scotland ' s Brexit ambition . top of the list of Scottish demand should be the transfer of the power be repatriate from Brussels , as they relate to Scotland , to the Scottish Parliament - not Westminster . all the power relate to exist devolve matter , such as farming and fishing , should automatically transfer to Edinburgh . Brexit also provide the ideal opportunity to devolve all the other power currently control by Brussels to the Scottish Parliament . this would include power currently exercise by the EU cover employment law and worker ' right , environmental protection , social policy , consumer protection , certain aspect of transport policy , some aspect of energy policy , public health matter , and certain aspect of justice and home affair policy as well as external affair . finally , a range of other power which have n't be devolve to Scotland because of EU rule should also be transfer to Edinburgh . the most important of these would be give the Scottish Parliament full control over value add tax ( VAT ) . until now the UK Treasury have argue that VAT could n't be devolve because the EU would n't allow rate variation within a member state . after Brexit , this excuse be no longer valid . VAT could easily be transfer in Toto to Edinburgh . the leave campaign ' s promise during the referendum that if the UK vote for Brexit , then Scotland would get control over immigration policy must also be honour and include in Scotland ' s list of demand . the second item on that list should be the transfer of all the funding associate with these new power mention above , include Scotland ' s share of the UK annual contribution to the EU budget , itself estimate by the Scottish Parliament ' S Information Centre ( Spice ) to be worth around £800 million a year net of the funding Scotland currently get from the EU . with this money , post-Brexit , the Scottish Government could continue to finance all the project currently support by the EU in Scotland to the same level of fund as at present , and still have another £800 million or so a year leave over to invest as we choose . the accumulation of all these new power and finance would bring about ' neo-Independence ' ' for Scotland , create the ideal platform for advance to full sovereignty for the Scottish people in the early 2020s . the third key item on Scotland ' S list must be continue access to the benefit of the single market . eleven per cent of all good and service sell furth of Scotland every year go to the EU . these export support many thousand of job in Scotland that we ca n't afford to lose ; so retain both free access to this market along with the other benefit of the single market , such as ` ` passporting ' ' for our financial sector , be essential . Scotland should continue to benefit from the free movement of people between Europe and Scotland . the crucial role play by people from Europe and elsewhere in the world in staff some of our key industry such as tourism , agriculture and horticulture have to be protect . there be no reason why Scotland should not be able to implement its own immigration policy which would allow free movement to continue . the UK Government would find it difficult to refuse these demand , if Scotland play its card right . to help ensure our demand be meet , the Scottish Government should organise a ` ` Brexit coalition ' ' of the nation and region of the UK . such a coalition could form a share platform of key demand that the nation and region need to be meet from Brexit and force Mrs May to reach a deal which be as acceptable to them as it be to her . Alex Neil MSP be a former Scottish Government Cabinet Secretary
Europe must keep UK close , say Germany ' S vice-chancellor ; Merkel ' s deputy offer prospect of access to single market - but warn that Brexit be take too long
the European Union should aim to maintain close tie with Britain after Brexit , the German vice-chancellor say yesterday . in comment which will encourage hope that Germany could be prepare to broker a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit deal , and access to the single market , Sigmar Gabriel say the EU should ` ` do everything ' ' to keep Britain ` ` as close to Europe as possible ' ' . but Mr Gabriel , who be Angela Merkel ' s deputy in the German government , also warn that it would ` ` not be easy ' ' to preserve tie , and say Britain be take ` ` far too long ' ' over Brexit . ` ` my personal view be that we should do everything , as far as it be politically justifiable , to keep the British as close as possible to Europe , ' ' Mr Gabriel tell reporter in Berlin . ` ` this will not be easy . but above all , it must be do quickly . the uncertainty be the big problem . in our estimation , the process be take far too long . ' ' the comment will be seize upon by supporter of a soft Brexit as evidence that Germany be prepare to offer Britain a deal . but Mr Gabriel make it clear that he be express his ` ` personal view ' ' . he be the leader of Mrs Merkel ' s current coalition partner , but be gear up for an election campaign in which they will be rival next year . his comment come just two day after Mrs Merkel take a hard line on Brexit at her party conference , repeat her warning that Britain will not be allow to ` ` cherry pick ' ' in the negotiation . in a speech that mark the start of her election campaign , Mrs Merkel make a point of stress her commitment to freedom of movement . access to the single market be con-ditional upon accept the EU ' s four basic freedom , include free movement , she say . proponent of a soft Brexit be hopeful that the threat to Germany ' s own economic interest will change Mrs Merkel ' S mind . but there be little sign of that yet . in his remark to reporter yesterday , Mr Gabriel say Germany be concern about the possible economic effect of Brexit , but say : ` ` we ' re not experience a strong impact at the moment . ' ' on the basis of his comment , Mr Gabriel appear to be more open to a deal with Britain than Mrs Merkel . but that may have little effect on negotiation . Germany ' S election be not due for another @card@ month , by when the talk will have be under way for some time . Mrs Merkel ' S Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) party be currently well ahead of Mr Gabriel ' S Social Democratic Party ( SPD ) in the poll , on @card@ per cent to the SPD ' S @card@ per cent . ' in my view , we should do everything , as far as it be politically justifiable , to keep the British as close as possible '
Remainers ' pay lip service ' to Brexit vote ; Davis attack Labour MP in bitter Commons debate as timetable for trigger Article @card@ be approve
Caroline Lucas ? SDLP ( @card@ ) : Mark Durkam , Alasdair McDonnell , Margaret Ritchie Independent @card@ ) : Natalie McGarry , Michelle Thomson plaid Cymru @card@ ) : Jonathan Edwards , Liz Saville-Roberts , Hywel Williams ? SNP ( @card@ ) : Tasmina Ahmed-Sheikh , Hannah Bardel , Mhairi Black , Ian Blackford , Kirsty Blackman , Philip Boswell , Deidre Brock , Alan Brown , Lisa Cameron , Doug Chapman , Joanna Cherry , Ronnie Cowan , Angela Crawley , Martyn Day , Martin Docherty , Stuart Donaldson , Deputy Political Editor David Davis have accuse Europhile MP of pay ` ` lip service ' ' to Brexit while do ` ` everything they can ' ' to stop it . the Secretary of State for Exiting the European union commit to produce a ` ` strategic plan ' ' for Brexit before trigger Article @card@ and formally begin Brexit negotiation . however he say the government would not do anything that might ` ` jeopardise our negotiate position ' ' as he warn that a second referendum would be ` ` destructive ' ' to negotiation . Mr Davis speak as MP embark on six hour of debate before wave through Theresa May ' S plan to trigger Brexit by the end of March next year . more than @card@ MP speak in the debate , which reveal bitter division in the Labour Party over migration and see Tory MP trade insult with one another on the floor of the Commons . MP vote overwhelmingly in favour of the government ' s Brexit timetable , in a motion that also commit the government to revealing detail about its plan . however a hardcore group of pro-Remain Labour MP vote against the motion , despite the fact it be first table by leader Jeremy Corbyn and largely accept by the Government.Mr Davis say : ` ` many on the bench opposite pay lip service to respect the result of the referendum , while at the same time try to find new way to thwart and delay . ` ` the shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respect the will of the people . today we will see whether they be prepare to back Britain , support our plan to follow the instruction of the British people and leave the European union . ' ' Government ' on notice ' Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , call the government ' s decision to give more information about its plan for leave the EU a ` ` victory ' ' . he claim that he do not want to ` ` frustrate or delay ' ' Brexit , only to demand that the government must spell out its plan on the Single Market , transition and the Customs Union . he say he be put minister ` ` on notice ' ' that Labour would try to write its own plan for Brexit into law unless minister disclose more information . while Labour ' s official position be to back the government ' s amendment to invoke Article @card@ by March next year , many of its MP choose to rebel . ' Democratic outrage ' Twenty-three Labour MP vote against the motion , warn that it would enable minister to push ahead with Brexit without give away any more detail about their plan . Ben Bradshaw , a Labour MP , say : ` ` it in effect give a blank cheque for us to invoke Article @card@ by March without any of us be any the wise about the government ' S intention today . ' ' Mike Gapes , another Labour MP , say the government ' S amendment be a ` ` democratic outrage ' ' . Heidi Alexander say she support a second referendum on the term of leave the EU as she condemn the government ' s ` ` arbitrary ' ' timetable . labour divide on migration Ms Alexander say Britain need immigration because it be ` ` not have enough baby ' ' . she say : ` ` I be a 41-year-old woman without child . ` ` baby grow up to become taxpayer . who will be contribute to my pension and my care ? the answer be migrant and their child . ' ' by contrast Andy Burnham , Labour ' s candidate for the Manchester mayorality , criticise the party ' s ` ` paralysis ' ' over migration . ` ` reluctance to confront this debate be undermine the cohesion of our community and the safety of our street , ' ' he say . ` ` I be no longer prepared to be complicit in that . ' ' it come after Mr Corbyn suggest at Labour ' S conference last year that he favour uncontrolled immigration . Tory MP trade blow lead Europhile Conservative MP come out in force during the debate , but Ken Clarke be the only member of the party to oppose the amendment . the former Tory chancellor say Mrs May ' s Brexit plan be ` ` extremely vague ' ' as he call for a White Paper . he mock the suggestion that she want a ` ` red , white and blue ' ' Brexit as he question whether the government have a plan at all . Peter Bone , a Eurosceptic MP , attack Anna Soubry , a lead Remain campaigner and former employment minister . he say she ` ` have no time for this place ' ' while in government but be suddenly a ` ` great ' ' supporter of parliamentary sovereignty . Ms Soubry say she and her colleague be ` ` sick and tired ' ' of the abuse direct at them as she warn that many young people feel ` ` the old generation have steal their future ' ' . she say she be prepare to back Brexit but warn the Prime Minister against play ` ` silly game ' ' , add that she must publish a White Paper . remain be ' full of anger ' Eurosceptic Tory MP use the debate to set out some red line of their own . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader , say he would rather stay in the EU than leave and remain part of the Customs Union . he say : ` ` it seem completely pointless to me to actually embroil ourselves on the Customs Union , go through all this rigmarole of argument and debate and row , only to find at the end of the day there be no jewel in the crown at the end . ' ' Michael Gove , a former chief whip , say Remain campaigner look back in ` ` anger , remorse and regret ' ' . MP who vote against Ken Clarke the only Conservative rebel ? Tory ( @card@ ) : Ken Clarke ? Labour ( @card@ ) : Rushanara Ali , Graham Allen , Ben Bradshaw , Ann Coffey , Neil Coyle , Stella Creasy , Geraint Davies , Jim Dowd , Louise Ellman , Chris Evans , Paul Farrelly , Mike Gapes , Helen Hayes , Meg Hillier , Peter Kyle , David Lammy , Chris Leslie , Ian Murray , Barry Sheerman , Tulip Siddiq , Angela Smith , Catherine West , Daniel Zeichner ? liberal democrat ( @card@ ) : Alistair Carmichael , Nick Clegg , Tim Farron , Sarah Olney , Mark Williams ? Green Party ( @card@ ) : Marion Fellows , Margaret Ferrier , Stephen Gethins , Patricia Gibson , Patrick Grady , Peter Grant , Neil Gray , Drew Hendry , Stewart Hosie , George Kerevan , Calum Kerr , Chris Law , John McNally , Angus MacNeil , Stuart McDonald , Callum McCaig , Anne McLaughlin , Carol Monaghan , Paul Monaghan , Roger Mullin , Gavin Newlands , John Nicolson , Brendan O'Hara , Kirsten Oswald , Steven Paterson , Angus Robertson , Alex Salmond , Tommy Sheppard , Chris Stephens , Alison Thewliss , Michael Weir , Eilidh Whiteford , Philippa Whitford , Corri Wilson , Peter Wishart ' the shadow cabinet can not even decide whether it respect the will of the people '
to boldly Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Michael Groom ( Letters , October @card@ ) suggest that Brexit can be solve by be bold . do bold mean show assertive self-confidence - or blindly plough ahead regardless of consequence ? Ernie Waddell Edlesborough , Buckinghamshire Sir - you suggest that MP have ` ` misread the mood of the nation ' ' over Brexit ( Leading article , October @card@ ) . at lunch the other day , of six of us who have vote for Brexit , four say that they would now vote to remain . MP may be pick up similar view . there may be a public desire to decide whether we favour ` ` hard ' ' or ` ` soft ' ' Brexit - or even to have a second , better-informed referendum . many who vote leave will be grateful to those MP who keep question an over-enthusiastic handful of minister . Adrian Martin Loddiswell , Devon Sir - I would happily turn the clock forward to Christmas @card@ ( Letters , October @card@ ) to avoid the cantankerous talk between two irreconcilable side , which will simply lead to hard Brexit . Justin Tooth London W3
Scotland Mrs May play a joker but keep the full Brexit hand close to her chest ; Sketch
Tory MP adore Theresa May . you can tell because at Prime Minister ' s question she deliver what be very possibly , against stiff competition , the feeble script putdown I ' ve ever hear in the Commons ( ` ` even on roll stock , Labour be a laughing stock ! ' ' ) - and yet her backbencher hoot and cheer , instead of , for example , claw in anguish at their own face and pelt her with balled-up order paper . Bernard Jenkin ( Con , Harwich & N Essex ) drench her in praise . ` ` in add my congratulation to the many she ' s receive on her appointment as Prime Minister , ' ' he ooze , ` ` may I just comment that follow the EU referendum , and under her leadership , I feel more confident about the future of our country than ever in my lifetime ? ' ' I have n't hear such a bruising line of interrogation since a Scottish football journalist ask Rangers ' Brian Laudrup , ` ` how come you ' re so good ? ' ' but , while Mrs May be get an easy ride now , it surely ca n't last . the Brexit negotiation will see to that . yesterday she be ask three time by the SNP ' S Angus Robertson whether she want the UK to retain full access to the European single market - and each time she dodge the question . ` ` she do n't know ! ' ' chorus the SNP . firmly , Mrs May explain that she would not ` ` reveal our hand ' ' . in truth , though , it would n't be possible for Mrs May to reveal her hand , because she have n't yet get one.This be because her government ' s most senior figure disagree on what Brexit should be like . for example , the Foreign Secretary , Boris Johnson , have advocate a points-based system for immigration , but the Prime Minister oppose it . and after the Brexit Secretary , David Davis , say on Monday that it be ` ` very improbable ' ' Britain would stay in the single market , a spokesperson for Mrs May be send out to make clear that this be ` ` not policy ' ' . in other word : the man appoint to speak for the government on Brexit be n't speak for the government on Brexit . as well as the one about not reveal her empty hand , the Prime Minister have devise another cunning line to help her dodge question about what she want from Brexit . ` ` we will not , ' ' she sniff three time , ` ` provide a run commentary on every twist and turn of the negotiation . ' ' or , to translate : ` ` I ' m not go to tell you what I want from Brexit , so that I do n't look bad when I do n't get it . then , whatever it be I end up get , I can tell you afterwards that that be what I want all along . ' ' this , as it happen , be the approach David Cameron take to negotiate concession from the EU , before the referendum . he too trumpet relentlessly that he would get ` ` the good deal for Britain ' ' , while remain as vague as he could about what the good deal would involve . the only thing we really know he want be to stay in the EU . and he do n't get it . ' Tories cheer instead of claw in anguish at their own face and pelt her with balled-up order paper '
UK economy ' to grow fast from @card@ ' after Brexit divorce deal
Britain ' S economy should grow fast in @card@ and @card@ as the expect agreement of a Brexit divorce bill - report by the Daily Telegraph as ( Euro ) 45bn ( £40bn ) to ( Euro ) 55bn - should inspire more business and household confidence . Berenberg Bank now expect a sharp pick-up in business investment in the come month as well as a more modest increase in consumer spending . as a result , it have raise its GDP growth forecast by @card@ percentage point in each of the next two year , with growth rise from 1.5pc this year to 1.8pc in @card@ and 1.9pc in @card@ . ` ` @card@ be probably the low point , ' ' say Kallum Pickering , Berenberg ' S senior UK economist , as he cut the probability of a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit from 30pc down to 20pc . ` ` with the chance of a soft Brexit rising , the global upturn can now begin to rub off on the UK more . high business and household confidence from the low risk of a hard Brexit should underpin strong gain in long-lived consumption and investment . ' ' the Brexit talk be still far from over , however . Andrew Bailey , chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority , urge the government and the EU to agree a transition period as soon as possible to avoid a crunch in which contract across the UK-EU border be throw into a legal void . ` ` there do need to be a transition agreement , we need to agree it very soon now , frankly , ' ' he tell the House of Lords EU financial affair sub-committee . ` ` there be obviously then a question as to what rule of engagement the EU and UK agree during that period . in many way I be not so fuss about what they be , provide that they be clear . we can not have ambiguity . ' ' he add : ` ` we could live with a world where the UK go on implement EU legislation rule , and obviously could live in one where we do n't . ' ' that be just as important for the EU as it be for the UK , he say , as financial contract span the border be vital for the continental business that rely on British bank and insurer . the government propose a new industrial strategy earlier this week to attempt to boost domestic growth , productivity and wage .
Union may compromise over Brexit , say Irish PM
the EU could compromise over give Britain access to the single market and custom union after Brexit , the Irish prime minister have suggest . Leo Varadkar propose that the EU could enter into a ` ` deep ' ' free trade agreement with the UK after Brexit and still enjoy access to the single market . he also suggest that the UK could follow the example of Turkey and make its own custom deal after leave the EU to reduce red tape . but he warn he be prepare to delay Brexit talk unless he be satisfy that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make on key issue include the Irish border , the Brexit bill and the right of EU citizen . the Taoiseach , who be make his first official visit to Northern Ireland , have signal that he be prepare to make the Irish Sea the border with the UK because Dublin believe proposal to create a frictionless land border be unworkable . however , he appear to adopt a significantly soft approach than other EU nation to other aspect of Brexit negotiation . he say : ` ` if the UK do not want to stay in the custom union , perhaps there can be an EU-UK custom union . we have one with Turkey . surely we can have one with the United Kingdom ? he add : ` ` if the UK do not want to stay in the single market , perhaps it could enter into a deep free trade agreement with the EU and rejoin EFTA of which it be a member prior to accession . and if this can not be agree now , then perhaps we can have a transition period during which the UK stay in the single market and custom union while these thing be work out . ' ' the EU ' S @card@ remain nation be due to meet for a summit in October when they will decide whether enough progress have be make on the divorce settlement to allow trade talk to begin . Mr Varadkar hint Ireland could block the start of phase two of talk unless it be happy with proposal for the Irish border . he say he do not want there to be ` ` an economic border on our island nor do I want one between Ireland and Britain ' ' and that it be up to advocate of a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' to set out how such border control could work .
labour to foil clean Brexit with help of minor party
labour be prepare to join force with the Liberal Democrats , the SNP and the green in an attempt to thwart Theresa May ' S plan for a clean Brexit and ensure the EU still have oversight over British law . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , will publish the Great repeal Bill on Thursday , which will transfer up to @card@ European law and regulation into British law on the day Britain leave the European Union . Opposition MP be prepare to table a series of amendment in the autumn to ensure the European Court of Justice and EU institution retain influence over British law and right after Brexit . the Prime Minister have previously make clear that Britain will not ` ` return to the jurisdiction ' ' of the European Court of Justice after Brexit and have insist : ` ` Our law will be make not in Brussels , but in Westminster . ' ' the bill be likely to prove one of the big test of Mrs May ' s authority after her failure to secure an outright majority in the election . Bernard Jenkin MP , a Brexit campaigner , say : ` ` these argument that somehow we need some foreign jurisdiction to provide enforcement for UK law be phoney . ' ' Theresa May have call on Jeremy Corbyn to condemn ` ` bully ' ' supporter as they be accuse of draw up a ` ` hit list ' ' of @card@ moderate Labour MP they want to leave the party .
it ' S still not too late to change your mind , Germany tell UK
Britain would be welcome back into the European union if minister reverse the decision to leave , accord to the German finance minister . Wolfgang Schauble say Britain could rejoin if it choose not to go ahead with Brexit , although he admit it be unlikely to happen follow the nation ' s vote to leave last year . his remark , just day before Brexit talk be due to begin , appear to be a deliberate jibe at Theresa May after she lose her commons majority have ask the country for a strong mandate for a hard Brexit . Mr Schauble claim Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have agree that the aim for talk should be to ` ` minimize the potential damage and maximize the mutual benefit ' ' . Mr Hammond , see as the most Europhile member of the Cabinet , be say to favour a ` ` job first ' ' Brexit , put him at odd with Mrs May ' s stated intention of put a reduction in migration centre stage . Guy Verhofstadt , the EU ' s lead Brexit negotiator , say Brussels be ` ` impatiently wait ' ' for Mrs May to decide her position on any exit and to begin talk with other leader of the @card@ member state . in a series of highly critical tweet Mr Verhofstadt , who have be a fierce critic of the UK ' s decision to leave the union , say the Prime Minister must get a handle on her government and start negotiation as soon as possible . he say : ` ` we be impatiently wait for the negotiate position of the UK government . the current uncertainty can not continue . ' ' Mr Verhofstadt add : ` ` Brexit be n't just about the Tories leave the EU , it ' S about the whole UK . everyone ' S voice should be hear . ' ' he say that the ` ` Good Friday Agreement must be a priority in Brexit talk ' ' as an alliance between the northern Irish DUP and the British Government take shape . in an interview with Bloomberg , Mr Schauble say ` ` it ' s up to the British government to take their own decision ' ' as he suggest that EU leader would give minister ` ` some day ' ' to decide how to proceed with talk . he add that it ` ` would not be helpful ' ' to speculate on whether the UK will reverse its decisiont , but add : ` ` the government have say we will stay with the Brexit . we take the decision as a matter of respect . but if they want to change their decision , of course they would find open door . ' ' the Prime Minister ' S spokesman reply : ` ` the British people vote to leave the EU and we will be deliver on that will . ' ' ' we take the decision as a matter of respect . but if they want to change their decision , of course they would find open door '
Brexit Britain need a radical vision but timid Hammond play it safe ; a woeful failure to seize the historic moment be become the hallmark of this government
everything have change , and yet everything have stay the same . this be a risk-averse , unrushed , incremental Autumn Statement fit for a comfortable , content , steadyas-she-goes country , not a manifesto for Brexit Britain . our angry country have just vote to smash the status quo , upend the establishment and tear up @card@ year of foreign policy ; yet there be no commensurate response from Philip Hammond , no firework , no game-changing tax reform , no think the unthinkable . prudence and caution be ordinarily great attribute in a chancellor ; and Mr Hammond be right that spend a little bit more on road make sense . yet these be time that require visionary leadership , not managerialism . it ' S not enough merely to tweak a few scheme here and there , or even , in time , to increase capital spending by a few tenth of a percentage point of GDP . we need a Ronald Reagan style ` ` it ' s morning in Britain ' ' moment ; instead , we be offer a collection of micropolicies that could almost all have be deliver by George Osborne , Vince Cable or even Ed Miliband . this government ' s passivity in the face of seismic change at home and abroad , its inability to imagine and describe a great , exciting future for this county , its refusal to seize the moment - these be fast become its define feature . this be tragic : the Tories have n't be this popular since the eighty , yet they be fail utterly to take advantage of it . there be three possible explanation for this extraordinary timidity . the first be that the Treasury remain in denial , that it secretly hope that Brexit will go away , that Donald Trump will be unelected and that the French election wo n't happen next year . while plenty of powerful people still hope that Brexit will be derail , Mr Hammond be n't one of them , so this theory can be dismiss . the second be that the government want to retain some firepower in case the economy slow . this be plausible , but regrettable : it should be lead , not follow , boost the economy pre-emptively . the third , and in my view most plausible , explanation as to why Mr Hammond choose not to rock the boat be that Project Fear live on , and that the Chancellor do n't have the desire or appetite to take it on . Britain have vote to leave the European Union , the government have pledge to make it a success and yet the country ' s official forecaster continue to assume that Brexit will be bad for growth , productivity and the budget deficit . it ' S like a scene from Yes , Minister , a case study in how the establishment never give up . it would be comical if it be n't so serious . the Office for Budget Responsibility believe that the state will now borrow £122 billion more by @card@ than it forecast in March , a huge change that will send the national debt shoot up all the way to @card@ per cent of GDP in @card@ . Mr Hammond ' S decision be responsible for £26 billion of this increase ; and another £26 billion can be account for , the OBR guess , primarily by the fact that it be become harder to wring income tax out of the economy because of the rise in self-employment . but the OBR also assume that £59 billion of high borrowing be ` ` relate to the referendum result and exit the EU ' ' over this fiveyear period : that number therefore become the ` ` official ' ' cost of Brexit , and have be welcome with hysterical glee by Remainers . the hit be base on highly contestable assumption , include low productivity , reduce business investment , increase barrier to trade and less immigration than there would otherwise have be . for those of us who believe that Brexit will , in time , be good for growth and bolster openness and competition , this be madden : what ' s the point of win a referendum if the government machine be on autopilot , pre-programme to trash Brexit and to assume the bad at every stage ? this inbuilt Remainian bias risk become self-fulfill : the Chancellor can not cut tax because it be assume the economy will slow , so he do n't and it do . as it happen , the only one of the assumption that the OBR make that might be true be that immigration will fall , but it ' S still impossible to predict precise number . I do n't blame Robert Chote , the boss of the OBR and a first-class economist , for this deeply unsatisfactory set of forecast : his job have become impossible . the government have n't tell him anything about the shape of Brexit , so he have take the consensus , establishment view on it . what choice do he have ? have he say that Brexit will , in fact , be good for growth , the explosion of establishment rage would have engulf him . his report make it very clear that these be not really prediction but merely deduction from assumption . in fact , it could have be far bad : the hit from Brexit in the OBR ' S forecast be actually very small : the economy will grow by @card@ per cent this year , fast than the @card@ per cent expect by the OBR in March . growth next year will be a perfectly respectable @card@ per cent ( down from @card@ per cent ) , then @card@ per cent in @card@ ( down from @card@ per cent ) , before return to the @card@ per cent previously expect . Britain would still be grow faster than the Eurozone . this be a dramatically good picture than the catastrophic fantasy recession predict by the treasury during the referendum campaign . even if growth do perform as the OBR suggest over the next two year and then eventually bounce back , as Eurosceptics believe it will , the UK would still end up well off as a result of Brexit . but all of this mean that any forecast for public finance have become even more meaningless than usual . the suppose massive fiscal loosening announce at this Autumn Statement be primarily a statistical fluke . regardless of Brexit , George Osborne ' s deficit reduction target be unachievable ; Mr Hammond be right to ditch it . the real tragedy be not that the national debt be spiral out of control - I just do n't believe the number . it be that the government be do almost nothing to build a new , strong , free-market Britain to capitalise on Brexit . as waste opportunity go , this one truly take some beating . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Hammond in Cabinet Brexit row ; Senior minister attack Chancellor for ' argue like an accountant ' over risk of Britain leave the EU ; PM have tell Cabinet to ' get on ' with deliver Brexit
Philip Hammond be face accusation of attempt to ` ` undermine Brexit ' ' by push for delay to Cabinet measure design to control immigration . the Chancellor have be criticise by Cabinet colleague for ` ` argue like an accountant see the risk of everything ' ' rather than press ahead with plan for Brexit . it be understand that Mr Hammond be one of a number of voice urge caution during a Brexit Cabinet committee meeting last week , during which proposal be discuss for a new work permit system design to reduce immigration . at the meeting Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , present plan for a post-Brexit visa regime that would see all European Union worker force to prove they have secure a skilled job before be allow into Britain . it be see as confirmation that Britain will leave the single market as part of the Brexit process , something which Mr Hammond be previously understand to have warn against . source claim that Mr Hammond raise question about the plan . government source reject any suggestion that there be open dissent from Mr Hammond over the proposal , and say the meeting be about explore proposal rather than reach any concrete position over future immigration policy . however , member of the Cabinet be say to be grow increasingly frustrate by Mr Hammond ' s position on Brexit . one Cabinet source say he be ` ` overly influence by his Treasury official who think it be a catastrophe that Britain vote to leave the EU ' ' . another source say : ` ` he be argue from a very Treasury point of view . he be argue like an accountant see the risk of everything rather than the opportunity . ' ' another source suggest that while the Treasury be quick to criticise solution propose by member of the Cabinet , it have be ` ` less forthcoming ' ' in table its own policy . the source add : ` ` the Home Secretary present an immigration paper at the meeting . other department be not quite so proactive . there be difficulty . ' ' there be claim yesterday that tension have increase to the point where there be fear Mr Hammond could resign as Chancellor . Treasury source last night move to deny those claim as ` ` complete and utter nonsense ' ' . one source say : ` ` it be ridiculous to continued on Page @card@ Anton Muscatelli : page @card@ Slippery slope Euro bind to collapse , warn economist one of the father of the euro have say that the single currency be ` ` a house of card ' ' that be bind to collapse . Prof Otmar Issing , a German economist and former central banker who play a key role in the birth of the euro , say EU financial authority be on a ` ` slippery slope ' ' as the political drive to close union increasingly conflict with their duty as a watchdog . comment : P19 Business : P1 continue from Page @card@ suggest he be do anything other than try to make [ Brexit ] work . ' ' however , the Treasury source add : ` ` he be very clear that the vote to leave the EU be not a vote to sink the economy . ' ' at the Brexit committee meeting last week , Mrs May be understand to have demand that her Cabinet ` ` get on ' ' with deliver Brexit . ` ` the Prime Minister make it clear that we have to get on this , ' ' a source close to event say . ` ` but there be very big personality argue different thing . it ' S not easy . ' ' under the proposal submit by Ms Rudd last week , EU tourist and student would still get free access to the UK . the work permit system would be design to stop low-skilled migrant come to live in the UK in order to search for a job . it be believe the Home Secretary also propose a ` ` seasonal worker scheme ' ' to allow low-skilled migrant to come to Britain temporarily if there be shortage of worker in industry such as agriculture or construction . any attempt to create a work permit scheme be likely to be criticise by business leader . the government be earlier this month force to abandon plan to ` ` name and shame ' ' business hire foreign worker instead of Briton . meanwhile , a think tank have suggest that City firm could move their headquarters out of Britain unless they be give assurance that the finance industry will be protect in Brexit . Open Europe , an independent think tank , warn that the banking sector need at least one year ' s notice of what access to the EU market will look like . ` ` the financial service industry need maximum certainty on future trade arrangement with the EU as early on as possible in the negotiation , ' ' it say . ` ` firm have be plan for the bad , and some of them may start put those plan into motion if uncertainty drag on for too long . ' '
Scotland EU ' s plan to put UK off Brexit ; Brussels hope that take tough stance will see country abandon plan to leave bloc ; Politicians lie about EU for @card@ year , claim Juncker
senior figure in the EU believe that Britain will give up on Brexit if they make negotiation as tough as possible , the Daily Telegraph understand . British official be fight to stop Europe adopt a no-compromise position in the hope that the UK will change its mind about leave the bloc . the revelation come as Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , say British politician be to blame for Brexit because they spend @card@ year spread ` ` lie ' ' about the EU . more than five prominent EU figure interview by the Daily Telegraph express doubt that Britain would go through with Brexit when confront by the ` ` reality of the bureaucratic nightmare ' ' and the ` ` insane act of economic self-harm ' ' . one senior UK official involve in set up forthcoming negotiation say the EU elite ` ` seem to think the game be to make us change our mind ' ' . the stance have leave representative fight to explain to EU leader that their approach be ` ` dangerous ' ' and ` ` unlikely ' ' to succeed . a second UK source add there be a risk of position in the Brexit talk become ` ` dangerously entrenched ' ' , even before Theresa May invoke Article @card@ that will open formal ` ` divorce ' ' proceeding . the sense that battle line be harden came as the @card@ EU leader prepare for a summit today in the Slovakian capital , Bratislava , design to show unity and a determination to forge ahead with a future without Britain . the toughen mood be indicate by Donald Tusk , the European Council president , in a nine-point letter urge EU leader to use the Bratislava summit to restore citizen ' fade faith in the Union . in a barely disguise appeal to make sure Britain be leave demonstrably worse off by Brexit , Mr Tusk insist that the @card@ should resolutely ` ` stick to the treaty ' ' on issue such as free movement . ` ` if we do so , there will be no room for doubt that it be a good thing to be a member of the Union , ' ' he write . Burkhard Balz , a German MEP and influential figure on the European Parliament ' s economic and monetary affair committee , say Britain must not underestimate the determination of the rest of Europe to deprive the UK of its EU financial passporting right and euro clearing . he also warn Europe would accept economic pain to defend its core principle and that the British belief that the demand of German and French exporter could soften the term of Brexit be overblow . WIREIMAGE ` ` this summer I travel all over Germany , and the main reason be to talk about Brexit . BENETT/ Dave Every time , in every place , the big round of applause be when I say the ' the time of cherry-pick and rebate be over ' . that be how the German continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ people feel about the situation , ' ' he tell the Daily Telegraph . in the European Parliament , which must ratify any Article @card@ deal agree by the EU @card@ , the mood against Britain be further sour this week by personal attack on Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian prime minister and a lead Brexit negotiator , by former Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , and David Davis , the minister for leave the EU . Mr Davis refer to his future interlocutor as ` ` Satan ' ' when address the foreign affair select committee , while Mr Farage lambaste Mr Verhofstadt as a ` ` fanatic ' ' . ` ` perhaps there be a time when this could not have get nasty , ' ' say one source close to Mr Verhofstadt , ` ` but when the Brexit minister call the chief negotiator ' Satan ' what response , really , do Britain expect ? ' ' Yesterday Mr Juncker say it be no surprise that the country vote to leave the European Union earlier this year because the public have be tell that the EU be ` ` stupid ' ' for decade . of British politican , he say : ` ` on Europe there be so many lie , so many halftruth that be circulate around , that one can not be surprise . ' ' he admit that the union must shoulder some of the blame for the decision but claim there be ` ` something wrong ' ' with the UK in comment that prompt fury among British MP . in a YouTube question and answer session Mr Juncker say : ` ` of course Brexit mean that something be wrong in Europe . but Brexit mean also that something be wrong in Britain . ` ` if , over @card@ year , you be explain to your general public that the EU be stupid ... you ca n't be surprise that the day you ask people ' do you want to stay or do you want to leave ? ' , that a too high number of British express the view that it be good to leave . ' ' ` ` on Europe there be so many lie , so many half-truth that be circulate around , that one can not be surprise . ' ' Douglas Carswell , the Ukip MP , call Mr Juncker ` ` arrogant ' ' follow his remark .
Brexit be a fantasy , say German trade chief ; Voice of exporter claim Britain leave the EU be see by market as political chatter rather than reality Germans risk miscalculation over cost of messy Brexit
Germany ' S powerful trade chief have dismiss Brexit as a pipe dream that will never happen , insist that market remain calm only because investor be entirely discount the political noise from Westminster . ` ` Brexit be just talk so far . I doubt it will ever happen , ' ' say Anton Börner , president of the German federation of trade and service ( BGA ) and voice of the country ' s export interest . ` ` the market be not expect Brexit either . otherwise you would see the stock market crash through the floor or British interest rate would be explode . British financial market be tick along relatively well because investor assume that Brexit be just political chatter rather than reality , ' ' he tell die Welt . the comment offer a revealing window into attitude in Berlin , where much of the political class still think that the UK will recoil from the Article @card@ process and opt back into the EU - albeit on diminished term . the assumption that Britain ' S bluff can be call lend itself to political gamesmanship and have colour the Brexit talk , perhaps tempt the German authority to think they take a particularly tough line without serious consequence . this be fertile ground for misjudgment . German trade datum suggest that the cost of an acrimonious Brexit - with EU trade tariff , reach 10pc on car - be high for German industry than often acknowledge . last year the German trade surplus with the UK be ( Euro ) 50.5bn ( £44.7bn ) , big than its surplus with any other country , and four time its entire surplus with the rest of the eurozone ( ( Euro ) 12.9bn ) . this be not trivial . Mr Börner ' s breezy assertion that Brexit will never happen suggest that German industry be misread the political situation and have yet to assess the actual damage if Britain be push too far and talk break down . ` ` there be still an assumption that the UK will blink and ask for Brexit to be call off , ' ' say David Marsh , an expert on Germany and head of the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum . Mr Marsh say British leader be equally mislead in think that Germany will come to the rescue and force through a friendly deal to shield its car industry . ` ` both side be misjudge the other , ' ' he say . for now the position of the BGA and Germany ' s industrial combine be to uphold the ` ` integrity of the EU single market ' ' even if this mean sacrifice unfettered access to the lucrative UK market . they be not deviate one iota from the inflexible line of the German government . Brexiteers hope that German industry would lobby for a soft deal have be sorely disappoint . Mr Börner say that the British must learn the hard way that withdrawal come at a cost . ` ` there be rule that we have all agree to . it would be a devastating signal - both internally and externally - if the EU be to give something away , ' ' he say . to the surprise of many in Britain , Germany have so far prove to be one of the most unyielding country in the EU , shoot down proposal by other state and EU think tank for a creative way out of the impasse . Berlin be strikingly hostile to an British-Italian initiative and to a Bruegel paper by France ' S Jean Pisani-Ferry call for a ` ` Continental Partnership ' ' to preserve close trading tie , with inner and outer circle to reflect good the change geometry of Europe . it have be quick to reprimand any of the EU-27 state that step out of line . Germany have play a lead role in stipulate there can be no discussion of the relationship with Britain until the issue of Brexit reparation payment be settle and the UK have jump through a set off hoop , an aggressive stance that risk force Britain to walk out . while the mantra from Berlin be that the EU be a ` ` rules-based ' ' structure that must be protect , there be a dark reality behind the rhetoric . Germany flout EU law over its illegal current account surplus and forge its own Nord Stream @card@ gas deal with the Kremlin against vehement protest from East European state , and in breach of EU principle . the EU system both heighten and mask German power . the single market have serve Germany extremely well but often at the expense of other EU state . Italy have see no benefit from the arrangement for a quarter century . it correlate with national decline . in demand the EU uphold the sanctity of the single market and the EU Corpus Sanctum above all else , Berlin be conflate its own interest with the interest of other : those that do not see the matter in such didactic , ideological term and want to preserve close defence tie with the UK , such as Poland ; or those that could be hit hard by a no-deal debacle , such as Ireland . the risk for Germany as it seek to make an example out of Britain be not only that it could trigger an anti-German ` ` buyer ' strike ' ' by offend British consumer but also that its own relation with other EU state will become even hard to manage . ' there be a dark reality behind the rhetoric . Germany flout EU law over its current account surplus '
Amber Rudd accuse Johnson of be a ' backseat driver ' over Brexit negotiation ; Home Secretary deny Cabinet split over EU withdrawal and refuse to deny ambition of top job
amber rudd have accuse Boris Johnson of be a ` ` backseat driver ' ' over EU negotiation after his essay on Brexit re-opened Cabinet rift . the Home Secretary say that she do not want Mr Johnson ` ` manage the Brexit process ' ' and criticise his decision to go ahead with the article the day after the late terrorist attack . Ms Rudd also refuse to deny that she have ambition of become prime minister , say only that she have not ` ` get time ' ' to think about it . Ms Rudd , a Remain campaigner during the EU referendum campaign , be less than complimentary about the Foreign Secretary in the run-up to last year ' s Brexit vote , say he be : ` ` the life and soul of the party , but he be not the man you want drive you home at the end of the evening . ' ' ask by the BBC ' S Andrew Marr what she mean when she say that , she reply : ` ` what I mean by that be I do n't want him manage the Brexit process . ' ' she insist that Theresa May be ` ` drive the car ' ' and , when press on Mr Johnson ' S intervention , she say : ` ` you could call it backseat driving . ' ' her view be echo by Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , who say : ` ` it be absolutely clear to everyone that the driver of the car in this instance be the Prime Minister . ' ' the Home Secretary describe Mr Johnson as an ` ` irrepressible enthusiast ' ' on Brexit who bring ` ` enthusiasm , energy , and sometimes entertainment ' ' to the Cabinet . ask if the intervention be helpful , she reply : ` ` I think it be absolutely fine . I would expect nothing less from Boris . ' ' she say she have not read his article in the Daily Telegraph because : ` ` I have rather a lot to do on Friday . there be a bomb that nearly go off in Parsons Green . yesterday I chair Cobra , I go to see the www.police.No , I do n't have time to read the piece . ' ' she agree that Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , ` ` have a point ' ' in criticise Mr Johnson for submit the piece as London suffer another terror attack . deny the Cabinet be split over Brexit , Ms Rudd say : ` ` the fact be that most people , like myself , who campaign for Remain , believe that now we need to get on with it . ` ` we need to do it in away that protect the economy , that do n't have a cliff edge , that make sure that immigration attract the bright and the good ... ' ' many minister be reportedly irritate by Mr Johnson ' S intervention , which have expose difference of opinion in the Cabinet about the size of any Brexit bill that should be pay . Theresa May have spend much of the summer restore discipline in the Cabinet over Brexit and until now appear to have be largely successful . the Home Secretary have be widely tout as a potential successor to Mrs May and she fail to rule out a bid for the top job . ask about her future ambition , she say that as Home Secretary she be focus on ` ` keep people safe ' ' , add : ` ` I have n't get time for the rest of it . ' ' however , Conservative colleague be unconvinced by her reticence . one senior Tory MP tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` of course she be line herself up for a leadership bid , without any question or doubt at all . but she know , as do everyone else in the party , that it be not in anyone ' S interest to have a leadership challenge before Brexit be a legal reality . ' ' BBC OVERS/ Jeff ` ` one of the big obstacle to Ms Rudd if she do decide to stand in a future leadership contest be the size of her majority in her Hastings and Rye constituency , which slump from @card@ to just @card@ in June ' s general election . there have be speculation that Ms Rudd might change constituency for a safe seat at the next election but she would only say : ` ` I ' m hope over the next few year to build on it by show the voter of Hastings and Rye how I can support them locally . ` ` I be down in Hastings and Rye most weekend work locally but my priority have to be , as Home Secretary , keep people safe . ' ' meanwhile , Mr Green be ask about his own relationship with the Prime Minister by Sarah Smith on BBC one ' S Sunday Politics . Ms Smith remind him that Margaret Thatcher talk fondly about her deputy leader William Whitelaw and joke that ` ` everyone need a Willie ' ' . ask if he view himself as ` ` Theresa May ' s Willie ' ' , he reply : ` ` I be a huge admirer of Willie Whitelaw in my youth and absolutely I would be very content to have him as a role model . ' '
OECD see no reason to raise barrier after Brexit ; City expertise will not be brush aside after Brexit
EU nation have ` ` ample room ' ' to keep trading in financial service with the UK after Brexit even within the current international rule , and there be no need to build any barrier between the continent and its finance hub , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) say . shut out Britain , which would risk starve the EU of the capital vital City of London , be entirely unnecessary , the international group say in its annual business and finance outlook . all @card@ OECD member state agree to a Code of Liberalisation and the group argue that , if the member follow this mutual agreement , they can carry on operate smoothly - though that may rely on them stay on good term . ` ` Erecting new barrier to financial service in the post-Brexit environment will not be in the collective interest of the global economy , where London play such a key role in international banking , bond and foreign exchange , ' ' the report say , note that it take decade for the UK to build up its expertise , something which can not be simply transfer elsewhere . ` ` for OECD country , international obligation in the form of the OECD Codes of Liberalisation should present no legal barrier to operate in the collective interest post-Brexit . ' ' these code ` ` provide ample room for a pragmatic approach to the United Kingdom ' s exit from the European Union ' ' , the OECD say . access to the single market for service essentially mean that the country have the similar regulatory regime - something the OECD expect will continue , give vary regime include those in the US and Japan be deem to be equivalent by the EU . ` ` unless UK and EU financial service regime diverge significantly after Brexit , it can arguably be expect that the United Kingdom would benefit from the sort of selective recognition arrangement provide for by the Codes , ' ' the OECD say . ` ` the converse - recognition of EU financial service provider by the UK authority as meet UK standard - be also to be expect , even though the material significance of this may be small . ' ' in most area the World Trade continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Organisation insist its member offer access to their market on a level play field for all country - the most favour nation , or MFN , rule - except in the case of strike a trade deal cover ` ` substantially all ' ' trade . if the EU offer the UK ' s financial service sector special access then it could look like it be break that rule , though traditionally this have only be test in dispute over trade in good , not in service . ` ` no breach of the MFN principle result from EU directive that allow the European Commission to take the so-called ` ` equivalence decision ' ' , by which third country service provider can be entitle to access European financial service market without incorporation , ' ' the OECD say . ` ` such third country identify so far include Japan and the United States , for example , and the financial service operation concern relate to such area as capital market prospectus , credit rating , statutory audit , insurance and reinsurance , credit institution , or investment firm . ' '
Scotland Sturgeon accuse of manufacture Brexit grievance
Nicola Sturgeon be yesterday accuse of manufacturing ` ` synthetic grievance ' ' about Brexit after claim that the UK Government be attempt to use it to attack ` ` the very foundation ' ' of Holyrood ' S power . the First Minister use a speech to a think tank in Edinburgh to claim that Westminster be plot to strip Holyrood of some of its responsibility despite Theresa May specifically pledge not to do so . she say that it would be a ` ` gross betrayal ' ' for the UK Government not to devolve power repatriate from Brussels cover policy area such as farming and fishing . the SNP leader also argue that a second independence referendum would give Scots a ` ` proper choice ' ' on whether they want to remain part of a post-Brexit Britain and it would ` ` almost ' ' be necessary if the Prime Minister ignore her demand for a special deal . but Ruth Davidson attack Ms Sturgeon ' s ` ` shrill ' ' tone and say the Prime Minister ' S Brexit White Paper have make clear more power would be devolve to Holyrood . the Scottish Fishermen ' S Federation ( SFF ) say the First Minister be make ` ` the wrong argument at the wrong time ' ' and call for the Scottish and UK government to work together to make the most of Brexit ' s ` ` sea of opportunity . ' ' David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , tell a Holyrood inquiry last week that none of Holyrood ' S power would be ` ` re-reserved ' ' after Brexit . he say civil servant have identify several hundred power that will be repatriate from the EU , of some of which will be entirely devolve to Holyrood , other will go to Westminster and a third group will be share . however , speak to the David Hume Institute in Edinburgh , Ms Sturgeon say that after @card@ year of progress , devolution now face a ` ` grave threat ' ' . she say : ` ` Far from the promise of the leave campaign that a Brexit vote would automatically see swathe of new power repatriate from Brussels to Holyrood , the Tories be actually threaten to strip the Scottish Parliament , and the other devolve administration , of some of their power . ` ` it be clear from their statement that even element of farming and fishing policy - which have be a wholly devolve competence from day one - now risk be take back to Westminster . ' ' argue this be ` ` a gross betrayal of the claim and promise make during the EU referendum campaign ' ' , she conclude : ` ` so what we have be in effect an attack on the very foundation of the devolve parliament we vote for @card@ year ago . ' ' Warning Mrs May of the consequence of ignore her plan to keep Scotland in the single market , Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` Proposing a further decision on independence would n't simply be legitimate , it would almost be a necessary way of give the people of Scotland a say in our own future direction . ' ' but Ms Davidson say : ` ` this hyperbole from the First Minister take synthetic grievance to a whole new level . frankly , she sound shrill . ` ` Nicola Sturgeon ' s attempt to use Brexit to manufacture the case for a second referendum have quite simply fail . she should now take it off the table so Scotland and the UK can work to get the good Brexit deal possible . ' ' Bertie Armstrong , the SFF ' s chief executive , say : ` ` what we want be for the UK Government and Scottish Government to pull together . ' ' he say the organisation want fishing regulation to be devolve but argue that international negotiation over Britain ' S water have to continue be lead by the UK government with input from the Scottish authority . ' this hyperbole from the First Minister take synthetic grievance to a whole new level '
Labour vow not to stand in way of PM ' s Europe plan
labour will back Brexit even if the party lose its bid to amend the Article @card@ bill , the shadow foreign secretary , have admit . Emily Thornberry tell the BBC that Labour be use ` ` back channel and private conversation ' ' to seek assurance from the government and vow not to block the formal EU exit process even if minister do not pledge to keep key protection . the remark be criticise by Labour MP who warn that the party must set out a clear alternative to Theresa May ' s Brexit plan . furious MP have demand Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , be sack for miss last week ' S vote . Jeremy Corbyn hint yesterday that some of the shadow minister who defy him to vote against Article @card@ may not be sack , despite parliamentary convention . ask whether frontbenchers who defy party order could keep their job , Mr Corbyn tell BBC Radio @card@ ' S the World This Weekend : ` ` I will be make an announcement during the week . ' ' he add : ` ` I be a very lenient person . ' ' Lisa Nandy , a former shadow energy secretary , express grow frustration in the party that Mr Corbyn ' S team have no clear stance on Brexit . she say : ` ` the real challenge for Labour be to become the alternative and that mean you have to know not just what you be against , but what you be for . ' ' outline the party ' S decision not to block Brexit , Ms Thornberry tell the BBC One ' S Andrew Marr Show : ` ` we have say that we will not frustrate Brexit . we have get our instruction from the British people . we be democrat and the public have vote to leave the European Union . ` ` we be speak to Government , we be speak to Tory backbencher and we be try to get a compromise that will work . ' ' her statement on the party ' s Brexit position come as MP prepare to demand Mr Corbyn sack Ms Abbott for miss last week ' s Article @card@ vote as she claim she have a migraine . they will today demand she lose her shadow home secretary job during a private meeting of the parliamentary Labour Party . Caroline Flint , a former Labour cabinet minister , say : ` ` we now have Brexit flu that Diane have create here . it ' S about be part of a team . ` ` she hold one of the most important portfolio within the shadow cabinet , if she ca n't support the leader on this then she should go . ' ' a number of shadow cabinet minister resign because they do not feel able to vote in line with Mr Corbyn ' S demand last week , but Ms Abbott remain in the senior team . Ms Thornberry refuse to be draw on whether Ms Abbott would face the sack if she fail to support the Bill in Wednesday ' s final third reading vote .
Hammond rebuke Johnson , warn no one be ' unsackable ' ; Tories in Manchester Conservative Party Conference
Philip Hammond deliver a clear rebuke to Boris Johnson for ` ` downplay ' ' the complexity of Brexit as he continue his feud with the Foreign Secretary yesterday . the Chancellor say ` ` focus ' ' and ` ` unity ' ' would be need if Britain be to come out of the Brexit negotiation with a good deal . and he warn the Foreign Secretary that no minister be ` ` unsackable ' ' . meanwhile , Sir Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , espouse the virtue of ` ` discipline and loyalty ' ' in a sideways reference to Mr Johnson on a day when he face mount criticism from his Cabinet colleague . Mr Hammond , speak a day before Mr Johnson make his own conference speech , say Britain will remain ` ` closely link with the EU ' ' follow Brexit , and stress the need for a ` ` careful and cautious ' ' negotiation . Mr Johnson use article in the Daily Telegraph and the Sun last month to set out his Brexit ` ` red line ' ' and to demand that his Cabinet colleague start to show more optimism about Brexit . he believe Britain should be prepare to leave the EU without a deal , and have suggest too many of his colleague be downplay the benefit of leave the union . Mr Hammond take the opposite approach in his speech , say : ` ` if we get this right , Britain will have a bright future beyond Brexit . but we must be clear-eyed about the challenge along our way . ` ` we must not downplay the difficulty nor underestimate the complexity . with focus and determination and unity , we will succeed . ' ' Mr Johnson ' s conference speech today will be arguably the most anticipate of the conference . the reception it get could make or break his ambition of one day lead his party , and if he be see as be disloyal it could also increase call from some of his Cabinet colleague for Theresa May to sack him . Mr Hammond do not name Mr Johnson in his speech , but in another barb clearly aim at him , he say the government must ` ` pick our way carefully and cautiously across the difficult terrain of EU negotiation , to ensure we arrive in good order on the fertile plain at the other side ' ' , add that ` ` focus , determination and unity ' ' would be need to succeed . in a series of medium interview earlier in the day , Mr Hammond have say that Mr Johnson be ` ` sackable ' ' , after the Prime Minister refuse to answer a similar question on Sunday about the Foreign Secretary . he also suggest Mr Johnson ' S disloyalty be make it harder for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , to negotiate in Brussels . he say : ` ` the more we can show unity , the strong our negotiate position with the European Union would be . his hand would be strong when it be clear that he have a unite Cabinet behind him . ' ' ask about Mr Johnson ' s claim that the Brexit transition period should be ` ` two year and not a second more ' ' , he shrug : ` ` I would describe that as a rhetorical flourish . ' ' Mr Hammond suggest that Mrs May have give Britain ` ` flexibility ' ' over the length of the Brexit transition period by say it would last ` ` around ' ' two year . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , say the transition period could last ` ` a few month either side ' ' of two year . the Telegraph understand that several Cabinet minister believe a period of two and a half year would be acceptable . Sir Michael Fallon be also scathing when ask about Mr Johnson ' s chance of become the next Tory leader . speak on the Telegraph ' s Chopper ' S Brexit Podcast , Sir Michael say his advice to his squabbling colleague be to ` ` have a look at the military . people admire our military the world over ? why ? because of ? those virtue of discipline and loyalty ' ' . he say a poll that show @card@ per cent of Tory member want Mr Johnson as the next leader ` ` do n't seem extremely high ' ' . speak on the same programme , Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader , say Mrs May need to show by the end of the conference that she could ` ` lead a unite party , or we will not succeed ' ' . Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , yesterday warn if Cabinet minister do not ` ` pull in behind ' ' Mrs may they would be ` ` risk Brexit ' ' . ask by the Guardian if he fear Mr Johnson be ` ` look for the top job , ' ' Mr Hunt say : ` ` all I would say to anyone who might be eye a different job be that Jeremy Corbyn be also eye a different job . ` ` and if they do n't swing behind Theresa , who I think be do a fantastic job in very difficult circumstance , they will just open the door to Jeremy Corbyn and probably the most dangerous Left-wing government this country have ever see . ' ' at a conference fringe event , Mr Green refuse to rule out pay for single market access after the Brexit transition period ? which would cross one of Mr Johnson ' s red line . he say : ` ` I ' m not rule anything in or out that will be in the detail of the negotiation because David Davis have get a difficult job and he be eminently suit to do it . I ' m not go to do anything that make his job more difficult . ' ' William Hague : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ business , page @card@ ' Brexit will be one of the most challenging task undertake by a peacetime government '
Theresa May need courage and ambition body : when a prime minister address a party conference , they have two audience : the party and the country . under Tony Blair and David Cameron , it become orthodox to overlook the party and reach out to the country - on the assumption that the former be repellent to the latter . but thing have change . grass-roots activism be more vital to British politics than it have be for decade , and the re-emergence of philosophical debate mean that a good leader have to engage seriously with the idea bubble away within their rank . that be why , when Theresa May take to the stage in Manchester next week , she must address the audience in the hall and at home on the assumption that they be both look for the same thing : a compelling Conservative vision . Jeremy Corbyn have vision by the bucketload . his idea might be outdate , even dangerous , but the very fact that he believe in something attract support , and that support have help revive the Labour Party ' S fortune . so , too , have the Tories ' comparative lack of self-confidence . while Labour have spend the past few year make the case for big government , the Tories have be shy about advocate the free market . this have allow Labour to give the impression that its activist be the only one motivate by high ideal . and yet , listen to Mrs May ' S speech will be small businessman , charity worker , cleric , councillor and regular party activist - the backbone of civic Britain - who just want to give something back to their community . this traditional Tory family have be expand by Brexit . the Conservative vote in @card@ be old , poor , and less southern than it have be in a while . opinion in Manchester over Brexit may be fairly diverse , yet the question on everyone ' S mind be now identical : ` ` we ' ve hear that Brexit mean Brexit , but what do that actually mean in practice ? ' ' there be those who want Brexit to be as light as a feather : a slow retreat from the EU , pay it off to keep it sweet and stay in the single market , with a few cosmetic change . on the other hand , there be those who want Britain to win the maximum of liberty at the low price : keep control of our border , our court and our ability to trade with whomever we wish . get the most out of Brussels might require brinkmanship , say that the UK be willing to walk away without a deal . it be a risk ; Brexit always involve risk . but one never get what one want without ask . the voter understand this : only the most militant Remainers take every threat from the EU negotiating team as a statement of fact . and as the week go by , the stake of that negotiation be become clear . we be tell during the referendum campaign that the EU be just a trade club motivate by mutual self-interest . this week , however , Emmanuel Macron call for fast , close integration - EU identity card , a shared defence budget , an EU army . just as the domestic battle have become dramatically sharp - socialism vs capitalism - so the debate over Brexit have crystalise into pan-Europeanism vs nation-state democracy . Brussels have sheer contempt for Britain ' s dream of self-determination . Mrs May signal she be willing to make concession to the EU in her Florence speech , and how do Jean-Claude Juncker react ? by say there will be little progress in talk ` ` unless miracle would happen ' ' . this be Mrs May ' s chance to lay out this epochal choice and say , both to her party and her country : ` ` this be what I ' m up against . this be why I need your support . ' ' but she should also say : ` ` and this be what I propose to do . ' ' activist will be listen for detail : what happen after this transition deal ? Will Britain set target on immigration ? what domestic policy will see the economy through ? will the UK build more house , cut tax , slash regulation and invest in infrastructure ? if the choice pose be between a Brexit in name only and a Brexit that make the most of Brexit - one that exploit free trade and slim down the regulatory state - Mrs May would be wise to hammer out the case for freedom . there be absolutely no point in sit on the fence . if the party and the public crave decisive leadership , there be nothing to be gain from skip over the big question and offer a reiteration of the slogan that serve the party so poorly during the general election . strong and stable ? these be good quality , but they need to be ally to courage and ambition . the Tories must trust their instinct more . they particularly need to trust the instinct of their member . Mrs May should speak to them boldly and , yes , tell them what they be wait to hear - if only because it ' s what the country want to hear , too . Brexit be a magnificent , once-in-a-generation chance to reassert the authority of Parliament and liberate the individual , to re-establish Briton as the sovereign of their own affair . on Brexit , this be Mrs May ' s chance to say , both to her party and her country : ' this be what I ' m up against . support me ' if the party and the public crave decisive leadership , there be nothing to be gain from skip over the big question
Scotland Tory anger at official over Brexit divorce bill ; civil servant accuse of keep Cabinet ' out of the loop ' with £36bn offer to EU ; Settling Brexit bill ' a sign of weakness '
BREXIT negotiator have be accuse of try to ` ` ram through ' ' a £36billion divorce bill while most of the Cabinet be on holiday in a furious backlash from minister and senior Eurosceptic conservative . yesterday , the Sunday Telegraph disclose that senior Whitehall official have conclude that the offer be the only way to break a deadlock in negotiation with the EU and push ahead with discussion on a future trade deal . the scale of the divorce bill have infuriate Eurosceptic Cabinet minister and Tory MP , many of whom believe that Britain be under no obligation to pay anything once it leave the EU and should in fact get some money back . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , tell MP three week ago that European leader can ` ` go whistle ' ' if they expect Britain to pay an ` ` exorbitant ' ' divorce bill . Theresa May and senior Eurosceptic Cabinet minister include Mr Johnson and Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , be on holiday while Parliament be in recess . Eurosceptic minister have long be concern that British official be intent on derail plan for a clean Brexit , particularly after their role in David Cameron ' s ` ` Project Fear ' ' campaign during the EU referendum . a government source say : ` ` it feel like a lot of work be go on over the summer and a lot of decision be be make while the Cabinet be out of the loop . it ' S not good . cynic would say that they be try to ram it through while there be n't time for proper scrutiny . ' ' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , be lead talk but nearly @card@ official be work on the negotiation and be understand to have be involve in draw up the plan for the divorce bill . last month it be claim that Mr Johnson and Dr Fox have be ` ` keep in the dark ' ' about an announcement that EU citizen will be allow to continue to come to the UK after Brexit . both be abroad when the announcement be make by Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who be both senior figure in the Remain campaign . Downing Street yesterday dismiss the £36billion figure as ` ` speculative ' ' . David Jones , a former Brexit minister , say : ` ` it look very much as if official be try to bounce minister into accept an outcome of negotiation they will not be happy with . the whole thing be extremely unhelpful and against the national interest . ` ` any payment we make to the EU should not simply be a sweetener for a trading relationship . the Eurosceptics in the Cabinet will not accept a figure of this scale . ' ' last month British Brexit negotiator conclude the EU have create a straitjacket for the negotiation process by refuse to talk about trade until it continue on Page @card@ Juliet Samuel : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ reach a deal on citizen ' right , money and Northern Ireland . Senior Whitehall official be now look to propose a transition deal under which Britain would continue to offer to make net payment to the EU of ( Euro ) @card@ billion ( £9.03 billion ) a year for up to three year after Brexit . the payment would represent a partial payment on a final £36billion bill that negotiator hope will jump-start talk on trade and future relation . Mrs May and Mr Davis have accept that an amount will have to be pay and that they need to ` ` determine a fair settlement of the UK ' S right and obligation ' ' . Jacob Rees-Mogg , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , say that he and his colleague would vote down the Brexit divorce bill in Parliament . he say : ` ` I think £36billion be much too much . we have no legal obligation to pay anything . accept the premise that you have to pay to leave the club be fundamentally wrong . in term of a negotiate strategy it be a sign of weakness for us to offer money before we move on to other thing . ` ` they have set this straitjacket ; they should untie it . we should not fall into their trap ... we want the money for British public service , not commission fat cat and their pension . ' ' Peter Bone , another Eurosceptic Tory MP , say ` ` I would have think we should be get some of that money back , we should n't be give them money . I do n't understand what the logic be behind give the European Union any money whatsoever because we have be pay in and in and in . ' ' however , other Eurosceptic MP believe that the divorce bill may be a price worth pay . Conor Burns , parliamentary private secretary to Mr Johnson , say : ` ` Britain be a nation that honour her obligation . many of us who campaign to leave the EU be more focus on the prize than the price . ' ' a series of position paper set out Britain ' s approach on a new custom agreement and a solution to the Northern Ireland border issue could start to be publish as soon as next week .
sack treacherous envoy , May urge
Theresa May be face call from her own minister to sack government trade envoy who have oppose her plan for Brexit amid accusation that they be ` ` talk Britain down ' ' as it leave the EU . six of Britain ' S @card@ trade envoy have defy the government in key vote over Brexit , include one who suggest that people who vote to leave be ` ` little Englander ' ' . Eurosceptic minister join Iain Duncan Smith , the MP and former Conservative leader , in call for them to be axe for ` ` be oppose to Brexit ' ' . one minister tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` at a time when we be try to build a global Britain , have people who do n't believe in the nation ' s future outside the European Union be not at all in the national interest . ` ` these people should be champion Britain abroad , not damage its prospect by talk it down . ' ' Mr Duncan Smith tell the Brexit-Central website : ` ` it be quite absurd that at the moment the UK leave the EU and start to make new free trade deal , we should have as our trade representative people who be viscerally oppose to Brexit . ' ' Trade envoy be appoint by the government to promote Britain in @card@ market around the world . they be not pay for the role although their expense be cover . they include Rushanara Ali , a Labour MP and trade envoy for Bangladesh who vote against trigger Article @card@ and formally start the process of leave the EU . in the Lords , Baroness Bonham-Carter of Yarnbury and Baroness Northover , two Liberal Democrat peer who serve as trade envoy , support amendment oppose the government ' S plan for Brexit . baroness Northover previously describe people who vote for Brexit as ` ` the voice of little England ' ' . Lord Faulkner of Worcester and Lord Hollick of Notting Hill , two Labour peer who serve as trade envoy , oppose the government along with Lord Janvrin , a cross-bench peer . a government spokesman defend the envoy programme and say they bring a ` ` wealth of experience ' ' to the table to help British business succeed internationally . the envoy be either unavailable to comment or decline to do so . a Lib Dem spokesman say : ` ` Liberal Democrats always talk up Britain when seek to promote trade in foreign country . ` ` there be nothing patriotic about try to yank Britain out of the world ' s most lucrative market without a single trade deal in place to replace it . ' ' it come as it emerge that Tory rebel be threaten to side with Labour in a bid to keep Britain in the Single Market and Customs Union after Brexit . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , be plan to table an amendment to ensure Britain keep ` ` the same basic term ' ' during a transition period after leave the EU .
Scotland May , the magnificent multi-tasker ; Election @card@ Sketch
yesterday afternoon , a journalist ask Theresa May whether she ' d watch the big TV debate . ` ` I think Amber Rudd do an excellent job , ' ' reply the Prime Minister . an intriguing answer . the day before , Mrs May have explain that she could n't take part in the debate herself , not because she be run scared , but because she would be too busy ` ` think about Brexit negotiation ' ' and ` ` meeting voter ' ' . yet here she be , the next morning , deliver her personal review of her stand-in ' S performance . apparently , Mrs May have n't have time to attend the debate - but do have time to watch it . then again , we should n't make assumption . perhaps Mrs May spend Wednesday evening do all three task at once : think about Brexit negotiation , meeting voter , and watch Amber Rudd . it ' S perfectly possible . knock on voter ' S door ; think about Brexit negotiation while wait for voter to answer ; talk to voter ; then watch a bit of Amber Rudd on iPlayer smartphone App while walk to next voter ' S house . then repeat , all evening . the more I think about it , the more impressed I be . that truly be worldclass time management . how people can say Mrs May be have a bad campaign , I do n't know . yesterday , the Prime Minister be at a company in Cleveland , give a speech about Brexit . she present two alternative vision . if she remain Prime Minister , she explain , Brexit offer ` ` a bright future ' ' ( for emphasis , these word be emblazon on the board behind her , in sunny yellow ) . if Jeremy Corbyn become Prime Minister , however , Brexit be bind to go wrong . ` ` Our economic prosperity will suffer , ' ' she scowl . ` ` Jobs will be put at risk ... we wo n't have the financial mean to fund the public service we rely on ... Sounded worry . and , accord to Mrs May , a Corbyn victory next week be not impossible . so , aboard the Tory battle bus afterwards , I attempt to follow the Prime Minister ' S logic . if a Corbyn-led Brexit be guarantee to be an economic nightmare , I ask her , would the Tories in Opposition seek to overturn the referendum result , to prevent this disaster ? ` ` the referendum result should be respect , ' ' say Mrs May . right . but if a Corbyn-led Brexit be go to ruin the country - as she ' S tell us it will - would n't she feel a duty , in the national interest , to try to prevent it ? ` ` I ' m not go to predict the election result , ' ' say Mrs May . ` ` I ' m work for the campaign until election day . but I do believe there ' s an important issue about trust in politician . people give their choice . ' ' so even though she ' S tell us that under Prime Minister Corbyn , Brexit will mean job loss , economic damage and no money for public service , she would n't do anything to stop it ? ` ` what I ' m do be work over the next week for the General Election , ' ' say Mrs May . and that be that . well , I suppose we ' d good hope she win then , have n't we ?
correction and clarification ; News Bulletin Body : Brexit survey an April @card@ article report on a ` ` Brexit survey ' ' say to have find that @card@ per cent of poll respondent ` ` back Brexit ' ' . although a clear majority do not disagree that Britain will be economically well off and will have more control over immigration post Brexit , the @card@ per cent figure relate to respondent ' approval of the way the government be handle Brexit negotiation , not to their support for Brexit per se . we be happy to clarify this .
correction and clarification ; News Bulletin Body : Brexit survey an April @card@ article report on a ` ` Brexit survey ' ' say to have find that @card@ per cent of poll respondent ` ` back Brexit ' ' . although a clear majority do not disagree that Britain will be economically well off and will have more control over immigration post Brexit , the @card@ per cent figure relate to respondent ' approval of the way the government be handle Brexit negotiation , not to their support for Brexit per se . we be happy to clarify this . Calum Dowers , the teenager kill in a road accident by a driver use his mobile phone , be incorrectly name in the picture caption accompany the article ( ` ` Driver kill teen while use App to track down wife ' ' , May @card@ ) as Calum Best . we apologise for the error .
Scotland Corrections and Clarifications Body : Brexit survey an April @card@ article report on a ` ` Brexit survey ' ' say to have find that @card@ per cent of poll respondent ` ` back Brexit ' ' . although a clear majority do not disagree that Britain will be economically well off and will have more control over immigration post Brexit , the @card@ per cent figure relate to respondent ' approval of the way the government be handle Brexit negotiation , not to their support for Brexit per se . we be happy to clarify this . Calum Dowers , the teenager kill in a road accident by a driver use his mobile phone , be incorrectly name in the picture caption accompany the article ( ` ` Driver kill teen while use App to track down wife ' ' , May @card@ ) as Calum Best . we apologise for the error .
Scotland Tusk : you ' ll want to stay when reality of Brexit hit
Britain may decide not to leave the EU when face with the reality of a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council say last night , warn that forthcoming divorce talk would be ` ` painful ' ' . his intervention come as Europe continue to harden its approach towards the negotiation after Theresa May ' s pledge to trigger Article @card@ by early next year . Mr Tusk say that Mrs May ' s promise to end the free movement of EU worker , stop EU budget payment and restore the primacy of UK law-making mean Britain have opt to ` ` radically loosen ' ' its tie to Europe . ` ` the only real alternative to a hard Brexit be no Brexit , even if today hardly anyone believe in such a possibility , ' ' he say in a speech to the European Policy Centre , a Brussels think-tank . Brexit continue to dominate the news agenda amid row over foreign-based food company ` ` profiteer ' ' from the fall pound and a High Court bid to force a parliamentary vote on trigger Article @card@ . after a day of closed-door talk , Unilever , the Anglo-Dutch consumer conglomerate , apparently back down in its stand-off with Tesco over a @card@ per cent price hike on food such as Marmite , which it have blame on Brexit . a Telegraph analysis discover that of its @card@ lead brand at least @card@ be make in its nine UK factory , not import . Mr Tusk , who next week will chair a European Council meeting in Brussels which will be Mrs May ' s first as prime minister , say it be ` ` pure illusion ' ' Britain could leave the EU while retain the benefit of membership . he single out Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , for say that Britain could have its cake and eat it . ` ` the brutal truth be that Brexit will be a loss for all of us , ' ' Mr Tusk add . ` ` there will be no cake on the table for anyone . there will be only salt and vinegar . ' ' Mr Johnson dismiss such negativity , tell MP it would ` ` take time ' ' for the full benefit of Brexit to appear . he add that Britain could get a trade deal that be ` ` of great value ' ' to the economy than access to the EU single market , add that Commonwealth country be already ` ` step up ' ' to reach trade agreement . he make the upbeat comment as the Attorney General contest the legal bid by Remain supporter to force the government to hold a vote on trigger Article @card@ . Jeremy Wright say the legal move by Gina Miller , a wealthy City investor , would be a ` ` backdoor ' ' attempt to bypass the democratically express will of the people . BREXIT Reports News Pages @card@ comment Pages @card@ & @card@
Post-Brexit bonanza for investor in UK firm ; Plunge in sterling benefit shareholder as top British company pay out billion more in dividend
sterling ' S post-Brexit tumble be set to deliver a multi-billion-pound boost to UK investor this year after record dividend payout in the last quarter . shareholder be expect to take home more than £82.5bn in dividend in @card@ as sterling ' s Brexit devaluation help to drive forecast payout for the year up by £4.3bn compare with @card@ . the dividend bonanza gather pace in the second quarter , hit a record £28.8bn , boost by a bumper round of special dividend payout from the likes of InterContinental Hotels and GlaxoSmithKline . the late dividend Monitor study by Capita Asset Services show that the decline of the pound in the month lead up to the referendum - and in the wake of the Brexit result - will swell the payout receive by UK shareholder when convert from US dollar . around two fifth of UK-listed company run their finance in the strong dollar currency , which could lead to exchange rate gain of just over £2.8bn in the second half of the year alone , on top of the £1.4bn already book in due to the pre-Brexit pound slump . ` ` [ Brexit ] have dramatically change the picture for UK dividend in @card@ . even though steep cut be still come through from a number of large mining concern , bank and other , overall , they be be largely offset by the much weak pound , ' ' the report say . in addition , special dividend payout quadruple compare with the same quarter last year after bumper shareholder payday from @card@ company , which Capita say be ` ` easily ' ' the large number on record for any quarter . InterContinental Hotels pay out £1bn after sell hotel in Paris and Hong Kong , and GlaxoSmithKline pay £970m follow an asset swap with Novartis . at the same time , record @card@ profit at ITV bring in a £400m shareholder windfall , while Lloyds Bank pay out an extra £360m . the report warn , however , that beneath the ` ` froth of special dividend ' ' the outlook be ` ` less positive ' ' . dividend , exclude special payout , fall 2.7pc to £25.2bn in the second quarter and could struggle in the come year if economic jitter over the UK ' s exit from the EU begin to hit the profit of mid-cap company . underlie dividend be still expect to rise , creep up £1.9bn to £76.9bn , but the 0.5pc increase from @card@ fall well below the 3.8pc boost expect when special dividend be include . caput say the swift post-Brexit bounce-back from the top @card@ company should offset the weakness in midcap company , enable equity yield to hold steady at 3.7pc . by contrast , UK bond yield hit new low of 0.8pc in the aftermath of the vote , Capita say . Justin Cooper , Capita ' s head of shareholder solution , say : ` ` the Brexit vote have completely change the picture for dividend this year and beyond . ` ` in the short term , investment and consumption will be depress while the country wait for a response from the new government , and for a Brexit timetable to emerge . dividend will suffer from any slowdown in economic growth , particularly among the UK ' s mid-cap company , though a persistently weak exchange rate will cushion sterling investor in the UK ' s large multinational . ' '
Brexit ' a great opportunity - not a time bomb ' say Fox
Liam Fox have call for the ` ` obsession with criticise Brexit ' ' to end in @card@ , as he insist the UK ' s withdrawal from the European Union ` ` be not a time bomb to be defuse ' ' . the International Trade Secretary say it represent a ` ` great opportunity to be embrace ' ' as he attack critic who would ` ` rather see Britain fail than see Brexit succeed ' ' . Mr Fox ' S intervention come as he travel to China to try to improve the UK ' S trade and investment tie with Beijing . write on the Conservative Home website , he say that he find ` ` return from a positive and optimistic international visit only to encounter a wave of negativism at home ' ' most frustrating . he say that interest abroad in invest in post-Brexit Britain be in ` ` stark contrast to the self-defeat pessimism that be too often on show ' ' in the UK from some politician , pundit and medium outlet . ` ` attitude need to change as we go into @card@ ; Brexit be not a time bomb to be defuse , but a great opportunity to be embrace , ' ' he say . ` ` Our international competitor be already out there try to carve out their slice of the world ' s grow market . we need to get beyond the obsession with criticise Brexit , lift our horizon , and be out there , too . ' ' Mr Fox say that establish an independent trade policy for the UK will allow Britain to pursue agreement with nation that the EU do not currently have free trade deal with . the Department for International Trade say : ` ` [ Mr Fox ] be visit China , our fifth large trade partner , to build independent trading relationship with the rest of the world . we have instigate @card@ trade work group across more than @card@ country to make sure we hit the ground running . ' '
Brexit plan get airborne - then nosedive ; Brexit deal chaos either Mrs May be keep the UK in line with Europe , or she ' S sell NI down the river
after @card@ month of phoney war - of talk , position and negotiate behind the scene - the rickety craft of Theresa May ' s Brexit strategy briefly take flight yesterday , and then promptly nosedive back to earth . within hour of Ireland ' s state broadcaster report that the Prime Minister have agree that the UK would ensure ` ` continued regulatory alignment ' ' between Northern Ireland and the EU , political gravity take over . if the game of leak the compromise be to railroad Mrs May into sign off the deal at her lunch with Jean-Claude Juncker , it backfire spectacularly , expose this most carefully word of text to more scrutiny than it could bear . wrap up in the language be a subtle compromise that official have work on for the good part of a month , and try to be all thing to all party . the UK have not be force to agree to Ireland ' s initial demand for ` ` no regulatory divergence ' ' ; instead it be elect to use newfound freedom after Brexit to maintain convergence . to Dublin the compromise give clear reassurance that Northern Ireland would not diverge , obviate the need for a return to a hard border , while simultaneously give Arlene Foster ' s Democratic unionist a promise that the ` ` alignment ' ' would only be in the sector that be relevant to the good Friday Agreement . it be at this moment that Brexit ' s immutable logic take over , and inexorably over the course of the next few hour begin to unravel the deal . Mrs Foster be emphatic that Northern Ireland must not be treat differently from any other part of the United Kingdom . the North , she say , could not become a regulatory exclave of the Republic , or the EU itself . but how then to square her demand for equality , with the idea that Northern Ireland be apparently be grant a soft Brexit that seem to make it part of the EU ' s single market and custom union in all but name ? either Northern Ireland be be treat differently , which would imply an east-west border to monitor mainland Britain ' s divergent trade policy after Brexit , or , contrary to everything we have be tell by Mrs May , the UK be not diverge at all ? it could not be both . in try to placate the DUP , Downing Street signal that Mrs May be sign up to ` ` regulatory alignment ' ' for the whole of the UK but only in those area that impact the Irish border question , principally agriculture and electricity . but there lie the rub . if that be the case - and there be some @card@ area that have reportedly be identify as crucial for north-south cooperation in Ireland - how free , really , would the UK be to diverge with Liam Fox ' s muchvaunted independent trade policy ? EU official be privately very clear that the ` ` fudge ' ' on Ireland leave little room for manoeuvre . the level of regulatory convergence require to avoid a hard border - and the east-west border that imply - be inescapable . so either Mrs May be sign up the UK to vast swathe of convergence with the EU , something Boris Johnson and free-trading Brexiteers have explicitly rule out , or she be sell her DUP partner down the river with false promise . clearly Mrs May hope the reality of these conflicting position could survive unnoticed at least until the EU have grant ` ` sufficient progress ' ' at the European council in @card@ day ' time , and she could claim a pre-Christmas victory at the end of a disastrous year . in the event , her gambit do not survive the afternoon . such be the political horizon of a prime minister whose cabinet have not even hold a substantive discussion on the shape of the UK ' s future relationship with the EU . on today ' S show it be not difficult to see why .
Labour resistance to Brexit be futile Body : Brexit be go to happen : claim to the contrary be time-wasting mischief . Britain vote to the leave the EU ; in June more than @card@ per cent of voter back pro-Brexit party . negotiation be under way . if there be any serious domestic debate to be have it be over transitional arrangement . militant Remainers prefer to engage in pointless grandstand . take the repeal bill , which next week begin its journey through Parliament . the Bill be purely procedural . it repeal the @card@ European Communities Act while , for the sake of ease and meet the trading standard of Europe , all existing EU legislation be translate into domestic UK law . this be not ideal : the purpose of leave the EU be to cut red tape rather than protect it . but Parliament will then have an opportunity to ` ` amend , repeal and improve ' ' as necessary . this be the practical beginning of Brexit , a repatriation of sovereignty that we see advance this week with Britain ' s withdrawal from the @card@ London Fisheries Convention . this will be extend , hopefully , to the writing of law , free trade and justice . and as these step be take , the true destination of the Brexit project should become clear . Britain be regain control and use that control to become a free , more competitive country . what must not happen be what Labour hope to achieve by tie up the repeal bill in the Commons : Britain leave the EU in name only , retain every vestige of legislation that kill free enterprise . nor must the country become stick permanently in a no-man ' s land of transitional arrangement . the CBI have suggest that Britain stay inside the Single Market and Customs Union until a Brexit deal be enforce , which would be a bad mistake and risk become an indefinite state of limbo . moreover , there be those who want to use the debate over transitional arrangement not just to delay Brexit but overturn the referendum result - to kick start another Project fear , hamstring UK negotiator and build the case for Britain to think again . the government have to press ahead with its negotiation with clear resolve , explain exactly what it be do and why - take the public with it . opponent have to be remind that to delay or undermine Brexit be to resist the stated will of the people . the country be either in the EU or out of it . there be no third way .
Scotland Sturgeon call for stability ahead of Brexit
Nicola Sturgeon yesterday appear to row back on her timetable for a second independence referendum after Michael Gove warn her to stop ` ` grandstand ' ' if she want to win concession over Brexit . the First Minister say ` ` everything ' ' that politician do in the midst of the Brexit talk should restrict ` ` uncertainty ' ' and Scottish and UK minister ` ` have all get a responsibility to try to act in way that limit that uncertainty . ' ' it be the clear hint yet she will abandon her original plan for a referendum between autumn next year and spring @card@ when she disclose her response next week to the SNP ' s maul in the general election . however , she say ` ` it ' S not about now but when the time be right ' ' . Mr Gove , the Environment Secretary , say the First Minister must stop try to ` ` manufacture grievance ' ' and adopt a ` ` fundamental alteration ' ' in her approach if she want progress on issue such as Scotland get flexibility over immigration policy . speak ahead of a meeting with fisherman in Peterhead , he praise Fergus Ewing , the SNP rural economy minister , and Roseanna Cunningham , the SNP environment minister , for their constructive tone during his talk with them and express his hope that relation between the UK and Scottish government will enter a ` ` more mature phase ' ' . his intervention come after Mike Russell , the SNP ' s Brexit minister , threaten to derail an ` ` orderly ' ' Brexit by withhold consent for key UK government legislation . but fail to pass the repeal bill would cause chaos in Scotland as it will replace thousand of redundant EU law . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , have say it would be ` ` incredible ' ' not to give consent . Ms Sturgeon be press to accept that her independence referendum threat be also cause uncertainty during a breakfast meeting with representative of farming and other countryside industry at the Royal Highland Show in Edinburgh . she argue that Scot should get a separation vote so they can have their say on Brexit , but add : ` ` in everything we do , a year on from the Brexit referendum should be about try to limit that sense of uncertainty . of course people feel very uncertain and the Scottish Government and the UK Government have all get a responsibility to try to act in way that limit that uncertainty ... ' ' speak to the BBC ' S Good Morning Scotland programme , Mr Gove urge Ms Sturgeon to have ` ` open and inclusive ' ' discussion with the UK . the prominent Brexit campaigner , who be raise in Aberdeen , say : ` ` we know now that the SNP be lick its wound after a disastrous election campaign . we hope that as a result there will be a period of humility . ' ' Brexit talk : page @card@
the IMF must stop play political game and get back to its root
the International Monetary Fund this week kick off its annual meeting in Washington on the typically downbeat note we have come to expect from these event . the global economy be weak and fragile , it warn in its late World Economic Outlook , prompt a destructive backwards slide into protectionism , economic malpractice and reduce openness . this sub-par growth , moreover , ` ` risk perpetuate itself ` ` because of ` ` the negative economic and political force it be unleash ' ' . Brexit be cite as a prime example of this potential plunge into the abyss . Maurice Obstfeld , the IMF ' s chief economic counsellor , go further . Brexit , he say , be part of a political backlash ` ` that blame globalisation for all woe and seek somehow to wall off the economy from global trend rather than engage cooperatively with foreign nation ' ' . I be a remainer , but I ca n't accept this interpretation of Britain ' s vote to leave . Mr Obstfeld do n't overtly lump Brexit in with Trumpism , but he might as well have do . his meaning be clear , and as seem ever more frequently to be the case with the IMF , he could not have be more wrong about it . nobody yet know how Brexit will pan out . lot of thing could go wrong , not least a defensive and vengeful reaction from the European union that attempt to lock Britain out of the single market . but on present evidence , Brexit be a very long way from the sort of protectionist , inward look , reactionary force Mr Obstfeld imagine . to the contrary , as articulate by the new government , Brexit be about embrace the many positive of globalisation and stand up for free trade , not turn the nation ' S back on them . economically , Brexit will undoubtedly be difficult and troublesome , but it be most unlikely to be disastrous . not for the first time , the IMF have become captive to ` ` group think ' ' and powerful establishment force . over the last @card@ year , the fund have be pretty much wrong about everything of substance . it fail to see the financial crisis come , and it fail to anticipate the eurozone debt crisis , have essentially become a cheerleader for integrationist ambition of monetary union . it then proceed to become part of one of the big economic policy blunder of the modern age , override its own rule and convention to save the euro and bail out the banker . it have also be consistently wrong about the UK . some serious soul search be in order . the very purpose of this institutional corner stone of the post-war , Bretton Woods economic settlement be be call into question as rarely before . time and again , the IMF have be find guilty of faulty forecasting , analysis and policy . too often it become captive to powerful political interest in its membership , as occur in Britain ' s referendum campaign when it be use as a key part of George Osborne ' s ` ` Project Fear ' ' . yet the big failure be over the euro . first the IMF ignore the design flaw at the heart of European monetary union , and therefore completely fail to see its propensity to crisis . then , as the debt meltdown begin , it remain upbeat about the health of the Europ=ean banking system , take at face value the self interested reassurance of national and euro area regulator . and finally it squander the fund ' S resource on an unprecedented scale support the continuation of a currency which for some of its member have become an economic doomsday machine . ensure the single currency ' S survival be routinely prioritised over the individual nation ' s good interest . this may have be understandable in view of America ' S still recent banking crisis . Larry Summers , a former US Treasury Secretary , warn that a sovereign default within the eurozone would be ` ` like Lehman ' S on steroid ' ' . yet fear of contagion provide only a partial excuse . the effect be to bail out banker at the expense of citizen . the internal devaluation impose on large part of Europe give it no plausible way back to growth or liberation from mountainous debt . Greece ' s former finance minister , Yanis Varoufakis , have call it a form of ` ` fiscal waterboarding ' ' . in carry out these policy , the IMF disobey a number of the cardinal principle it traditionally apply to programme country , in particular that austerity should be offset by devaluation and debt relief . within the straightjacket of the euro , there be neither . official get around these stipulation by slip through a radical change in IMF rescue policy , allow an exemption ( since abolish ) if there be a risk of systemic contagion . ` ` the board be not consult or inform , ' ' last summer ' s IEO post mortem on the debacle find . instead , director discover the change in policy ` ` tuck into the text ' ' of the Greek package , but by then it be too late . it be small wonder there have be a political backlash . the IMF be deeply complicit in cause it . the IMF have be equally guilty of misdiagnosing the UK economy , though fortunately in Britain ' s case the consequence have be confine to mere embarrassment . Osborne ' s fiscal consolidation be routinely criticise by the IMF as too deep and too fast , culminate in a warning from the organisation ' s chief economist , Olivier Blanchard , that the chancellor be ` ` play with fire ' ' . within a year , the UK have become the fast grow economy in the G7 . repeat some of the same mistake as be make in the eurozone debt crisis , Christine Lagarde , manage director of the IMF , wade into Britain ' s referendum debate , say that a vote to leave the European Union would have ` ` pretty bad to very , very bad ' ' consequence . so far it seem to have have zero impact on the world economy , and beyond an initial flurry of financial market turbulence , virtually none in the UK either . there be a vital need for supranational organisation such as the IMF . but rather than provide solution , the IMF have too often find itself part of the problem . it need to stop play political game and get back to its root , which lie in the sole purpose of provide liquidity support for country that get themselves into fiscal difficulty and sound policy remedy for get them out again . ' it fail to see the financial crisis come , and it fail to anticipate the eurozone debt crisis '
Scotland Sturgeon tell to stop her Brexit sulk
ruth Davidson have challenge Nicola Sturgeon to focus on get the good Brexit deal for Scotland instead of sulk and try to ` ` wish away ' ' the EU referendum . the Scottish Tory leader hit back at the First Minister ' S jibe that she have become a ` ` born-again Brexiteer ' ' despite play a prominent role in the Remain campaign before June ' s EU vote . Ms Davidson say that both she and Ms Sturgeon be disappoint with the Brexit result but ` ` she ca n't wish away the idea that this be go to happen because it be go to happen ' ' . Scotland ' s political leader now have a choice of either sulk or work to make it a success , she say , before conclude : ` ` I ' m not a natural sulker . ' ' in contrast , she say Ms Sturgeon be try to use the result as a ` ` constitutional chisel ' ' . speak at the Tory conference in Birmingham , she also reject the SNP leader ' S accusation that she have change her mind about want the Brexit deal to include access to the single market even if that mean accept free movement . but Ms Davidson be force to deny that she be on a collision course with Theresa May , who have indicate that she favour a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit with control on immigration . her intervention come as the Scottish Secretary insist the Prime Minister want Ms Sturgeon ' s input into the UK Government ' s negotiate stance . although he reiterate that the Scottish Government have no veto or opt-out from Brexit , David Mundell say Mrs May want to ` ` look at any option that reflect Scotland ' s good interest ' ' . Ms Sturgeon say a second independence referendum be ` ` highly likely ' ' only hour after the referendum result , which see @card@ per cent of Scots vote Remain , and have since focus on try to somehow keep Scotland in the EU . Ms Davidson argue Ms Sturgeon should focus on ensure the Brexit deal protect key sector of the economy and identify opportunity outside the EU . ` ` that ' s the choice you have - you either sulk or you work . and I ' m not a natural sulker , ' ' she say . ` ` you either put your shoulder to the wheel or you refight something . I do n't want the referendum to go the way that it do - I work really hard to make sure that it do n't . ' ' she argue it be premature to state that the government ' s pledge to prioritise cut immigration in the Brexit talk damage chance of get single market access . Ms Davidson say the different ` ` strand ' ' of the UK ' S stance would only be pull together when Article @card@ be trigger . she also question whether power hold by Brussel in devolve area such as fishing should come to Holyrood , say fisherman ' S group want a UK-wide approach . the Scottish Tory leader say David Davis , the Brexit minister , have tell her the power would all come back to the UK Government in the first instance , then talk will be hold about which should be devolve . a spokesman for the First Minister say : ` ` Ruth Davidson be tie herself in knot over her position on the key question of whether we stay in the single market . ` ` Scotland deserve well than that - just three month ago Ms Davidson be say single market membership be vital , but now she be spin furiously to avoid upset her boss the Prime Minister ' ' .
pm : Isil would love Brexit ; keep jihadists out be close to impossible , say minister
David Cameron provoke a furious response from lead Eurosceptics yesterday after say that the head of Isil would be ` ` happy ' ' if Britain leave the European Union . the Prime Minister say that both Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and Vladimir Putin , the Russian president , would favour a Brexit as he seek to ` ` demolish ' ' nine economic ` ` myth ' ' from the Brexit campaign . Boris Johnson , a lead Brexit campaigner , suggest that he ` ` no longer recognise ' ' Mr Cameron and the Remain campaign ' s ` ` negative ' ' vision of Britain . he add that it be ` ` a bit much ' ' to say that Brexit campaigner be ` ` ally ' ' with Mr Putin and Isil , and accuse the Prime Minister of ` ` collude ' ' with Britain ' S business to win their support during the referendum . in one of his most outspoken attack on Mr Cameron yet , Mr Johnson describe his EU deal as ` ` the big stitch-up since the Bayeux Tapestry ' ' and suggest it make Britain look like continue on Page @card@ Ediiorial Comment : page @card@ a ` ` banana republic ' ' . it come as Penny Mordaunt , a Eurosceptic defence minister , say it be ` ` almost impossible ' ' for the security service to keep jihadists out of Britain while it be a member of the EU . she say : ` ` it be undermine our security and again , as in so many area , we have the EU with the authority but none of the responsibility at all . it be the first duty of any government to protect its citizen and we need more tool to do that . ` ` it be not just the threat now - @card@ Daesh-trained fighter in Europe , accord to Europol - it ' s what ' s come over the horizon as well . ' ' last week Mr Cameron suggest the EU could descend into war if Britain vote to leave . he say in a speech yesterday at Mansion House in London : ` ` I never say if we leave on Thursday , World War Three break out on Friday . it be worth ask the question who would be happy if we leave . Putin might be happy , I suspect al-Baghdadi might be happy . ` ` this be the time for strength in number . this be the time to stick with our friend and neighbour and our ally rather than breaking [ Europe ] apart . ' ' he also defend the deal to give Turkey visa-free access to the EU after it be heavily criticise by Sir Richard Dearlove , a former head of MI6 , who compare it to ` ` store gasoline next to the fire ' ' . Mr Cameron highlight a recent article by Sir John Sawers , a former head of MI6 , and Lord Evans , the former head of MI5 , call for Britain to stay in .
EU lay down law on transition ; long road to the deal ; do not ' roll over ' and accept EU term , warn Rees-Mogg
EU LEADERS have be accuse of try to ` ` bind ' ' Britain to Brussels for year after they insist the UK must bow to the will of the European Court of Justice until @card@ . negotiate guideline for the second phase of the Brexit talk publish by the European Council yesterday state that ` ` all existing European structure ' ' include the ` ` competence ' ' of the ECJ will apply to the UK throughout the two-year transition period . but lead Brexiteers say stay in the ECJ for another four year mean ` ` delay Brexit until @card@ ' ' . Donald Tusk , the President of the European Council , confirm yesterday that leader of the @card@ other EU member state have agree that continue on Page @card@ report : page @card@ editorial comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make over the issue of the Brexit divorce bill , the Irish border and citizen ' right for talk to move to the next phase , cover the transition period and Britain ' s future relationship with the EU . Theresa May say it mark an ` ` important step ' ' on the road to Brexit and promise to deliver ` ` the Brexit people vote for ' ' . she have make it clear that she intend to end the ECJ ' s power over British court before the end of the transition period . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the staunch Brexiteer Tory MP , warn that she must not ` ` roll over ' ' by accept the EU ' S term , which also include stay in the single market and custom union and retain free movement until @card@ . Mr Rees-Mogg say : ` ` Demanding the Court of Justice and free movement be try to bind us into the EU when we vote to leave . this be delay Brexit until @card@ . there be also a political risk if no advantage of Brexit be show shortly before the general election . the EU do n't want us to leave and believe if it delay it long enough it wo n't happen . ' ' Iain Duncan Smith , former Conservative leader and another staunch Brexiteer , describe ECJ jurisdiction during transition as ` ` unworkable ' ' . but another row be brew last night over exactly when trade talk would begin . Mrs May say they would start ` ` straight away ' ' but the guideline state talk will not begin before March . Mr Tusk have repeatedly declare that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' be enough to trigger talk on transition and future relationship , say a Whitehall source , add : ` ` and we will hold them to that . ' ' Mr Tusk say only that ` ` exploratory ' ' talk could begin now . Mrs May ' s aim of agree the term of Britain ' s withdrawal by next October be possible , to allow the deal to be ratify by all @card@ member state , include Britain . the head of the EC say this be ` ` still realistic , but dramatically difficult ' ' .
forecaster be ignore the only certainty - another recession
' T be the season , it seem , of ` ` official ' ' economic forecast , and the more that roll in , the more depressing they get . last week it be the Office for Budget Responsibility , which sharply downgrade its productivity assumption , and therefore its growth forecast , for the wide UK economy . this week , it ' S the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , which have chime in with even bleak prediction than the OBR . in the OBR ' S case , there be at least no attempt to calibrate the forecast against other advanced economy , but the OECD spare us no such blush ; other than Japan , Britain ' s growth prospect be judge to be significantly bad than the rest of the G7 , at least for the next two year . implicit in both set of forecast be a substantial negative impact from Brexit . with political sensitivity in mind , the OBR try its hard to disguise the Brexit effect , blame the downgrade on a low post-financial crisis trend in productivity growth . but it be nonetheless there as a factor in those very same productivity assumption . with the OECD , the Brexit judgment be a good deal more overt ; the close the eventual trade deal with Europe , the OECD opine , the well it will be for growth . as it be , the OECD assume the talk will result in relatively favourable transitional arrangement , which be by no mean a give . Brexit present a particularly thorny issue for forecaster . if you could park it as an unknowable quantity , leave it out of the equation altogether , you most certainly would , if only to avoid the opprobrium heap from both side of the debate on any positive or negative judgment . yet no forecaster can credibly ignore it . furthermore , it be already obvious that whatever the long-term impact , Brexit uncertainty be indeed have an economically chilling effect . the chill instruct the forecast , which in turn inevitably feed into the wide political narrative , where their nuance and context quickly become ignore . in any event , as with the referendum campaign itself , we be again subject to a relentless diet of negative prediction . whether it turn out to be right or wrong be almost irrelevant . as Brexit negotiation reach their most politically difficult and define stage , the tone of the forecasting become steadily more doom laden . this be go to affect both the public mood and the concession that UK politician be prepare to make to ensure single market access . support for Brexit will erode the more leave the EU be see to damage the UK ' s economic prospect . Sir Michael Caine , one of the UK ' s national treasure , say of Brexit that he would rather be a poor master than a rich servant . noble , inspiring and widely share though this sentiment might be , it ' S not a choice that anyone of sound mind would voluntarily want to make ; we ' d all much rather be a rich master . to be a poor one be not the way Brexit be sell . as Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , keep stress , the UK do not vote to become poor . unfortunately , the implication of both the OBR and OECD forecast be that this be precisely what we have do . I worry a lot about the political repercussion if their gloom turn out to be justify . already the financial crisis have cause the UK to miss out on an entire decade of wage growth . the implication of the OBR ' s productivity downgrade be that we be head for a second such hiatus . real wage growth never equate exactly with underlie productivity growth , but the two be closely relate . without productivity growth , there can be no appreciable increase in live standard . in recent year , we ' ve see a reasonable amount of economic growth , but much of this be down to rise level of employment , which in turn boost overall consumption ; it add to spending power in the round , but not at an individual level . most of us be bad off than we use to be . the job boom have now very likely run its course , make the depressed OECD and OBR growth forecast all too plausible . if the vote for Brexit be at least in part a howl of rage against year of belt-tightening , just think what a further prolonged period of the same be go to do to the political landscape . the OECD have well get its model up to speed , for whatever the negative economic consequence of Brexit , they will be as nothing compare to a full-on dose of Jeremy Corbyn . if the OECD forecast look bad for Britain , it ought to be add that they do n't look particularly good for anyone . poor productivity growth be a universal disease afflict all advanced economy . for the time be , world growth be be sweep along by recovery in the previously depressed eurozone . this cyclical upswing will eventually abate , leave everyone in much the same boat as the UK , with still quite poor trade intensity compare with the pre-crisis period , not enough investment to sustain the present growth spurt , very high level of private and public indebtedness , and a distinct lack of both business dynamism and innovation . Hammond have declare that he will prove the OBR wrong on productivity . I hope he do , though I do n't see much in the government ' s industrial strategy White Paper to support the ambition . as be the way of these thing , the paper be a great deal well on the diagnosis than on likely cure . in any case , I ' m with Ronald Reagan on these matter . ` ` the nine most terrifying word in the English language be : I ' m from the government and I ' m here to help , ' ' he say . government tend to impede growth , not facilitate it . still , it might be say , at least our bank be off the critical list . accord to the Bank of England ' s late stress test , they be now sufficiently recover from the financial crisis to survive almost anything the world economy could throw at them . which be , I suppose , a relief , because far from ease since the financial crisis , overall national indebtedness - household , corporate and public combined - be now a great deal higher . and although the late forecast might look unduly gloomy , there be one thing they do n't predict which be actually almost certain - another recession . the present expansion have already be long by past standard ; that it can last another five year without mishap be almost inconceivable . it be unfortunately the case that the OBR and the OECD be be too optimistic , not too pessimistic . ' if the OECD forecast look bad for Britain , it ought to be add they do n't look that good for anyone '
May must unite Tory on Brexit or lose election , warn Hague ; Prime Minister face Cabinet split over EU deal as she prepare for key speech to set out planMrs May look for third way as Cabinet split on EU deal
Theresa May must use a landmark speech on Friday to unite the Cabinet around an agree plan for Brexit or risk an irreversible split in the Conservative Party , Lord Hague warn today . the former party leader say senior minister ` ` lack co-ordination ' ' @card@ month on from the EU referendum and it be ` ` high time ' ' they settle on an agree plan . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Lord Hague say that if Mrs May ' S landmark Brexit speech in Florence on Friday fail to unite the Cabinet , ` ` Jeremy Corbyn will be prime minister ' ' . as the Prime Minister prepare to set out her vision for post-Brexit Britain in her speech , a fresh Cabinet row have emerge over what sort of deal the government should aim for . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , favour a deal similar to the one be negotiate with the EU by Canada , which eliminate @card@ per cent of trade tariff and involve a clean break from Brussels . but Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , be say to favour a Swiss-style arrangement , in which Britain could pay to access the single market . at a press conference in Canada last night , Mrs May insist she do not face a ` ` binary choice ' ' between the two model as Britain be pursue its own bespoke deal . follow day of in-fighting , Mrs May attempt to regain control of the Brexit process by appoint Oliver Robbins , the UK ' s chief day-to-day Brexit negotiator , to a new post where he will report directly to her rather than his old boss , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . she also issue a put-down to Mr Johnson , describe as a ` ` backseat driver ' ' on Brexit at the weekend , by say : ` ` the government be drive from the front . ' ' the discord over Brexit be further highlight when Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , who work closely with Mr Hammond , use a speech in Washington DC to make a series of gloomy prediction about the effect of leave the EU . he say the referendum result be ` ` a real shock about which monetary policy can do little ' ' and say it would lead to ` ` weak real income ' ' as well as high inflation and increase interest rate . he also suggest that ` ` abrupt decrease in migration ' ' could lead to labour shortage that would have a detrimental effect on the economy . Mr Johnson seize the Brexit agenda last week when he set out his own detailed vision for Britain ' s future in an article for the Daily Telegraph , and it have now emerge that he fear that Mrs May will use Friday ' s speech to signal a Swiss-style deal that would yoke Britain to EU law and regulation . Switzerland pay for access to the single market but do not contribute to other EU fund such as the Common Agricultural Policy . it also accept freedom of movement but be not part of the custom union . its arrangement mean it have to abide by vast swathe of EU regulation . accord to a House of Commons research paper , such an arrangement would mean Britain pay @card@ per cent of what it currently do , or £4billion per year . Mr Johnson , who meet President Donald Trump in the US yesterday , warn that Britain must not agree to pay ` ` extortionate sum ' ' for access to the single market , add : ` ` they would not pay us for access to our market . ' ' he also say it be ` ` pretty important ' ' that any transition period ` ` should not be too long ' ' while concede that Britain would have to pay what it be ` ` on the hook for ' ' in the short term . Mr Johnson be furious that the Cabinet meet behind his back to discuss Brexit while he be in the Caribbean surveying hurricane damage , and believe that Mr Hammond and Ms Rudd use the opportunity to lobby for a Swiss-style deal , know as European Economic Area Minus , or EEA- . instead , Mr Johnson and Mr Gove be press for a deal that be more akin to Canada ' S Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) that remove @card@ per cent of trade tariff . the Foreign Secretary will meet Mrs May in New York today or tomorrow for a showdown over the content of her Florence speech as they both attend the United Nations General Assembly . meanwhile , Dominic Cummings , the former campaign director of Vote leave and a close friend of Mr Gove , suggest that the Cabinet have be ` ` lead like lamb to the slaughter ' ' by Sir Jeremy Heywood , the powerful Cabinet Secretary . he suggest that back Mr Johnson and Mr Gove give Tory MP ` ` a shot of save your skin ' ' , while back Mr Hammond mean the government would be ` ` in dire danger ' ' . but Mrs May say there be a third way that do not involve a Ceta or a Swiss-style deal . speak in Canada , she say : ` ` I do n't recognise the simple binary approach . I have always say we be not look to take a model off the shelf or a relationship that currently exist because the position of the UK be unique . ` ` we be already in the European Union . ` ` we have the relationship with the EU already and when we come out we want to ensure we can negotiate a good deal , a bespoke deal , a deal that be right for the United Kingdom and that would be in the economic interest of the European Union as well . ' ' Mrs May have invite Mr Johnson , Mr Hammond and Mr Davis to Florence but Mr Johnson have not yet confirm whether he will accept the invitation .
macron tell Britain ' S military make it ' too important ' to sideline
Emmanuel MACRON be tell that Britain be ` ` too important ' ' to sideline after Brexit because of its military strength , accord to leak emails from the president ' s campaign team . a trove of ten of thousand of emails release by WikiLeaks yesterday show senior Macron adviser argue for continued British involvement in European defence project while highlight the bitter division between Paris and Berlin on EU defence cooperation . the behind-the-scenes advice , which date from before Mr Macron ' s presidential win in May , paint a stark contrast with the European Union ' s recent claim that Brexit could open the door to a new golden age of EU defence cooperation . it also give weight to British Brexit negotiator ' belief that security and defence cooperation will be a key bargaining chip when negotiate the future relationship with the EU . one of the emails , send by Hervé Grandjean , Mr Macron ' s industrial affair adviser and a defence specialist , contain a report on the future of Franco-British defence relation after Brexit . the report , write by Alice Pannier , a European security expert , warn that France would be ` ` catch between the temptation to seize Brexit to advance the CSDP [ the EU ' s common defence plan ] and the desire to maintain a critical mass of exchange with the British , who ... remain the most important and the most active country in the field of defence . ' ' in the report , which be pass on to Quentin Lafay , the president ' s speech writer , on Oct @card@ @card@ , Ms Pannier add : ` ` Brexit will necessarily have potentially contradictory effect on bilateral cooperation . both government have insist on the preservation and strengthen of the bilateral partnership . ' ' in another email , date Oct @card@ @card@ , François Heisbourg , Mr Macron ' s former defence adviser , discuss EU plan for the close integration of European defence force in wither term . Mr Macron ' S party , La République en Marche , decline to comment on the specific email exchange when contact by the Daily Telegraph , and repeat warning that some of the emails in the cache could be fake , plant to deter cyberhackers . ` ` these emails be obtain and publish illegally . we be not go to comment on whether specific emails be false , ' ' a spokesman say .
Scotland Peers demand UK ' raise its game ' on Brexit
the UK Government need to ` ` raise its game ' ' and co-operate with the devolve administration over Brexit , a Lords committee warn today . a new report say that while a committee be set up to allow minister from the UK , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland to discuss the process , its meeting be ` ` not be treat with respect or organise efficiently ' ' . peer on the EU Committee say the Joint Ministerial Committee ( JMC ) should be allow to agree common position on the Brexit issue of most importance to the government in Edinburgh , Cardiff and Belfast . the intervention come after Mike Russell , Scotland ' S Brexit Minister , demand urgent meeting with the UK Government . he claim at the weekend that the repeal Bill have precipitate a constitutional crisis after it emerge that vital Brexit legislation to return EU law to the UK would take them to Westminster , and not to the devolve government . the UK Government insist the move be an interim measure and leave Europe will ultimately lead to a ` ` power bonanza ' ' for Holyrood . but in their report into the impact of exit the EU on the devolve administration , peer say they back ` ` the view of most of our witness that the UK Government need to raise its game ' ' . they say this should include a willingness to accept that the JMC , even if not a formal decision-making body , be ` ` more than a talking-shop ' ' . the peer suggest the committee ` ` should be authorise to agree common position on key matter affect devolve competence in time to inform the UK Government ' s negotiate position ' ' . Lord Jay of Ewelme say : ` ` Brexit ' s impact on the future of the United Kingdom will be profound and unpredictable . at the moment the internal politics be pretty toxic , and we see only last week the start of what could become a deep and bitter dispute on the role of the devolve institution in pass the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill . ` ` we ca n't afford this . the UK Government must respect the devolve institution . it ' S not enough say it ' s listen to them , it ' S actually get to take account of what they say and adjust its approach to accommodate their specific need . ` ` equally , the devolve administration must work with , not against , the UK Government to get the good Brexit for the whole of the UK . ' ' the report highlight concern over the ` ` apparent deterioration of relation between the UK and Scottish government ' ' as a result of the UK ' s vote to leave the EU . after almost two-third of Scot vote to remain , peer stress there be a ` ` strong political and economic case for make differentiate arrangement for Scotland ' ' . however , they dismiss Scottish Government call to remain in the single market after the rest of the UK leave the trading bloc as be ` ` politically impracticable ' ' . Mr Russell say an extreme Brexit outside the single market and custom union would cause ` ` severe long-term economic damage , hit job , growth and living standard ' ' . he add : ` ` this report make clear Brexit should not be use as cover for a ' power grab ' , and that power in area such as fishery , agriculture and environmental protection should be return from Brussels to Edinburgh , Cardiff and Belfast - not Westminster . ' '
Scotland Business threat to derail Brexit ; City leader demand indefinite delay in Britain ' s departure from Single Market and Customs Union Business leader appeal for ' transitional ' Brexit deal
David Davis will be confront today by business leader demand an indefinite delay in Britain ' s departure from the Single Market and the Customs Union . the Brexit Secretary have invite some of Britain ' s most senior executive to his grace-and-favour residence at Chevening in Kent for an informal summit . in a major escalation of the business community ' s attempt to soften Brexit , the CBI group last night call on the government to reach an open-ended ` ` transitional deal ' ' with the European Union to protect business . Mr Davis and other senior Tory Eurosceptic MP have say that they expect Britain to leave the Single Market after Brexit negotiation end in March @card@ . however , Carolyn Fairbairn , the director-general of the CBI , yesterday warn that it will be ` ` impossible ' ' to reach a final deal by then . she urge the government to build a ` ` bridge to the future ' ' by agree a transitional deal as soon as possible that will retain membership of the Single Market and Customs Union until a Brexit deal come into force . this would mean that Britain would have to accept free movement of EU citizen and the oversight of the European Court of Justice for an unspecified transition period . it would also prevent the UK from negotiate new trade deal with country outside the EU . Ms Fairbairn say : ` ` this be a time to be realistic . instead of a cliff edge , the UK need a bridge to the new EU deal . even with the great possible goodwill on both side , it ' S impossible to imagine the detail will be clear by the end of March @card@ . ' ' the CBI ' S position - strengthen by recent figure suggest the economy be slow - appear to reflect that of Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who have repeatedly say that Britain need to agree a transitional deal to avoid a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' Brexit . it will raise fear that with no time limit apply to the transition deal , Britain may never effectively leave the EU , lead to accusation the group be try to derail by stealth Britain ' s decision to leave the EU . Mr Davis have previously state that he expect Britain to leave both the Single Market and the Customs Union by the end of the decade . business leader privately believe that Theresa May ' s failure to secure an outright majority at the general election will give them significantly more influence over Brexit . Labour last night announce that it be back the CBI ' S demand , place more pressure on the Prime Minister . the approach be likely to provoke significant split in Conservative rank . Change Britain , a pro-Brexit pressure group previously endorse by Boris Johnson , say last night : ` ` commit to stay in the EU ' S Single Market and Customs Union during a transition period would only serve to tie our hand during negotiation , and make it more likely that the EU give us a bad deal . ' ' the guestlist at Chevening be understand to include Xavier Rolet , the chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , Carolyn McCall , the chief executive of Easyjet , Dave Lewis , the head of Tesco and Gavin Patterson of BT . the CBI , Institute of Directors and manufacturer ' organisation EEF will also attend . the group ' S demand come as Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , accuse British politician of fail to understand that the UK can not leave the Single Market and Customs Union without lose out . he also warn that Britain have ` ` more to lose ' ' than the EU if it walk away from negotiation without a deal . Mr Barnier will meet Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , next week . Downing Street say the government do understand the EU ' S position and be focus on ` ` get a deal that work for both side ' ' . ` ` it be n't new that some on the EU side have strong feeling about the decision the British people take last year but the UK Government be focus on get the well possible deal for our whole country and a deep and special partnership that ' S in the interest of the whole continent , ' ' say the PM ' s official spokesman . Lord Hague , the former Foreign Secretary , yesterday warn that Brexit will damage ` ` undoubtedly ' ' Britain ' s ability to influence world event . he say : ` ` Brexit will be damaging to our ability to work with other EU country , obviously on foreign affair and influence their outlook overall . ' ' ` ` there be no doubt we be a big player in the foreign affair council , big than we be in the financial and economic affair of the EU . it be also true that they will want to consult us , to temper the gloom a little bit . ' '
this be the Brexit I ' ve be wait for ; the Tory manifesto show the PM ' s plan for take Britain out of the EU will make us a global champion
' we be leave the European Union . we want to ensure our departure be smooth and orderly and to agree a deep and special partnership with the @card@ remain member state . ' ' stop for a moment and savour those word . if I have tell you , @card@ or @card@ or even five year ago , that they would appear in the election manifesto of one of the big party , you ' d have laugh . after something take place , we tend to think it be inevitable all along ; psychologist call it the hindsight fallacy . so it ' S easy to miss the revolutionary nature of what be happen - revolutionary in the exact sense that a wheel be complete its turn , that something be be set the right way up again . Theresa May have upend the assumption that have guide the entire establishment for @card@ year . politician , captain of industry , academic , lobbyist , civil servant - all operate on a premise that the general population never accept , namely that the UK ' S future be as a subordinate unit within a European polity . when I join the European Parliament in @card@ , I be the first conservative return in a national election to call for Britain to leave the EU . openly propose withdrawal be a sackable offence under John Major , William Hague and even , at least in theory , Michael Howard ( who , to his credit , go on to vote leave himself ) . a Eurosceptic , in the 1990s and early 2000s , be someone who do n't want to join the euro . leave the EU be not on anyone ' s agenda in Westminster , despite between @card@ and @card@ per cent of the electorate consistently favour the idea . Brexit have go from be unthinkable to be inevitable with almost no intervene phase . the chief author of the manifesto be Ben Gummer , the Minister for the Cabinet Office , who could not have be more fervent in his support for Remain . he have accept the referendum result with exemplary good grace , grasp that the bad of all world would be to go about Brexit sulkily . like most Remainers , he understand that the challenge now be to leave in a way that maximise the advantage to the EU and to Britain , and that address the chief concern of both the @card@ and the @card@ per cent . the @card@ per cent have every reason to be content . at the manifesto launch , Mrs May reiterate that Brexit would mean take back control of our law , border and money . there be even a promise to withdraw from the Common Fisheries Policy - something that Ukip have try to claim be in doubt . if Mrs May win next month , no one can argue that there be no mandate for any particular form of Brexit . what of the @card@ per cent ? those who refuse to accept anything short of stay in , will , of course , be disappoint , but they be a minority within a minority . most Remainers want a business-like outcome which minimise uncertainty and preserve the positive element of our relationship with the EU . talk to friend in this category , I find them reassure by the commitment to a comprehensive trade deal with the EU , by the promise of continued participation in some of its programme and by the guarantee of a smooth transition , in which Brexit be a process than an event . the idea that Brexit would lead , as George Osborne put it during the campaign , to ` ` Nigel Farage ' s Britain ' ' now look downright silly . Ukip have collapse in the poll and Mr Farage himself be sidle away from his old party . it be the conservative who be deliver Brexit , and they be do so on internationalist principle . a large chunk of the manifesto be call ` ` Global Britain ' ' , and set out how ` ` the United Kingdom will be a global champion for an open economy , free trade , and the free flow of investment , idea and information ' ' . the theme of remain open for business run through almost every other section , too . the pledge on infrastructure and university funding , for example , and the promise to simplify the tax system - they ' re all about make Britain a place where people want to invest . nothing could be further from the nativist , protectionist Brexit that some fear . here , in short , be a plan for a competitive Britain , interested and involve in the affair of every continent , include Europe . I ' ve wait a long time to vote for a manifesto like this . Daniel Hannan be Conservative MEP for South East England Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
' come on , what do you want ' : Merkel mock PM ' s reticence on Brexit ; Politics German leader say to have have journalist in stitch with claim May refuse to provide answer
Angela Merkel have mock Theresa May ' s Brexit negotiating tactic , say the two leader end up go around in circle because the Prime Minister never say what she want . the German chancellor say that whenever she ask Mrs May what she want from the EU , she always reply : ` ` make me an offer . ' ' Mrs Merkel be say to have leave journalist laugh ` ` uproariously ' ' when she give them a behind-the-scenes insight into Brexit talk during her visit to Davos last week . accord to ITV ' S Robert Peston , Mrs Merkel ' s constant refrain to Mrs May when she ask for an offer be to say : ` ` but you ' re leave - we do n't have to make you an offer . come on , what do you want ? ' ' Mrs May then repeat : ` ` make me an offer . ' ' Mrs Merkel say she and Mrs May be trap in an endless cycle of question and counter-questions . ` ` we do not comment on these report , ' ' a spokesman for the German government say . he refer instead to Mrs Merkel ' s comment in her speech at Davos last week , in which she say : ` ` with regard to Europe , we have a problem that I would now like to address . ` ` naturally , we all very much regret that the United Kingdom will no longer be part of the European Union . ` ` Our colleague Theresa May will be here tomorrow . on behalf of Germany , but also other country , I would like to say that we want to continue have a good partnership with the United Kingdom in the future . ` ` however , we will also make clear that access to the single market be tie to Europe ' S four freedom . we can make no compromise on that . but we know that we be closely link to the United Kingdom through value , conviction and foreign policy interest . it be up to the United Kingdom to say how close it want this partnership to be . we be open to all form of partnership . ' ' it come as George Freeman , Mrs May ' s former policy chief , say : ` ` it look as though we have nothing to say , other than a daily commentary on Brexit . ' ' Mrs May be face deep division within her party over the sort of Brexit she should pursue . a planned speech in which she would have set out her vision for Britain ' s post-Brexit future have be put on ice until the party and her Cabinet can agree on its Brexit stance . comment make by Philip Hammond , Mrs May ' s Chancellor , in Davos last week that Brexit would lead to only a ` ` very modest ' ' change in Britain ' S circumstance provoke uproar among Eurosceptic Tory MP . John Redwood , the Tory MP and former minister , tell the Andrew Peach Show on BBC Radio Berkshire yesterday : ` ` I be recommend that the Prime Minister , who ' s be extremely friendly and encourage to the EU , should now firm up and say ' the UK ' S make lot of generous offer about future agreement , there have n't be much come back from the EU yet , so be n't it time now for the EU to deliver ? ' otherwise why would we want to go ahead on the basis we ' ve be talk about ? ' ' Mr Redwood say he would like ` ` a very clear timetable and a much tight timetable than some of her official be talk about ' ' for Brexit . ask whether the Prime Minister be come under pressure from pro-Brexit Tory to sack Mr Hammond , Theresa May ' s official spokesman tell reporter : ` ` the Chancellor be do a good job . ' ' ' it be up to the UK to say how close it want this partnership to be . we be open to all partnership '
Tory rebel have make ' no deal ' Brexit more likely , say EU leader
Tory rebel have increase the chance of a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit by give Theresa May less time to negotiate a good deal for Britain , EU leader have warn . by insist they have a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final deal , the mutineer weaken Mrs May ' s hand because Brussels know anything she agree could be overturn by Parliament . she will also have to allow time for a vote , cut short the time available for reach an agreement with the EU . together , the two factor make it less likely that she will achieve the well possible deal , EU leader say , and if Parliament reject what be on offer Britain will crash out of the EU without a deal . Brussels will not renegotiate , mean the vote will still be a ` ` take it or leave it ' ' choice . Christian Kern , Austria ' s outgoing chancellor , say he still hope Brexit could be reverse , but Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , insist that it be ` ` unstoppable ' ' . he say Wednesday night ' s defeat for the government ` ` wo n't for one second stop Brexit ' ' . Danuta Hübner , a Polish MEP and chairman of the European parliament ' s constitutional affair committee , say : ` ` once it be finalise and it be sign by both party , then any change to it mean reopen negotiation , mean we will not make it within the two year , mean there be a hard Brexit . ' ' Mrs May be in Brussels last night for the start of a two-day European Council summit at which the leader of the other @card@ country be expect to agree that negotiation on a post-Brexit trade deal can begin . the Prime Minister tell them she want to move on to the next phase of negotiation ` ` with ambition and creativity ' ' . she say : ` ` a particular priority should be agreement on the implementation period so that we can bring great certainty to business in the UK and across the @card@ . ' ' Xavier Bettel , the prime minister of Luxembourg , say Mrs May ' S job have be make harder by the @card@ rebel in her party who help Labour defeat her in the Commons on Wednesday night . he say : ` ` as soon as she negotiate something she will need to go back to London to get approval from the Parliament and this be not make her life easier . if every time we announce something there be a risk that it will unravel in London , it be not very good for make concrete progress . ' ' David Davis agree , tell the commons that Wednesday ' S vote leave him with ` ` a very compress timetable ' ' . Mrs May , meanwhile , be prepare to back down over plan to enshrine the Brexit date in law after Tory rebel threaten to inflict another defeat on the Government next week . the Prime Minister and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , both refuse to rule out a climbdown , while another minister tell the Daily Telegraph ` ` we ' re not go to die in a ditch over it ' ' . the rebel argue that the government should give itself extra flexibility in its negotiation by leave the Brexit date open-ended in case the process over-runs by a matter of day or week . Downing Street say there be ` ` no plan ' ' to take the date off the Bill , while Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , say : ` ` we will take the bill forward , we will assess where we stand in the wake of last night . ' ' the rebel now face a grass root backlash with call for them to be deselected . Nicky Morgan , a former Cabinet member , be accuse by constituency councillor of hand Jeremy Corbyn a significant win . one say : ` ` she be go to cost us vote , at the last election her majority be down quite heavily . it put her in a ... precarious position . ' ' Heidi Allen be also face criticism from local party member in South Cambridgeshire for rebel . Paul Diamond , a barrister , say : ` ` we be concern that she be act without accountability ... I be take sounding from fellow member about what further action we should take . ' ' however , despite be ` ` disappointed ' ' with the government ' s defeat the Prime Minister be refuse to support any move to deselect the MP . meanwhile , Leo Varadkar , the Irish prime minister , say there be still a hard battle ahead to ensure Ireland ' S interest be lay down in a legally binding international treaty . he say Ireland have secure ` ` very strong language ' ' assure there would be no hard border with Northern Ireland but ` ` we ' re not complacent either ... this be politics and we ' re go to need to stay very engage in the month and year ahead and be vigilant ' ' . editorial comment : page @card@
Boris : yes , we will take back £350m from EU for NHS ; Foreign Secretary set out grand vision for country after Brexit Staying in single market and custom union would be mockery Chancellor must cut tax and regulation to boost economy Brexit specialBoris : Corbyn ' chickening out ' on the EU
Boris Johnson today set out a grand vision of Britain ' s ` ` glorious ' ' post-Brexit future as a low-tax , low regulation economy pay nothing to the EU for access to the single market . in a 4,000-word article in today ' S Daily Telegraph , the Foreign Secretary restate a key demand of the leave campaign - that the £350million a week currently send to Brussels should be redirect to fund the NHS . he say that Britain should not continue to make payment to the EU after Brexit and that ongoing membership of the European single market and custom union would make a ` ` complete mockery ' ' of the referendum . Mr Johnson make no reference to any transition period after @card@ and make repeat reference to how EU bureaucracy be a drag on Britain ' s economic performance . his blueprint differ markedly from that of Philip Hammond and other Cabinet minister , who have stress the need to remain close to the single market and pay money to maintain access . it come less than a week before Theresa May deliver a pivotal Brexit speech in Florence , and effectively amount to an ultimatum to the Prime Minister on what she be expect to say . it be understand that the Foreign Secretary have hope to make a speech about Brexit but have not have the opportunity . Whitehall source suggest that the Prime Minister and Chancellor be unaware of Mr Johnson ' S article . his Brexit blueprint will send shockwaves through the Tory rank and will spark speculation that Mr Johnson - who source say support the Prime Minister and her agenda - may still harbour leadership ambition , as the Conservative Party prepare to meet at its annual conference next month . in his passionately patriotic article , he insist that Britain can be ` ` the great country on Earth ' ' and round on so-called Remoaners ` ` who think we be go to bottle it ' ' . the most striking inclusion in his article be the repetition of his claim that Britain will be £350 million a week well off after leave the EU and that the money could be spend on the NHS . the claim appear on the side of the leave campaign bus during last year ' s referendum campaign and have be bitterly dispute by Remainers ever since . however , Mr Johnson say : ` ` once we have settle our account , we will take back control of roughly £350 million a week . it would be a fine thing , as many of us have point out , if a lot of that money go on the NHS , provide we use that cash injection to modernise and make the most of new technology . ' ' Mr Johnson be also dismissive of the suggestion that Britain should pay to access the single market during the transition period or beyond , say : ` ` we would not expect to pay for access to their market any more than they would expect to pay for access to ours . ' ' he deploy soar rhetoric in the tub-thumping article to insist that Britain ` ` will succeed in our new national enterprise , and will succeed mightily ' ' , while slap down opponent of Brexit who be ` ` woefully underestimate this country ' ' and think Brexit ` ` be n't go to happen ' ' . the Foreign Secretary also settle old score by attack those who try to prevent the leave vote , such as ` ` the BBC , Barack Obama , the archbishop of Canterbury , the CBI [ Confederation of British Industry ] , every major political party and much of the media ' ' . under Mr Johnson ' S blueprint , leave the EU must ` ` logically entail ' ' leave the single market , the custom union and the European Court of Justice . he say Britain will ` ` keep environmental and social protection that be fair and wise ' ' , but will ditch EU regulation , which cost between @card@ and @card@ per cent of GDP . Mr Johnson say : ` ` we should seize the opportunity of Brexit to reform our tax system ' ' , point out that the Bank of England ' s chief economist say in @card@ that the system be ` ` skewed ' ' and discourage investment . he also suggest that Britain should think about tax foreign buyer of British property to prevent them push house price up . another way of tackle the housing crisis , he say , would be to simplify planning law and environmental impact assessment . he single out the Communities Secretary , Sajid Javid , and the Health Secretary , Jeremy Hunt , for praise , but make no mention of the Brexit Secretary , David Davis . on immigration , he say business should be able to access the skill they need but ` ` will no longer be able to use immigration as an excuse not to invest in the young people of this country ' ' . he also want a Britain where ` ` fat cat ' ' boss be not reward for failure . on trade , Britain will be able to ` ` get on and do free trade deal ' ' , particularly with the Commonwealth , rather than look to the EU for way to expand . his view challenge Mr Hammond ' s preference for a lengthy transition . Mr Johnson see Brexit as a ` ` chance to catch the wave of new technology , and to put Britain in the lead ' ' . as automated vehicle take over the car market , the car industry will transform itself in Britain , while the protectionist EU will try to hold back the revolution . he also accuse Jeremy Corbyn of ` ` chickening out ' ' of Brexit with his party ' s preference for remain in the single market and custom union , or near equivalent . ` ` he would make a complete mockery of Brexit , ' ' he write , ` ` and turn an opportunity into a national humiliation . ' '
Hunt join long list of briefing paper blunderer ; Sketch
yes , they ' re still do it . even though countless colleague have be catch out in exactly the same way , government figure continue to amble dozily out of Downing Street clutch confidential paperwork , directly in front of photographer with zoom lens . we know time be tough , and the government be determine to keep tight control of the public purse . but really : I ' m sure the taxpayer would n't object if , in the name of basic security , minister invest in ring-binders . yesterday ' S daydreamer be Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , who be photograph holding note he and his team have prepare on Brexit . one line in particular catch the eye : ` ` Hard Brexit mean people flee UK . ' ' I assume that this be not Mr Hunt ' s own view , give that a so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' ( leave the single market and custom union ) happen to be official government policy . I imagine he note it down as an example of the kind of criticism his opponent might make . on the other hand , maybe it ' s the government ' s new line on immigration . ` ` Hard Brexit mean people flee the UK - and that ' S why we ' re pursue it ! there ' ll be far less pressure on the NHS once everyone ' S leave the country ! instead of wait month for an operation , you can have it straight away ! although admittedly you may have to perform it yourself ! ' ' Later , when Mr Hunt face MP , Labour ' S Heidi Alexander rant that ` ` doctor and nurse be leave in their drove ' ' and ` ` EU staff no longer want to come here ' ' . the blame , she say , lie squarely with Mr Hunt . ` ` well , ' ' he huff , ` ` she may have notice a little thing call Brexit happen - which be the cause of understandable concern . ' ' funny how thing turn out . accord to his note , Mr Hunt ' S opponent be suppose to blame Brexit , and he be suppose to defend it . instead , his opponent do n't blame Brexit , he do . afterwards , Labour table an urgent question about education spending . they be lead by Angela Rayner , the shadow education secretary . ` ` the Education Secretary bid for extra money for school this weekend ! ' ' she bellow . ` ` not at Cabinet , but on the front page of the Torygraph ! and no wonder , when Arlene Foster [ DUP leader ] get a billion pound ! she must be the most expensive right-winger since Cristiano Ronaldo ! ' ' personally , I enjoy that joke more when the SNP ' S Alison Thewlis tell it a week earlier . I look forward to hear it again . perhaps the next MP will bear in mind that Ronaldo actually enjoy his great success in the centre .
Scotland Double blow to Sturgeon over Brexit deal ; EU and Westminster deal blow to Sturgeon on Brexit deal hope
Nicola Sturgeon ' S hope of a separate Brexit deal for Scotland suffer a double blow yesterday when the Scottish Secretary rule out both Scottish membership of the single market and the transfer of immigration power to Holyrood . the First Minister have demand that Scotland remain inside the single market - either with the rest of the UK or on its own - after Brexit . her plan rest on Scotland get control over immigration so the country can remain open to free movement of people across Europe , even if the rest of the UK reject that position . Ms Sturgeon have warn that she will hold a second independence referendum if the UK fail to back these aim . Alex Salmond , the former first minister , suggest during his LBC radio phone-in show yesterday that a second vote could take place in the autumn of @card@ , just four year after the @card@ referendum which he previously describe as a once in a lifetime opportunity . he say a second vote would have to take place during the two-year Brexit negotiating period , which be due to begin in March . yesterday David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary dismiss any suggestion that Scotland could remain inside the single market after Brexit . build on the speech make by the Theresa May , the Prime Minister , earlier this week when she say the UK would be leave the single market , the Scottish Secretary tell MP : ` ` it ' S absolutely clear that Scotland can not be a member of the single market if it be not continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ a member of the EU , and the United Kingdom will not be a member of the EU . ' ' Mr Mundell also give a very clear indication that the UK Government would not allow immigration policy to be devolve to Scotland . the Scottish Secretary say : ` ` I will always look at evidence-based proposal that come forward and that ' s our commitment for example in relation to the Scottish Government ' s paper [ on Brexit ] produce just before Christmas . ` ` but it be quite clear within the settlement agree in the Smith Commission that immigration would remain a reserved power . ' ' Mr Mundell tell MP that the Scottish Parliament would , however , get control over agriculture and fishing after Brexit as these power would be transfer from Brussels to Edinburgh and not to London . but this commitment fall far short of what the nationalist have demand and Ms Sturgeon will now have to decide whether this late rejection of her proposal be enough for her to force another Scottish independence referendum . representative of the Scottish and UK government will meet late today to discuss her plan in more detail and , although UK minister have say they be still consider them , Mr Mundell have give the impression that it be only a matter of time before they be reject formally by Theresa May , the Prime Minister . Margaret Ferrier , an SNP MP , accuse Mr Mundell of ` ` backtrack ' ' on a previous promise to keep Scotland in the single market . she say : ` ` clearly he have throw in the towel on get the good deal for Scotland , and now he and his UK government colleague be go full steam ahead with their hard Brexit . ' ' Angus Robertson , the party ' s leader in Westminster , ask Mrs May during Prime Minister ' S question yesterday whether she would stick to her promise to treat Scotland as an ` ` equal partner ' ' . he accuse her of steer the UK into a ` ` Little Britain Brexit ' ' that would hit job and pay . he add : ` ` shortly after the Prime Minister confirm that she want to take the UK out of the single European market , the Scottish Parliament vote by a large , cross-party majority to remain in the single European market , just as a large majority of people in Scotland vote to remain in the European Union . ' ' Ms Sturgeon ' S attempt to secure a ` ` differentiate ' ' Scottish agreement , inside the overall UK Brexit deal , be further undermine yesterday when one of the EU ' s senior MEPs say there would be ` ` no exception ' ' . Elmar Brok , the chairman of the parliament ' s foreign affair committee , say : ` ` we can not have two agreement with the United Kingdom and with Scotland . ' ' he add : ` ` how can we do exception for Britain and then exception for Scotland ? ` ` I do n't think this be a cherry-pick thing , I be very sorry for Scotland because of that . ' ' ' we can not have two agreement with the United Kingdom and with Scotland . I do n't think this be a cherry-pick thing '
Davis end up in the fire over his ' Satan ' quip
if This country be to achieve the Prime Minister ' s goal of ` ` a smooth and orderly Brexit ' ' , it be incumbent upon all of us to do our bit . I ' m delight , therefore , to have already play my own small part . in September , I report on a meeting of a Commons select committee , during which David Davis be ask about the EU ' s top negotiator , Guy Verhofstadt . ` ` get thee behind me , Satan ! ' ' chortle the Brexit Secretary . one person who read my account of this quip , it seem , be a Mr G Verhofstadt of Strasbourg . two week ago , the night before the two man be due to meet for the first time , Mr Verhofstadt share my sketch - headline ` ` get thee behind me , Satan ! how David Davis taunt a major EU foe ' ' - with his @card@ follower on Twitter , and add that he be ` ` look forward ' ' to their ` ` conversation ' ' . then , upon Mr Davis ' S arrival , Mr Verhofstadt hold out his hand , and say : ` ` David . welcome to hell ! ' ' meet new people can be awkward . I ' m so glad I could help break the ice . yesterday the Brexit Secretary be question in the commons for the first time since . his joke about Satan , he say , have be ` ` royally misinterpret ' ' , but to avoid further ` ` trouble ' ' , he would now be ` ` polite to everybody ' ' . this do n't sound like the Mr Davis we know and love . I do hope he ' ll reconsider . as usual , pro-Remain MP be call the government clueless , and warn of catastrophe to come . David Nuttall ( Con , Bury North ) could take no more . Remainers , he snap , must stop ` ` seek to reverse the decision the people make ' ' . personally , I think he ' S right . Remainers should stop stick their oar in . indeed , I think it ' S in Remainers ' own interest to stop stick their oar in . put it like this . say , for the sake of argument , the Remainers ' prediction be right , and Brexit prove a disaster . Remainers , naturally , will want the public to blame the Brexiteers : Farage , Johnson , Fox and the rest . but if Remainers have in some way influence the type of Brexit we get - by , for example , insist we stay member of the single market , against Brexiteers ' will - then it will be all too easy for Brexiteers to say , ` ` actually , this disaster be the fault of the Remainers . they ruin Brexit . our type of Brexit would have be a success . but the Remainers sabotage it . ' ' and so , in the public eye , the people to blame for the disaster wo n't be the politician who urge us to vote for it . it ' ll be the politician who urge us not to , say it would be a disaster all along . and if the Remainers ' be wrong , and Brexit prove a roaring triumph ? well , then the Remainers should be so relieve they wo n't mind apologise . Jeremy Corbyn once suggest that Theresa May ' s ` ` cunning plan ' ' for Brexit be to ` ` do nothing ' ' . for Remainers , I think that would be sound advice .
a conciliatory approach to Brexit will bolster Theresa May ' s opponent ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - you report ( July @card@ ) that Theresa May will ask Jeremy Corbyn to help her deliver Brexit . before the election , Mrs May tell us that victory for Mr Corbyn would be a disaster for Britain , but she now think that this man can help her govern . Mr Corbyn and all other in opposition must be pinch themselves to believe that they have be give this ace card . Myra Spalton Macclesfield , Cheshire sir - it be surely a forlorn hope for a terminally damage Prime Minister to expect cross-party support for her version of Brexit ( report , July @card@ ) . despite the formal Labour policy on Brexit , Jeremy Corbyn and his crony have make it clear that , whatever Mrs May propose , they will oppose it . sadly , Mrs May have prove that she do not have the quality require to carry either party or country . she should go now.Brian Pegnall Falmouth , Cornwall Sir - if there be a referendum on the question , ` ` Should all political party work together to produce the good Brexit for Britain ? ` ` , I expect the answer would be a resounding ` ` Yes ' ' . Tim Hoyle Butleigh Wootton , Somerset Sir - if Brexit be prevent by political squabble , as Sir Vince Cable suggest it might be ( report , July @card@ ) , do anyone seriously believe we would be welcome back ? we would be place on the naughty step . the Eurocrats would ignore any influence we once have and proceed to ramp up integration , while demand more billion for their pet project . Hew Goldingham St Leonards-on-Sea , East Sussex sir - your lead article ( July @card@ ) begin : ` ` Brexit be go to happen . ' ' why take the trouble to state the obvious ? do the lady protest too much ? be the reason for such an anti-heretic protestation that - as the complication and drawback of leave become more apparent , the economic indicator become ever more gloomy , and more parliamentary time and money be waste on this misguided exercise in populist ` ` democracy ' ' - serious doubt be emerge as to whether it be all really worth the pain and grief ? Richard Bird London W11 Emeritus Prof William Outhwaite Newcastle University Prof Joshua Silver University of Oxford David Wolchover Ridgeway Chambers , Barnet , Hertfordshire Sir - Sir Vince say that a deteriorate economy would make people think again about Brexit . from the post-Napoleonic depression of @card@ to the present day , there have be some @card@ major recession in Britain . five of these have be since Britain join the EU . Derek Poots Horsham , West Sussex
labour tear apart as senior MP quit over Brexit vote ; May ' S mission ; three further shadow minister could resign in rebellion over Corbyn ' s Article @card@ three-line whip
labour ' S bitter division over Brexit deepen last night as a shadow minister resign over Jeremy Corbyn ' s decision to force his party ' s MP to back a vote to trigger Article @card@ . the Labour leader yesterday announce he will impose a three-line whip on his party for next week ' s parliamentary vote to trigger Brexit negotiation . he be now face a rebellion by up to a third of Labour MP , and three other shadow cabinet minister be say to be consider their position . Tulip Siddiq , a shadow education minister , say that she have decide with a ` ` heavy heart ' ' to quit the role because her constituency vote overwhelmingly against Brexit . despite commit his party to back Article @card@ , Mr Corbyn yesterday table seven amendment , include one which would give Parliament the power to block Mrs May ' s final deal . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , warn politician that they must ` ` respect ' ' the result of the referendum . the Government yesterday table a 137-word bill in the House of Commons which will enable Theresa May to formally trigger negotiation with Brussels . it be plan to rush the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill through Parliament in a fortnight , with the first vote on Wednesday . the legislation will then be send to the Lords for further debate , enable the Prime Minister to meet her deadline of trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . it come after Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats announce they would disrupt Theresa May ' S plan for a smooth Brexit . Mr Davis say : ` ` I trust that Parliament , which back the referendum by six to one , will respect the decision take by the British people and pass the legislation quickly . ' ' however , Labour be already plot to disrupt the plan and among the amendment it have table be one calling on the government to guarantee ` ` full ' ' access to the Single Market . some Europhile Labour MP be also aim to vote down the timetable for the legislation , a move which would delay the Brexit talk . follow Ms Siddiq ' S resignation , three other senior MP - Daniel Zeichner , a shadow transport minister , Catherine West , a shadow foreign minister , and Thangam Debbonaire , a whip - could follow suit . Ms Siddiq say in her resignation letter : ` ` the vast majority of my constituent vote last year to remain in the European Union , as do I . on the announcement of the 3-line whip on the Article @card@ vote I therefore feel I have no choice but to resign from my frontbench role as shadow minister for early year . I do not support the trigger of Article @card@ and can not reconcile myself to the front-bench position . ' ' Steve Reed , a Labour MP , say that Mr Corbyn have only agree to support the trigger of Article @card@ because he fear lose a snap general election . Mr Corbyn tell Sky News : ` ` it ' S clearly a three-line whip . I understand the pressure and issue member be under ... Labour be in the almost unique position of have MP represent constituency in both direction . ` ` I say to everyone , unite around the important issue ... I ' m ask all our MP not to block Article @card@ and make sure it go through next week . ' ' the Bill have two clause : @card@ power to notify withdrawal from the EU ( @card@ ) the Prime Minister may notify , under Article @card@ ( @card@ ) of the Treaty on European Union , the United Kingdom ' s intention to withdraw from the EU . ( 2 ) this section have effect despite any provision make by or under the European Communities Act @card@ or any other enactment . @card@ short title this Act may be cite as the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Act @card@ . editorial comment : page @card@ Stoke by-election just what the Labour leader do n't want to hear from his candidate Labour ' s candidate for the Stoke Central by-election once describe Brexit as a ` ` massive pile of s -- - ' ' . Gareth Snell have be select as Labour ' s candidate for the seat that Ukip leader Paul Nuttall be contest . seventy per cent of constituent vote for Brexit . Mr Snell also say on Twitter : ` ` if we have to prefix ( Owen ) Smith with ' Pfizer lobbyist ' , can we also say ' IRA support friend of Hamas career politician ' Jeremy Corbyn ? ' ' Other tweet include : ` ` we do hyberbole ? if so , it ' s a choice between IRA support friend of Hamas career politician Corbyn vs Smith . ' ' he also say : ` ` Smith learn politics in the heat of the fight in South Wales . Corbyn sip tea in trendy north London with career politician and Viscount . ' ' Later , Mr Snell add : ` ` for clarity , my previous comment be to demonstrate the absurdity of the hyperbole I ' ve read in the last two hour . ' ' a spokeswoman for Mr Corbyn say : ` ` we wo n't comment on this . ' ' Mr Snell will attempt to hold the Stoke-on-Trent Central seat for Labour next month after Tristram Hunt step down . Mr Nuttall will hope to capitalise on a strong Brexit vote in last year ' s EU referendum and secure himself a place in the Commons . borough councillor Mr Snell once tweet : ` ` Soft Brexit , Hard Brexit , massive pile of s -- - . sloppy Brexit , messy Brexit , quit , quit , quit . ' ' meanwhile , the Tories have select project manager Trudy Harrison to take on Labour in the Copeland byelection . the two contest on Feb @card@ be a headache for Mr Corbyn , with strong challenge in both seat . President Trump return a salute as he step off Marine one helicopter before board Air Force one for his flight to Philadelphia to talk to republican at their retreat . he meet Theresa May today ' the vast majority of my constituent vote last year to remain in the EU , as do I '
Scotland Sturgeon ' use Brexit to distract from record and further separatist agenda ' ; Scottish Labour leader say First Minister be try to seize ' political opportunity ' and SNP can not be trust
Nicola Sturgeon be try to use Brexit to divert voter ' attention away from her record in government and towards independence , the new Scottish Labour leader argue today . Richard Leonard warn Scot that they can not trust the SNP on Brexit , argue they be treat it as a ` ` political opportunity ' ' to further their separatist agenda . he be speak after Ms Sturgeon say leave the EU without a trade deal be ` ` unthinkable ' ' and it ` ` beggar belief ` ` that Theresa May be to appoint a minister in her reshuffle with responsibility for prepare for this scenario . the First Minister reiterate that the case for a second EU referendum on the outcome of the talk may be ` ` irresistible ' ' if there be no deal and ` ` no Brexit ' ' would be a preferable outcome . she also say she would make an ` ` assessment and a judgment ' ' about another Scottish independence vote after the term of the deal be know later this year . her late intervention come as Holyrood ' s cross-party finance committee say it could not recommend MSPs consent to the EU withdrawal Bill , argue it be ` ` incompatible ' ' with the devolution settlement . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , have already say that Clause @card@ , which establish that power repatriate from the European Union be all return to Westminster in the first instance , would be amend . but Ms Sturgeon write an article in a Sunday tabloid state that independence must ` ` remain an option ' ' after Brexit and predict a ` ` new spirit of Scottish assertiveness ' ' in @card@ . however Mr Leonard say his party would focus on get a deal focus on job and the economy , while respect the Brexit vote , ` ` unlike the SNP , who seem never to accept the result of any referendum ' ' . he say : ` ` the people of Scotland ca n't trust the SNP when it come to Brexit - it be a political opportunity for the nationalist to divert attention away from their record in government and towards their obsession with the constitution . the NHS over recent week have face unprecedented pressure , with Scotland ' S hospital manage one crisis after another , while huge cut to Scotland ' S council be have a massive impact on local service and the job that go with those service . ' ' Mr Leonard add that it be ` ` no wonder the First Minister wish to only talk about Brexit ' ' . Ms Sturgeon also yesterday refuse to put a timescale for an investigation into Mark McDonald , the former childcare minister , more than two month after he resign after admit ` ` inappropriate ' ' behaviour towards woman .
Carney say household and firm be take Brexit in their stride
UK household and firm be take the prospect of leave the European union in their stride , accord to the head of the Bank of England . some business be hold back on investment until clarity on a deal be establish , but expectation for Brexit do not seem negative , say Mark Carney , Governor of the central bank , while address an audience in Liverpool yesterday . ` ` they [ business and household ] be n't act as though it ' s go to be a very bad outcome from Brexit , ' ' he say . household be more concern about the current squeeze on their income , arise from inflation and low wage growth , than they be about the impact on earnings of any potential Brexit scenario , he add . his comment come as Lloyd Blankfein , the chief executive of US investment bank Goldman Sachs , suggest on Twitter that the UK should hold a second referendum on Brexit . Mr Blankfein , an infrequent tweeter , have post only @card@ time , have make negative statement about Brexit , either directly or indirectly , on four occasion . in his late comment , Mr Blankfein say : ` ` here in UK , lot of hand-wringing from CEO over # Brexit . good sense of the tough and risky road ahead . reluctant to say , but many wish for a confirm vote on a decision so monumental and irreversible . so much at stake , why not make sure consensus still there ? ' ' his comment come as the City ' S call for swift clarity on the term of Brexit to prevent the trigger of relocation plan intensify . the need for a clear and quick outcome be echo by Mr Carney . he say : ` ` it matter what kind of deal we get , it matter the timeline over which we get [ it ] . ' ' Mr Carney say Britain ' s economic performance have be hamper by the decision to leave the EU , as the UK fall from top performer , in term of growth in the G7 , to second from bottom . ` ` we have not do as well in the short term as we would have do if the vote have go the other way , ' ' he say on ITV yesterday . the Bank of England say this month that up to @card@ job could be lose on day one of Brexit if no deal be strike . earlier this week JP Morgan and Prudential tell the House of Lords they have begin put their relocation plan in motion . Goldman Sachs employ @card@ in the UK and have sign a lease for office space in Frankfurt .
Carney : lack of Brexit transition risk inflation rise ; Bank of England Governor say an abrupt exit from the EU could hit the pound and investment
Britain could suffer even high inflation if Brexit negotiator fail to agree a transitional deal with the European Union , Mark Carney have warn . an abrupt exit might result in a further fall in the value of the pound and dent business investment , squeeze the UK economy and lead to high price . the Governor of the Bank of England say a transitional deal would help company and household to adjust , add he would ` ` cast my vote ' ' for such an agreement . ` ` on the moment of Brexit , it will very much depend on what the final arrangement be with the EU @card@ , and what the transition path be from here to there , ' ' he tell the European Central Bank ' S communication conference . there have already be some fallout from Brexit - both in term of investment and the value of the pound - because business and market remain uncertain about the final shape of any deal , Mr Carney say . he pledge that the Bank of England will do everything it can to keep the economy grow , and the financial system stable , through Brexit : ` ` what be we try to say to the people of UK ? very simple : we will do whatever we can to support the economy subject to return inflation to that 2pc target - so do n't worry about inflation . ' ' his comment come as datum release by the Office for National Statistics show that inflation be low in October than expect . rather than the rise that economist have predict of @card@ or @card@ percentage point , inflation remain at 3pc last month . however , the slow than expect rise do not mark an end to the cost-ofliving squeeze . household will still be hit by rise price , as food inflation continue to climb , hit 4.1pc - the high level since September @card@ . this be offset by a slight fall in other common household expense such as fuel . however , it raise question among economist about whether the Bank of England have jump the gun with its recent interest rate rise . fuel be add to that debate by Sir Jon Cunliffe , the deputy governor of the Bank . he tell the Oxford Economics Society he vote against the rate rise earlier this month because he want to see pay growth start to pick up - a sign that inflationary pressure be rise - before take any step to rein in inflation . unemployment be at 4.2pc , its low level in @card@ year , which would normally push wage up rapidly . but , instead , pay be rise at the same pace as it be in @card@ when unemployment be twice as high , indicate that the traditional relationship between job and pay may have break down , Sir Jon say .
Scotland Hammond fail to back May for next general election ; Chancellor refuse to give May his support
Philip Hammond have repeatedly refuse to endorse Theresa May as Tory leader in the next general election . the Chancellor be ask four time if Mrs May should stay on as leader at the next election but decline to give her his support , instead say that the focus must be on deliver Brexit . the Prime Minister ' S future be expect to dominate the party conference this weekend amid deepen Cabinet split over Brexit . it have be claim that around @card@ Conservative MP be willing to sign a letter challenge her leadership in a bid to pressure her into quit . it come as David Davis open the late round of Brexit talk by warn Brussel that there can be ` ` no excuse ' ' for stand in the way of progress . speak alongside Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , Mr Davis say that the UK would only pay a Brexit divorce bill in exchange for a ` ` new deep and special partnership ' ' with the EU . Mr Davis ' s chief of staff yesterday suggest the comment be an ` ` early warning shot ' ' to Mr Barnier as the two attempt to break a deadlock continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ in negotiation . while Labour yesterday open the door to a second referendum on Britain ' s membership of the EU which could see Brexit reverse . some of the party ' s most senior politician line up at Labour ' s conference in Brighton to suggest that another referendum could be hold on the term of Britain ' s exit from the EU . Mrs May have hope to settle the issue of her authority last month by announce her intention to fight the next general election , tell rival : ` ` I ' m not a quitter ' ' . she also attempt to cement her position in a speech on Brexit in Florence last week after broker a shortlived truce between Mr Hammond and Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary . however during a visit to Scotland yesterday Mr Hammond repeatedly decline to say that Mrs May be the ` ` optimum ' ' person to lead the party in five year time . he reply : ` ` I be not go to get involve in the discussion about future Conservative party leadership politics . Theresa May have make it very clear that she have a job to do , I be completely behind her in do that job . ' ' the Chancellor also fail to deny that he have send a text to Mr Johnson offer his support for a leadership bid at 4am on the night of the conservative ' s disastrous election result . he say : ` ` there be an awful lot of communication during the early hour that morning . I do n't recognise some of the material I have see in the paper . ` ` what I do know be that the most important conversation I have that night be with Theresa May when she say she have decide to seek to form a government ; she ask me to serve in it and I commit to do so . ' ' it come as Mrs May be struggle to contain the mount Cabinet division over Brexit . Mr Johnson have make clear that a Brexit transition period must last no long than two year amid fear that it could risk damage the Tory at the next general election . however ally of Mr Hammond tell the Daily Telegraph that Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptics be ` ` simpleminded ' ' and warn that Brexit could take much longer . Mr Hammond yesterday insist that he do not believe that Mr Johnson be ` ` simple-minded on anything ' ' , but suggest that a long transition period may be necessary .
we need clarity on Brexit , not confusion body : no sooner be it report that the Cabinet have arrive at a position on Brexit that most conservative and , indeed , most MP , be prepare to support than the crack begin to open once more . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , indicate last week that an implementation phase last until @card@ - three year after Brexit - be now the ` ` broadly ' ' agree position , or at least one that he and the Treasury be promote . during the transition period , trade and immigration would continue pretty much as before . business leader welcome this not so much because they agree with the timetable or even with Brexit itself , but because it seem to give them the clarity that they need to plan ahead . similarly , opposition party - whose vote will be crucial when any deal come before Parliament some time next year - signal that this be a policy they could work with . however , the talk of consensus be premature . it have rekindle the suspicion among Brexiteers that transition be simply a ruse to stop the UK leave the EU or for create a permanent half-way house . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , who have be in America perform sterling work seek a post-Brexit trade deal , say he have not be party to any Cabinet discussion on this matter , nor agree to any continuation of free movement after Brexit , even temporarily . meanwhile , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , have also be absent on official duty . he , too , seem to have be wrong-foot by the late manoeuvrings . write in the Sunday Telegraph , Gerard Lyons , a former adviser to Mr Johnson , say a two-year transition period be sufficient . it would seem odd to the country if a three-year implementation phase be deem to be ` ` outside the spirit ' ' of Brexit but a two-year transition period acceptable . get it right be what really matter . even Mr Fox indicate that he might well be happy with the @card@ timetable ; he deny that a position have be agree by minister , as the Chancellor appear to suggest . this matter could be easily rectify with a Cabinet meeting , even if it mean interrupt holiday to hold one . for investor and voter , what be most important be clarity and a sense of shared purpose from the government - something that have be emerge , only to fall apart again . this issue be too important for it to become the focus of a proxy war among minister exploit the weakness of Mrs May .
Hammond call for ' soft Brexit ' take @card@ year
Britain will not be able to leave the EU within two year without serious side effect , Philip Hammond suggest last night , as he open a potential rift with Cabinet colleague by say ` ` thoughtful politician ' ' would agree . the Chancellor say that a transitional deal - in which Britain would pay for access to the single market for about @card@ month after leave the EU - would help to ensure a ` ` smooth ' ' Brexit . his intervention throw new light on difference of opinion in the Cabinet . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , and Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , be both thought to oppose a transitional deal . Mr Hammond also raise further question about Britain ' s desire for a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . he suggest that leave the European custom union , which set EU-wide tarriffs on good , could lead to a fivefold increase in border check and cost hundred of million of pound a year . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , want Brexit to be deliver ` ` as soon as possible ' ' and have say the UK be likely to have to leave the custom union so it can strike its own trade deal . in further sign that Mr Hammond be push against a hard Brexit , he insist that control on European migration , which will be possible after Brexit , need not ` ` choke off ` ` the supply of highskilled worker . he say : ` ` just because you have a system of control immigration do not mean you have to use it to slam all door shut . I ca n't conceive of any circumstance in which we would want to impede or prevent the flow of highly skilled , highly pay people . ' ' Mr Hammond ' S intervention come after Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , suggest that the UK need a two-year transitional deal to cushion the impact of Brexit . the Chancellor tell MP on the Treasury select committee that a transition deal after Britain leave the EU would be ` ` generally helpful ' ' . the deal would mean the UK would not formally quit until after the @card@ general election . he say : ` ` there be an emerge view among business , among regulator and among thoughtful politician that have a long period to manage the adjustment between where we be now as full member of the EU and where we get to in the future would be generally helpful , would tend towards a smoother transition and would run less risk of disruption . ' ' Michael Deacon : page @card@ Foreign aid Target may be scrap Britain ' s controversial foreign aid spending target could be axe by the government . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , say the commitment to spend @card@ per cent of Britain ' s national income on aid will be examine as part of a spending review . he say the review would be ` ` the right time to look at priority ' ' .
spare us a tyranny of the minority ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : suddenly , everyone want to be an outsider , even the establishment . ` ` we be the insurgent now , ' ' say Tony Blair of the Remainers . Sir John Major have warn against the ` ` tyranny of the majority ' ' . these former prime minister say they merely wish to represent the @card@ per cent who oppose Brexit , to give them a voice and perhaps a second referendum . but the goal , as they admit themselves , be to keep Britain in the EU . that would amount to a tyranny of the minority . on Thursday , Sir John tell a private dinner that : ` ` the tyranny of the majority have never apply in a democracy and it should not apply in this particular democracy . ' ' Sir John be a venerable statesman , greatly to be admire - but historian might take him to task . America ' s founding father , for instance , frame their constitution to avoid a dictatorship of the mass - but , in reality , woman and African-Americans be deny the vote , and the latter be enslave . democracy be messy and paradoxical . they evolve . in the case of Britain , we plump for a parliamentary system that at time look like an elect oligarchy . we give MP the key to the kingdom for five year and hope that they honour the manifesto they run on . in @card@ , the Tories be elect on a promise to hold an in/out referendum . when they trigger it , they pledge to abide by the result . there be Remainers who oppose the referendum even before it be hold , on the ground that law ought to be write by Parliament rather than the people . some even say that referendum be the instrument of dictatorship . the difference , however , between the EU referendum and a referendum of the thirty be that fascist hold plebiscite only to rubber stamp decision they have already make . in this instance , Parliament ask the people what to do . it could not reach a decision on Britain ' s EU membership , so it seek the public ' S advice - on the clear understanding that it would follow their instruction . most Remainers have probably accept the voter ' decision . a few have not and work , openly , to overturn it . they say that the @card@ per cent who vote against Brexit deserve representation . this be a nice sentiment , but disingenuous . a country be either in the EU or it be out of it , there be no halfway house , no cosy compromise . ergo , when the British people vote to leave on June @card@ the result be decisive . we can not create two new country , one Brexited and one Remained . we must proceed as one nation accord to the decision of the majority . and the vast majority of Briton , leave and Remain , probably accept this logic . only the militant continue to defy it . they be few and far between , yet there be no deny that their voice be gather volume - and that no one be answer . Ukip be in chaos . Nigel Farage appear to be pursue a new career in America . the most pro-Brexit minister be silence ; Boris Johnson be actually ridicule by the Chancellor in the House . the government be commit to Brexit but seem reluctant to make an enthusiastic case for it . we understand its caution . it could be argue that it be foolish to enter negotiation have already declare what one want to get . and the Autumn Statement , although unexcite , be probably pitch at the international community and the market rather than Brexit supporter . but the government give the impression that it will only pursue a Brexit that have next-to-no economic effect , which mean a Brexit so soft that it be n't really Brexit at all . the public , by contrast , vote for Brexit fully aware of the economic risk - aware because they be spell out by the IMF , the Treasury , David Cameron and by just such statesman as Mr Blair and Sir John . leave acknowledge potential downsides too , while add that they could be ameliorate through economic reform . some say that sweep away EU regulation , for instance , could turbocharge British business . we strongly agree . in other word , the argument of the militant Remainers might be flimsy and inaccurate but they demand a reply by the government . the Eurosceptic case for democracy need restate , too . leaver do not vote for a tyranny : they vote for freedom from Brussels . the goal of their great movement be to restore the power of Parliament . how odd , how perverse , that an alliance of current and former parliamentarian be try to stop them .
Scotland Brexit minister catch out ; Spain deny have secret talk with SNP over special deal for Scotland
Nicola Sturgeon ' S Brexit minister be yesterday catch out make inaccurate claim to Brussels diplomat about the level of Scottish support for the EU and suggestion of non-existent talk with the Spanish government . Mike Russell use a speech to EU official to portray Scotland as separate from the rest of the UK , claim five million Scot have demonstrate in the EU referendum that ` ` they do not want to give up their European citizenship ' ' . he also claim that the only MSPs to vote for Brexit be four Tory and , press specifically about whether talk be take place with Spain over a special deal for Scotland , reassure the audience that ` ` we would not be talk in these term unless we be have conversation ' ' . but the Tories accuse him of attempt to paint ` ` a completely false picture ' ' to a ` ` sympathetic audience ' ' , point out that few than @card@ million Scot vote to Remain compare to more than a million who back leave . the Daily Telegraph disclose that continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Alex Neil , a former Scottish government minister who serve in Cabinet with Mr Russell , vote leave and also report his allegation that other SNP MSPs have approach him confirm they do the same . the Spanish government further undermine Mr Russell ' S claim yesterday by confirm they have hold no talk about a special Brexit deal for Scotland . a senior government source say the EU have be clear there would be no negotiation until the UK trigger Article @card@ . any deal would have to be agree by all member state , include Spain , which be wary of offer Scotland preferential term for fear of encourage its own separatist movement . Mariano Rajoy , the Spanish prime minister , say in June that Scotland will have to leave the EU with the rest of the UK . the allegation against Mr Russell overshadow a meeting in London yesterday between Nicola Sturgeon and EU ambassador . a spokesman for the Brexit minister accuse the Tory of a ` ` ludicrous attack ' ' but do not respond to the specific example of inaccuracy cite . he make the speech on Monday in Brussels but the Conservatives record the proceeding and yesterday publish the audio footage . Ian Duncan , a Scottish Conservative MEP , say : ` ` it ' s no surprise that the Spanish government have confirm that no contact have be make . in an effort to impress EU official in Brussels , Mr Russell appear to have simply make stuff up . we know that SNP MSP Alex Neil support Brexit and that as many as six other SNP MSPs do likewise . yet Mr Russell have go to Brussels and try to paint a completely false picture . ' ' the minister use the speech to drop hint that a second independence referendum would be call unless a ` ` differentiate ' ' deal be offer to Scotland with the soft form of Brexit . but an audience member point out that he have little to say on whether the EU would agree to a special deal for a Scotland within the UK . Mr Russell say Brussels should be sympathetic to a country that believe in the ` ` European project ' ' . press on whether he be in contact with the Spanish government , the minister say he would not disclose the identity of ` ` everybody we speak to ' ' . but he then drop a heavy hint that talk be under way , say : ` ` I think you can take it as intelligent people we would not be talk in these term unless we be have conversation . ' ' however , a spokesman for Spain ' s ministry of foreign affair say no talk have take place over a special deal for Scotland after Brexit . a senior Spanish government source add : ` ` the EU have decide not to start any negotiation before notification under Article @card@ of the [ Lisbon ] Treaty . ' ' but a spokesman for Mr Russell say : ` ` this be a ludicrous attack from the Tories - for them to ask anyone else to clarify their plan for Brexit be like a burglar demand a homeowner clean up the house he have just ransack . ` ` this event be open to the public and the medium as well as be film , and anyone who take the time to listen to the recording would hear a discussion which be overwhelmingly positive about Scotland . ' ' Brexit exit ? loss of EU seasonal worker may force fruit producer to move abroad Labour shortage could force fruit production to move abroad thanks to Brexit , a business leader warn MSPs yesterday . Holyrood ' s economy committee hear Scottish fruit producer could have to scale back or move overseas as a result of any inability to recruit from EU country post-Brexit . James Porter , from Angus Soft Fruits which account for @card@ per cent of Scottish soft fruit production , tell the committee it employ around @card@ seasonal worker from EU country such as Bulgaria , Romania , Poland and the Baltic state . he say the industry be completely reliant on seasonal labour with just @card@ per cent of staff employ locally . while there be no problem in recruiting in Scotland in the shortterm , he say colleague south of the border be face ` ` serious problem ' ' recruiting for next year and worker be ` ` very worried ' ' about the future . ask about the impact of not be able to recruit from the EU , he say : ` ` you could either scale right back and try and match your production to the labour that be available or you could move it abroad , and there ' s already a lot of talk down south about do that . ' ' Mr Porter say supermarket prefer UKproduced fruit , but , without the necessary labour , producer may have to leave . he say the seasonal nature of the work , the unsociable hour , and the fact worker often live on the farm can make it difficult to recruit locally .
a Cabinet with both talent and purpose ; ESTABLISHED @card@ Body : Theresa May ' S reshuffle have be startling . some think she might change little about the team she inherit , prefer continuity with the Cameron year . other expect a half-Eurosceptic , half-Europhile fudge design to reassure those who lose the referendum . neither turn out to be correct . instead Mrs May have unveil a Cabinet characterise by both talent and purpose . Brexit , it would seem , really will mean Brexit . there be continuity where it make sense : Jeremy Hunt stay on as Health Secretary to see through his bold and necessary list of reform . otherwise , out go the chumocracy . fairly or not , David Cameron be often accuse of promote friend and ally to the top job . Mrs May , however , be a different political animal . by not ally herself to one faction or another within Parliament - by remain somewhat aloof in Westminster circle - she enter her administration beholden to no one . on the contrary , she have be quite ruthless . out go George Osborne , Michael Gove , Oliver Letwin , Nicky Morgan and John Whittingdale . in their place she have appoint man and woman who not only disagree with her during the referendum , but even run against her for the party leadership . the Eurocrats might not be so happy about Boris Johnson ' s appointment as Foreign Secretary but , with David Davis head up a new department dedicate to Brexit , it be unlikely that he will be handle as much of the European brief Theresa May have combine the good of old and new without imply messy compromise as one might otherwise have expect . instead , he will be unleash onto the world - a stage that he be eminently suit for . Mr Johnson , a hugely popular politician for all the Left ' S jealousy , bring charisma to Britain ' s global brand in the same way that Philip Hammond will bring maturity to the role of Chancellor of the Exchequer . out too go any uncertainty about the direction of this government . Mrs May intend to achieve Brexit . to that end she have fill almost all the role that will handle its consequence to prominent leave campaigner . Mr Johnson at the foreign office ; Andrea Leadsom , another leadership rival , at environment ; Liam Fox at international trade ; Priti Patel at international development ; and Mr Davis as the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union . of course , Mr Davis and Mrs May will play their hand very carefully - any negotiation process require some degree of opacity to succeed . but the fact that Mr Davis have be argue for so long and so consistently for Brexit mean that we can finally divine some idea of what it might involve . he seem to favour what might be call a ` ` Brexit of both world ' ' . he want to regain control of the UK ' s border while also retain access to the single market - an ambition that other have warn might prove too great . interestingly , Mr Davis have also speak of an export-lead Brexit . he favour snap up trade deal , cut tax and reduce regulation , reframing Brexit not just as an isolated policy but a whole spirit of government . he do not , however , believe in a totally unregulated workforce : there will still be a place for one nation value in the post-Brexit world . Mrs May have combine the good of old and new without imply messy compromise . there be plenty of talent in the mix , as there be under Mr Cameron . but whereas Mr Cameron use to think tactically and like to appoint the people he be most comfortable deal with , Mrs May be somewhat more strategic . we infer that she have understand the message from the referendum . yes , it be a vote about leave the EU . but it be also a cultural rebellion against a metropolitan elite that seem out of touch and unresponsive to the demand of the electorate . voter will know that their cry of protest have be hear if they see Brexit deliver - and feel the consequence in a grow sense of political and economic empowerment . this be a Cabinet with the potential to do just that . Theresa May have combine the good of old and new without imply messy compromise
Scotland Hammond accuse of Brexit treachery Senior Cabinet minister say Chancellor be deliberately try to frustrate withdrawal
Philip Hammond be work to ` ` frustrate ' ' Brexit and be treat pro-Leave minister like ` ` pirate who have take him prisoner ' ' , a Cabinet minister have tell the Daily Telegraph , in an extraordinary attack on one of the most senior member of the government . all-out war appear to have break out in the government as the furious senior minister brand the Chancellor and his treasury ` ` the establishment ' ' , and warn of a deep split over how to leave the European Union , as talk restart in Brussels . the source also reveal the need to keep a weakened Theresa May in No10 in an attempt shore up Brexit , warning of a ` ` critical moment ' ' as David Davis fly out today to meet his rival negotiator for discussion to set the term of engagement on leave . it come as Mr Hammond hit back angrily after day of damaging accusation against him , include claim that he make sexist remark and say public sector worker be ` ` overpay ' ' . the ` ` tittle-tattle ' ' , discuss in a Cabinet meeting , come from MP who do not like his view on Brexit and be seek to damage him , the Chancellor say . but a senior Cabinet minister tell the Telegraph : ` ` what ' S really go on be that the establishment , the Treasury , be try to -- -- it up . they want to frustrate Brexit . ` ` this be a critical moment . that ' S why we have to keep Theresa there . otherwise the whole thing will fall apart . ' ' Mr Hammond see Brexit-supporters as ` ` pirate ' ' who have ` ` take the Establishment prisoner ' ' , the source say , add that Mr Hammond be ` ` try to break out ' ' and get his own way . the unprecedented remark , make after row between the Chancellor and Cabinet colleague over public sector pay , highlight tension over Brexit as minister squabble behind the scene over what leave the EU should entail . frustration with Theresa May ' S leadership , and plot to oust her as prime minister be also rumour to be behind the leak , with MP try to smear rival . last week MP backing David Davis and Boris Johnson clash at a party in London , reportedly claim each would kick the other ` ` in the b -- -- -- -s ' ' if the briefing do not stop . Mr Hammond , a Remain supporter , yesterday tell the BBC ' S Andrew Marr : ` ` some of the noise be generate by people who be not happy with the agenda that I have try to advance of ensure that we achieve a Brexit which be focus on protect our economy , protect our job and make sure that we can continue have rise live standard in the future . ' ' Mr Hammond repeatedly refuse to deny he have tell the Cabinet that public sector worker be ` ` overpay ' ' but confirm his view that public sector pay and pension package be ` ` about @card@ per cent ahead ' ' of the private sector . he also deny say drive a train be so easy even a woman could do it . report : page @card@ & @card@ Juliet Samuel : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
for the Chancellor , cake be n't on the menu ; Sketch h
Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank of England , gaze levelly at his audience . ` ` before long , ' ' he say , ` ` we will all begin to find out the extent to which Brexit be a gentle stroll along a smooth path to a land of cake and consumption . ' ' Mr Carney be , of course , a figure of scrupulous political neutrality . so we can be sure his reference to ` ` cake and consumption ' ' be intend wholly in innocence , and not as a mock allusion to Boris Johnson , the Brexit figurehead who assure the public that after leave the European union we would be ` ` have our cake and eat it ' ' . similarly , when Mr Carney speak of ` ` a gentle stroll along a smooth path ' ' , we can be sure that he do not mean it www.satirically.No doubt he would be aghast be anyone to infer that he think Brexit will be a scream nightmare , and that in pursue it the government have take leave of its sense . he be , after all , politically neutral.This point can not be emphasise enough . the Governor be speak at Mansion House in London , alongside Philip Hammond , the Chancellor . originally the two man have be schedule to speak at a lavish dinner last Thursday , but they cancel the event out of respect for the victim at Grenfell Tower . in the circumstance , the public might not have respond favourably to image of the capital ' s wealthy and most powerful people enjoy a banquet in white tie . the speech be therefore reschedule for yesterday morning , without a tailcoat in sight . like Mr Carney , Mr Hammond speak about Brexit . his speech last more than @card@ minute . in that time , notably , he do not cite a single possible benefit of Brexit . instead , he seem to be speak purely in term of damage limitation . the government ' S job , he say , be to ` ` reassure employer that they will still be able to access the talent they need ' ' , to ensure ` ` trade can carry on flow smoothly ' ' , and to encourage business to make investment ` ` that have be on hold since the referendum ' ' . it would ` ` require every ounce of skill and diplomacy we can muster ' ' . but if the government could achieve all that , he conclude , ` ` the collective sigh of relief will be audible ' ' . yes , a ` ` sigh of relief ` ` . listen to him , you could easily run away with the impression that the good the country could hope for post-Brexit would be to keep life as close as possible to the way it be pre-Brexit . above all , say Mr Hammond , the government must aim for a Brexit that ` ` prioritises British job and underpin Britain ' S prosperity ' ' , because the public have not vote ` ` to become poor ' ' . and to protect our economy , we must remember ` ` how important it be for business to be able to access global talent ' ' . rough translation : stop focus on slash immigration , Prime Minister . you ca n't do that without weaken the economy . or , to put it another way : you ca n't have your cake and eat it . ' Philip Hammond speak about Brexit for more than @card@ minute . in that time , he do n't mention a single benefit '
Woodford : ' Brexit ' s a sideshow , UK be set fair ' ; optimism about the economy have cause the star fund manager to buy more Britishfocused business , he tell Richard Evans
' Brexit be far from the most important influence on the UK economy . ' ' Neil Woodford , Britain ' s most prominent professional investor , who be celebrate three year in charge of his Woodford Equity Income fund , have pour scorn on the economics profession for predict instant disaster in the wake of the vote to leave the EU and sound an upbeat note about the country ' s future as exit negotiation begin . in an exclusive interview with Telegraph Money this week he explain why his optimism about the British economy have lead him to tilt his portfolio towards business that be tie to it , such as bank , house builder and property firm . ` ` Ninety per cent of economist say we would have an instant recession if Britain vote to leave the EU . they be talk nonsense , ' ' he say . ` ` other , more profound factor determine our economic future . I ' m not underestimate the impact of Brexit but I think I have a more balanced perspective . ` ` for example , there be record number of people in work . if business think the world be about to end , why be they advertise record number of job vacancy ? why be foreigner still invest here ? why be bank now finally lend normally for the first time since the financial crisis - this be a more significant development than the furore about Brexit . ' ' he say he expect the EU exit negotiation to produce an acceptable compromise and predict that there would be a transitional arrangement of some kind , which would avoid the shock of a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' withdrawal . ` ` I do n't think business confidence be about to evaporate . ' ' Mr Woodford predict that the British economy would benefit from a period of political stability after the election and would grow at about 2pc a year . as a result , he have invest in stock whose fortune be closely align with the domestic economy . earlier this month the buy Lloyds Banking Group , Barratt Developments , Taylor Wimpey and British Land . he raise the money to invest in these firm by sell his entire stake in GLAXOSMITHKLINE , the drug maker , which he have hold for @card@ year in portfolio at Invesco perpetual and his current firm . it be previously his third large holding . ' I do n't have any other Glaxos ' Mr Woodford sell Glaxo because he have give up hope that he could persuade the company to break itself up into more focused business , which he believe would produce good return for shareholder . he say he fear that if Glaxo stick with its current structure it could eventually be force to cut the dividend . ` ` I have long believe that value could be create for the company ' S shareholder if it split itself into separate , more specialise business unit , ' ' he say when he sell the stake . ` ` the sum of the part be significantly great than the whole . my viewpoint , and that of other like-minded institutional investor , have be hear but ultimately ignore - repeatedly . ' ' but Mr Woodford reassure investor in his fund that none of his other holding depend for their success on bring about fundamental change at the company concern . ` ` Glaxo be unique in this respect , ' ' he say . ` ` I be not seek to dismember the company but to make it a good , more focus business . it be a really important part of the British economy . ' ' he say AstraZeneca , the UK ' s other drug giant , which be his large holding , be ` ` completely different ' ' and ` ` much more focused ' ' . ` ` it ' s do exactly what I want Glaxo to do , ' ' Mr Woodford say . ' Britain have huge potential as a knowledge economy ' when Telegraph Money interview Mr Woodford just as he be launch his equity income fund in @card@ , he say part of the appeal of fund management be that he be always learn . ask what he have learn in the three year since , he say : ` ` the big difference be that I have become significantly more convince of the potential of Britain ' s ' knowledge economy ' . ` ` we be experience a second industrial revolution and Britain be play a lead role , ' ' Mr Woodford say . ` ` this country be now make commercial success from its unbelievably high-quality science base - that never happen in the previous @card@ year or so of my fund management career . this development could not be well time . ' ' Mr Woodford launch an investment trust focus on hi-tech start-up business , Woodford Patient Capital , in @card@ . he add : ` ` the successful nation of the next @card@ year will be those that take the lead in area such as artificial Mr Woodford say he expect good performance from his investment trust intelligence , biomedicine and it . this be potentially transformational for wealth creation . I ' m more optimistic about Britain ' s part in it than ever . ' ' Patient Capital Trust : ' I ' m happy to be judge on the three to five-year record ' the Woodford Equity Income fund have perform strongly since launch , gain 37.8pc against 25.2pc for the FTSE all share index ; it have be the second good performing equity income fund over the period . however , the Patient Capital trust have disappoint many investor , with only a marginal gain in net asset value since launch ( the share price remain below the launch price because a discount have emerge ) . there have be well document problem at three of the quote stock in the portfolio and Mr Woodford say other valuation have be hit by a severe lack of appetite among institutional investor for quote start-up stock . but he say he remain convince of the trust ' S potential and expect much good performance over the long term . ` ` Our confidence in the hypothesis behind the trust have not be shake one bit , ' ' he say . ` ` I know investor can be , well , impatient . but I be happy to be judge on a three to fiveyear view and I ' m very confident that the trust can deliver . ` ` I be very encourage at the pace and scale of the progress of the business in the portfolio . we say at the beginning that investor should expect a wide range of outcome from the holding . most have n't see much change in value , some have have problem , but other have achieve way beyond what I expect . ` ` over the trust as a whole I be astonish at the rate of progress , much of which have yet to be reflect in valuation uplift . ' ' Telegraph Money also speak to Craig Newman , who run the business side of Woodford Investment Management while Mr Woodford concentrate on manage the portfolio . fee Woodford pride itself on fee transparency ( it break down all its charge , include trading cost , each month and be one of the first to pay research cost itself ) . we ask Mr Newman if he would consider cut the fee on the Woodford Equity Income fund in view of its size of more than £10bn . the fact that fund management firm invariably charge fee as a percentage of the fund size mean that their income automatically rise as asset be attract to the fund or as investment gain boost its value . he say : ` ` we will always aim to remain competitive and so I would never rule out a cut in the fee . ' ' Fund size when fund become very large , some investor worry that the manager will be force to invest more in the big company , limit their option , because even great success with small holding wo n't ` ` move the dial ' ' . Mr Newman say Mr Woodford be very comfortable at the current size , point out that he have not experience problem run even large sum at his previous firm . ? new fund he say the firm be interested in launch new fund , although he hint that bond fund would not be top of his list . cut in fund fee on the card ? ' economist predict an instant recession . they be talk nonsense '
Britain face EU bill until @card@ ; UK will send billion to Brussel in exchange for single market deal , say Whitehall source Britain could continue pay billion to Brussels
Britain will have to continue pay billion into the EU budget after Brexit to secure a ` ` transition ' ' trade deal with Brussels , senior Whitehall source have tell the Daily Telegraph . Britain ' S exit will leave an £8billiona-year black hole in the EU ' S finance , which be cause significant anxiety across the continent - include in Ger-many , which fear it will have to pick up the bill for any shortfall . British negotiator be examine plan under which the UK would contribute billion to cover the gap in the EU ' s finance between Brexit in March @card@ and the end of the EU ' s seven-year budget framework in @card@ . however , the payment will only be offer in exchange for a ` ` sensible ' ' transition deal , under which British business would retain access to the single market for two year after Brexit . a senior Whitehall source say : ` ` payment up to the end of this MFF [ Multi-annual financial framework ] be something that we could put on the table which would help them fix a big short-term problem in their budget . ' ' the source add that British negotiator have also not rule out ` ` ongoing payment ' ' in exchange for a free-trade agreement with the EU . the idea , which be highly sensitive give the likelihood of opposition from some Brexiteers in Westminster , reflect a grow recognition that money will provide key leverage in the come talk . it come as Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission and Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , arrive in London today for talk with Theresa May . meanwhile , Boris Johnson will make his first speech of the election campaign , in which the Foreign Secretary be expect to say Britain will not turn its back on the world after Brexit . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , will also make a speech in London about the government ' S plan to make a success of Brexit , strike an upbeat note despite a stream of tough signal emanate form Brussel . separately , a flagship Labour pledge to end free movement immediately unravel yesterday as it say that EU migrant should be able to come to Britain as long as they have a job offer . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , yesterday announce that ` ` free movement have to go ' ' in what appear to be a significant break with Jeremy Corbyn . however , the pledge unravel within hour after he subsequently say there should be ` ` free movement of labour ' ' , add that ` ` we must have immigration ' ' for the economy . the European side have be harden its line on Brexit since the Prime Minister trigger Article @card@ last month , and be make a transitional arrangement contingent on continued budget payment , free movement of people and accept the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) . the EU ' s negotiate guideline , which be to be finalise at a summit on Saturday , have also be toughen to include further expand financial demand , include direct agricultural payment . on trade , the late draft include a demand from France to separate the key area of financial service from any trade deal , unless the UK agree to accept the EU ' s ` ` regulatory and supervisory standard regime ' ' , accord to the Bloomberg news agency . Germany and France be lead demand not to backslide from Europe ' S ( Euro ) 60billion ( £51billion ) ` ` Brexit bill ' ' which have already draw an outraged reaction from lead Brexiteers . the prospect of pay significant sum to buy access also risk open up Cabinet split , with Mr Davis take a hard line on financial payment , accord to EU diplomatic source . Charles Grant , the director of the Centre for European Reform , a pro-EU think tank say that Germany - egg on by France - be stand firm on the budget issue , which Europe say must be satisfactorily resolve before it will agree to trade talk . ` ` some top official suggest that they will not compromise on the ( Euro ) 60billion , ' ' he say , ` ` but if the British be willing to compromise on the money , they will find the @card@ willing to start talk on [ a free trade deal ] . for British negotiator , the concern be principally about sell the idea of make substantial payment to the British parliamentarian and public . ` ` Everyone know there be large commitment and that Britain be a country that pay its bill , ' ' say a second Whitehall source also involve in preparation for the talk , ` ` it ' s a question of come up with a methodology that can be defend at home . ' ' Mrs May , who will make the final decision on any British offer , have be careful not to make any cost-iron declaration on the question of budget payment . in a BBC interview after trigger Article @card@ , she hint that the UK would be prepare to make substantial payment - but be clear they would not be characterise as an exit ' bill ' or a payment for leave .
Brexit , you ' re kill us , say comedian ; Brexit
comedian have tell how anti-Brexit joke be hurt their career as audience walk out in offence . several stand-ups have successfully tailor their take on Britain leave the European Union for Leftwing audience in London . but many come unstick when they take their act to the rest of the country . Marcus Brigstocke , who have be tour the UK with a routine that include @card@ minute of material on Brexit , say it be the first time in his career that audience member have walk out ` ` every night ' ' . he say : ` ` people have be angry , people have walk out of show and people have boo . ` ` a lot of the people I think of as my audience will not be back , they ' re that angry , ' ' he tell BBC Radio @card@ . ` ` it seem that for the most part Brexit be not just the hideous social and political turn we have take as a country , but be also comedic poison . ' ' Stewart Lee , a comedian , have also speak of hostile reaction to his material poke fun at leave voter . Aaron Brown , editor of the British Comedy Guide , say : ` ` I would say the comedy world ' S reaction have be almost exclusively negative . many joke essentially paraphrase as ' shoot ourselves in the foot ' , and the rest rely on lazily brand @card@ per cent of the voter as racist . ' ' the ability of UK zoo to breed and protect endangered specie could be damage if the UK leave the EU without a deal , Kirsten Pullen , of the British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums , have warn .
a war be be fight for the soul of Britain - and the optimist must win ; the Tories must turn Britain into a free-trade haven and pledge to boost opportunity for the poor
there be two nation in Britain today , but they be not quite the one that Benjamin Disraeli have in mind . on the one hand we have the optimist , Brexiteers as well as ex-Remainers , who be gradually come together in their embrace of our new future , reunite in their determination to make the most of the next few year to reform and improve our country . on the other , we have the pessimist , a shrinking but still extraordinarily vocal group : to them , the outlook be so unbearably gloomy that they can not bring themselves to think constructively about a country they no longer recognise . the good news be that , after a few difficult week , the optimist be finally in the ascendant . Theresa May be now their official leader , as well as our Prime Minister : she do n't back Brexit , but be go to implement it with gusto . her strong leadership be exactly what be need : it be no surprise that it be prove infectious . support for the now officially pro-Brexit Tories have jump to @card@ per cent , accord to YouGov ; consumer spending be hold up , accord to the Bank of England ' s regular regional survey ; and a grow number of institution be start to propose helpful , constructive idea to make the most of Brexit . take the President of the Royal College of Surgeons : she have urge the NHS to ` ` seize the moment ' ' and use Brexit to tear up red tape that damage patient safety , include rule that prevent hospital from demand a proper mastery of English and working-time law that mean surgeon do n't undergo enough training . one lead regulator have tell me privately that leave the EU would allow a much more robust pro-competition policy ; Siemens , a pro-Remain company , now insist that it be fully commit to Britain and that it would build a ` ` huge manufacturing place ... in a heartbeat ' ' if it receive enough order for its train carriage . the list be grow visibly longer by the day . Ineos , the giant chemical maker , be relocate its headquarters and senior management back to the UK from Switzerland ; SoftBank , one of Japan ' s big company , be make the largest-ever Asian investment in the UK , argue explicitly that it believe in a post-Brexit Britain . a number of company have also agree to rent or commission new office in the City since the referendum . the optimist be not delude : they know the go will be tough , that Brexit have crystallise long-standing structural weakness in the economy , that many big company be scare , and that it will take hard work to sign trade deal and negotiate the right exit from the EU . there will be cost as well as benefit from Brexit . but they relish the challenge and be convince that we now have a once-in-ageneration opportunity to change our country and economy for the good , or simply to continue make money in one of the large , most prosperous economy in the world . then there be the pessimist . some be Remainers who still believe Brexit to be an epoch-defining catastrophe , who continue to plot and scheme to overturn the result , who cling to the derange , insulting notion that those of us who vote leave be either stupid , racist or evil , who scour the news for every negative datum point and who , in a few isolated and extreme case , would actually like a recession ` ` to prove them right ' ' . you also have some Leavers in this pessimistic camp who believe that nothing will ever change , either because we wo n't actually leave the EU or because they feel that the political class will return to business as usual . this latter group often hail from deprived community ; they vote Brexit in part to give the London establishment a kick but fear that they will continue to be ignore . the challenge for the optimist be to reunite the two Britain . they need to inspire and assuage the angry Remainers , show all but the most die-hard that the future can be rosy ; and they must reach out to those Leavers who feel that they have n't benefit enough from globalisation . all group in society have a responsibility to take part in this project to rebuild Britain for a post-Brexit 21st century . entrepreneur and firm need to propose the reform they believe be require to allow our economy to prosper outside of the EU : we need to hear solution , not whine , from business . the same be true of other professional , from university administrator to architect to the police force , as well as from the charitable sector . Britain need a ` ` can-do ' ' revolution , with as many positive idea as possible from all quarter and perspective . the question be no long whether or not to Brexit - it ' s how to make it work as well as possible for the whole country . the government , for its part , need to unveil a three-fold programme to woo the sceptic . the first pledge should be to turn Britain into the nation that be the most open to trade of any Western economy in five year ' time . to reach this target , the government would seek to limit the reimposition of tariff or non-tariff barrier with the EU , while urgently pursue as many free-trade deal as possible with faster-growing economy worldwide . the second pledge should be to make the UK the most entrepreneurfriendly country in the West by @card@ . this would include tear up red tape , cut tax , make it easy for tech firm to continue to hire skilled migrant talent , and encourage university to become incubator for start-up . last but not least , the government should make an explicit promise to Britain ' s poor group and region that their opportunity will drastically improve . the free school programme should be turbo-charged by allow for-profit company to open new one , start in the north of England and Wales before be roll out nationally ; new selective school should be open , as part of an extension of parent choice ; much more land should be make available for build in the south of England ; and expensive green energy rule should be ditch . Britain be also in desperate need of several low-tax , low-regulation new enterprise zone near university in poor part of the North and Wales , with a vision and management structure similar to London ' S Canary Wharf . it ' s be almost a month since the referendum and the optimist , thanks in large part to May ' s steady hand , be finally on the rise again . they must now begin the long , slow process of reunite the country . that be the mission on which they will ultimately be judge . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Davis force to backtrack on Brexit deal
David Davis be force to change tack on the legality of the Brexit deal yesterday as he admit the agreement would become British law as ` ` soon as possible ' ' follow an avalanche of criticism from EU official . they unleash a series of rebuke against Mr Davis over his suggestion that the UK could backtrack on promise make in the divorce settlement , which have only be agree on Friday . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit coordinator , accuse the Brexit Secretary of score an ` ` own goal ' ' with his ` ` unacceptable ' ' comment and say he have ` ` undermine [ d ] trust ' ' with London . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s Brexit negotiator , stress that there could be ` ` no backtrack ' ' . the EU have refuse to begin negotiation on trade and transition until it judge ` ` sufficient progress ' ' be make on the Brexit bill , Ireland and citizen ' right . on Friday , Britain be give the green light after seal the deal . meanwhile , Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council , warn that both side be now lock in a ` ` furious race against time ' ' to agree on the term of transition and future trade in just @card@ month . the EU ' S head of state be expect to rubber-stamp sufficient progress at a summit on Friday . Mr Davis attempt to calm the troubled water yesterday afternoon . he write on Twitter : ` ` Pleasure , as ever , to speak to my friend @ guyverhofstadt - we both agree on the importance of the Joint Report . Let ' S work together to get it convert into legal text as soon as possible . ' ' EU source say Mr Davis ' S comment prompt them to toughen up the language in the draft European Council resolution . MEPs in the European Parliament follow suit , amend a resolution to condemn Mr www.Davis.No to vote Ministers to offer ' clarity ' on final agreement Theresa May be try to quell a Tory rebellion as pro-Europe MP demand a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal . Dominic Grieve have table an amendment to the withdrawal bill with support from @card@ other and say Mrs May could be defeat . minister oppose the amendment say they believe all the MP really want be more ` ` clarity ' ' . Iain Duncan Smith say Mr Grieve ' S motion be just ` ` grandstand ' ' .
Tories must regain their own conviction body : if Brexit be the revolution , we be enter a very British , bloodless version of the Terror . there be no guillotine in Westminster , but the sexual harassment scandal have create panic - plot within plot , score to settle . rather than make history , MP be now force to ride it and pray that they emerge with their career intact . there be a way through : conviction politics . if honest , bold conservatism do n't win the revolution , there ' s a terrible risk that Jeremy Corbyn ' S socialist just might . one of the peculiarly British feature of the Brexit upheaval be that after it happen , the manager of the old system largely stay in place . it be Remainer Theresa May , in coalition with a few Leavers , who get to choose what kind of Brexit the UK would chase , and while she embrace revolutionary slogan such as ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' , she fail to translate this into a compelling election message and fail to leverage the optimism of Brexit to her advantage . Mrs May wake up on June @card@ with few MP and an ascendant Labour Party . then come the harassment scandal . what have this generational verdict on workplace misogyny get to do with high politics ? the answer be that it appear to have be hijack to serve other end . the principal party in the Cabinet all have some stake in a reshuffle or the debate over Brexit . Sir Michael Fallon , who resign as defence secretary , be believe to be a critic of the so-called hard-Brexit position . hard Brexiteer Andrea Leadsom , who be name as the person who denounce Sir Michael ( a claim contradict by No @card@ ) , be tip to be sack ; her decisive and timely action in the harassment debate might win her a lot of support . and Gavin Williamson , the Remainer who fill Sir Michael ' S shoe , have be name for high office since the conference when , in an unusual move , he give a keynote speech . although there be no suggestion that Mr Williamson know of the existence of the MP ' ` ` dirty dossier ' ' , there have be call for an investigation to see if it be leak from the whip ' office that Mr Williamson use to run . while the child of the revolution devour themselves , the government face a war on two front . how much energy be be drain from the negotiation with the EU ? while there be glimmer of inspiration - the promise of trade deal , Michael Gove ' s reform at Environment - it ' S hard to see how reshuffle the whip ' office or Cabinet turf war help , especially as poll show public confidence in the handling of negotiation have fall . in December come the nut and bolt of the divorce bill and , yes , this require the kind of attention to detail for which the Prime Minister be famous . but @card@ month after the referendum , we be still no closer to know what kind of Britain the Tories intend to build . to guide a revolution , one must have some sense of what it be for - something more positive than just control the border . Brexit be about sovereignty and opportunity , take power from the bureaucrat and give it to the people . it would be terrible if it become tar by association with the harassment scandal , another Tory idea undo by the incompetence of Tory politician - and the smug elite of militant Remain could just sit back and watch it unravel , without lift a finger . the other battle the conservative face be with the Left . Brexit break the rule and create new possibility in politics ; one of those be Jeremy Corbyn in No @card@ . it would be deeply unjust if Labour benefit from the harassment scandal , give the accusation face by its own MP and official . but Mr Corbyn can power through this chaos with one natural advantage : he believe the end justify the mean . he be a true radical . while his ideology be well beyond the centre of British politics - alien , in fact , to most of us - there be a risk that he win simply because he offer a clear alternative to a regime in disarray . to stop him , the Tories have to regain their own sense of mission . they must do what it take to clean up politics , yes , but also unite with conviction around the delivery of Brexit , lest the people boot them out and replace them with a leader of the revolutionary leave .
MP warn archbishop of Canterbury to stay out of EU discussion
down Street yesterday reject the archbishop of Canterbury ' s claim that the chance of finalise a Brexit deal before March @card@ be ` ` infinitesimally small ' ' , as Tory MP tell him to stay out of the debate . the most Rev Justin Welby suggest it be unlikely that the government would be able to strike a complete deal before the official point of withdrawal in just over @card@ month ' time . but his intervention receive a swift rebuke from Theresa May , who say that she and her government ` ` remain commit to the timetable of Brexit ' ' . the archbishop also anger Eurosceptic MP , who say he should spend less time on Brexit and more on ` ` worry about the size of congregation in church across the country ' ' . he have previously call on Mrs May to set up a cross-party commission to advise her on Brexit to ` ` draw much of the poison ' ' from negotiation . yesterday he suggest a commission would be need for the UK to have any chance of reach an agreement before time run out and Britain leave the bloc . he tell today on BBC Radio Four : ` ` you have get to remember that on Brexit there be literally thousand of separate agreement to come to . ` ` if each one of those have to be argue as a point of confidence on the floor of the House of Commons the chance of get this do in what be now roughly @card@ month be infinitesimally small . ' ' the archbishop argue that some issue should be ` ` off the political table ' ' and decide by an ` ` expert commission ' ' . but the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman say Mrs May and her top team ` ` remain commit to the timetable of Brexit ' ' and that ` ` there be no plan for a commission ' ' . Philip Davies , a Conservative MP , say that while the archbishop be entitle to his opinion , he should be concentrate on other thing . he say : ` ` to be perfectly frank , if he spend more time worry about the size of congregation in church across the country and less time worry about the Brexit negotiation , he might get somewhere . ' ' Fellow Tory MP Andrew Bridgen add : ` ` I have get the great respect for Justin Welby and the work he do . ` ` however , I always think that when religious leader get involve in politics and politician get involve in religion it be nothing but trouble . well to stick to what we do . ' ' the archbishop of Canterbury , the most Rev Justin Welby have be tell by Tory MP to stay out of the Brexit debate
unelected Lords must not be allow to undermine the Brexit vote ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - all believer in genuine democracy should be alarm by what be go on in the House of Lords ( ` ` May face double defeat on Brexit Bill as Lords gang up ' ' , report , February @card@ ) . the determine opponent of Brexit in that unelected institution , cloak themselves as upholder of parliamentary democracy , be concoct procedural poison pill and offer them as compromise . Theresa May must not allow herself to fall into such traps . if the Lords be arrogant enough to defy the British people , then she must use the Parliament Act.Terry Smith London NW11 Sir - some @card@ million Briton choose a bright future . the democratically elect government be quite capable of fit a light bulb and do not require @card@ unelected peer to ` ` help ' ' and ` ` advise ' ' on how to do this . Gerald Heath Corsham , Wiltshire Sir - in their desire to protect the right of EU citizen in Britain without demand a reciprocal agreement from Brussels , the Lords be condemn British expats to an uncertain future . they be also undermine one of the government ' s negotiate point . perhaps it be time to consider the reformation of this club , which appear to be out of touch with the general mood of the British public . Richard Ramsey Turners Hill , West Sussex Sir - Giving in to the Lords ' call for a veto on the final Brexit deal would be a disaster . this would be take to mean that we only consider a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' acceptable , and would give a win advantage to the EU ' s negotiate team . they would offer only a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , which they would expect Parliament to reject . I be sure that all those lobbying for this amendment be fully aware of how it be likely to work out . they might claim that they respect the referendum vote , but really they have discover a new way to reverse the people ' s decision.Ken Shuttleworth St Albans , Hertfordshire Sir - it be sad to see Lord Heseltine try to cause ruction over the Brexit Bill . be he not involve in create the rift in the Tory party that lead to the downfall of Margaret Thatcher ? he and other try to go against the will of the majority should examine their conscience . Phyllis Jones Bedford Sir - on yesterday ' S Andrew Marr Show , there be much discussion about how the Lords may influence the Brexit outcome - but not a word be utter by Mr Marr as to why they and other have stand idly by over the past @card@ year as the authority of the Commons be eroded.R G Hopgood Kirby-le-Soken , Essex
Scotland Scottish council say they be ignore on Brexit ; leader reveal they have good talk on vital issue with the UK Government than with Edinburgh
Scotland ' S council leader have hold a series of ` ` excellent ' ' talk with the UK Government over the implication of Brexit but have have only one meeting with SNP minister , a Holyrood inquiry hear yesterday . councillor David O'Neill , president of the convention of Scottish Local Authorities ( Cosla ) , praise communication with the UK Government on Brexit but say there have be little engagement with the ruling SNP in Edinburgh . he tell MSPs on the local government committee that council have to be ` ` embed ' ' in the negotiation but this have not happen in Scotland , despite local government offer up its experience and assistance . his intervention come as source close to Nicola Sturgeon last night promise to allow MSPs to scrutinise her plan to keep Scotland in the EU single market when they be publish next week , after no time be schedule in Holyrood ' S timetable . it be understand senior representative of some opposition party have be invite for a briefing on Monday with Mike Russell , Ms Sturgeon ' S Brexit Minister , ahead of publication , which be expect the follow day . the Scottish Parliament ' s timetable for next week include a ministerial statement on protect Scotland ' S livestock but not on the controversial proposal . it be the final week that parliament sit until the second week of January . Tavish Scott , a senior Liberal Democrat MSP , last night say Ms Sturgeon would have to bring the plan to Holyrood if she be to stick to her pledge to keep parliament inform on her response to Brexit . Scottish Government insider say MSPs would get the chance to ask about the plan before they go on their Christmas holiday . it be understand time for a statement could be add to the timetable next week . Mr O'Neill tell the committee : ` ` I think it would be fair to say that the level of engagement that Cosla be have , along with our other local government association in the UK , with the UK Government have be excellent . ` ` the level of engagement that we ' ve have with the Scottish Government have be a meeting . ' ' he say David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , have ensure Cosla have access to UK civil servant and could arrange meeting with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary . there have also be close cooperation with English council , which he say be conduct a ` ` substantial body of work ' ' . Mr O'Neill claim there be more knowledge within council about Brexit than in the Scottish government but ` ` there ' s not really be any substantive contact ' ' apart from a single meeting .
Brexit memo suggest that Britain want it all ; Senior Tory ' S aide reveal detail of Brexit ' strategy '
a BREXIT memo which suggest that Britain want to ` ` have its cake and eat it ' ' last night spark speculation over whether the government have reveal detail of its negotiate strategy for the first time . the note , which be carry by an aide to Mark Field , the Conservative Party vice-chairman , after a meeting at the office of David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , say it be ` ` unlikely ' ' that Britain will be give the chance to remain in the single market after it leave the European Union . the note suggest that the government be ` ` loath ' ' to introduce ` ` transitional ' ' control after Britain leave the EU which would give the City access to the single market for a limited period . Downing Street insist that the memo be ` ` not a government document ' ' and say it ` ` do not represent the UK ' s position in relation to Brexit negotiation ' ' . however , source refuse to say who have attend the meeting . Julia Dockerill , Mr Field ' s chief of staff , be photograph carry the note as she leave the meeting in no @card@ Downing Street . it state that the ` ` implementation ' ' of Article @card@ , which will formally trigger Brexit negotiation , be likely to be ` ` difficult ' ' . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , ` ` want to see what deal look like first ' ' but the memo suggest Britain ` ` wo n't provide more detail ' ' . it say that a deal on manufacturing be ` ` relatively straightforward ' ' but an agreement on service , which include the financial sector , be likely to be ` ` hard ' ' . it say that Britain be likely to pursue a ` ` Canada-plus ' ' trade deal with the EU , add that being part of the European Economic Area would be ` ` not good ' ' . the memo state : ` ` Difficult on Article @card@ implementation - Barnier want to see what deal look like first . ` ` get to be do in parallel - @card@ odd negotiation . keep the two year . wo n't provide more detail . we think it ' s unlikely we ' ll be offer single market . manufacturing relatively straightfoward . transitional - loath to do it . Whitehall will hold on to it . we need to bring an end to negotiation . ' ' the document appear to discuss the prospect of a Norway trade deal , which be a member of the European Economic Area , which extend the single market ' S benefit to some non-EU member such as Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein . it say : ` ` why no Norway - two element - no ECJ intervention . unlikely to do internal market . ' ' Whitehall source say the memo be a note of comment make at a meeting between Conservative Party official and representative from the Dutch ruling VVD party . a source play down the significance of the meeting , say : ` ` these be note for an internal party meeting - a few sketch note . ' ' Theresa May have refuse to give any detail of her strategy , amid concern that it would give away Britain ' S hand . the Prime Minister be aim to trigger Article @card@ and begin the two-year formal process of leave the European union by the end of March next year . under the timetable Britain will leave the EU in April @card@ . Ms Dockerill , a Tory councillor , appear unaware of the memo furore last night as she tweet picture from a Christmas party . it come as British Influence , a think tank back by Lord Mandelson , announce a new legal challenge to give Parliament a vote on leave the European Economic Area . however the head of the think tank be yesterday force to issue an embarrassing ` ` clarification ' ' after he mistakenly say that Switzerland be a member of the EEA .
Scotland PM may delay Brexit to help firm avoid ' cliff edge ' ; May will seek transitional deal for City to ensure business be not leave strand by sudden change
Theresa May have tell business leader that she want to avoid a ` ` cliff edge ' ' after Brexit , but insist that she will not delay leave the European Union . the Prime Minister indicate yesterday that she will try to get a ` ` transitional ' ' deal for the City in a move that could mean that the UK still have to pay EU contribution after Brexit . Downing Street insist that Mrs May will not seek to ` ` extend ' ' the twoyear deadline for leave the EU . she speak after Paul Drechsler , president of the CBI , warn that business do not want a ` ` sudden and overnight transformation in trading condition ' ' that could leave them ` ` strand in a regulatory no man ' S land ' ' . Mrs May tell the CBI ' s annual conference : ` ` I understand the point that Paul have make . other have make this point , that people do n't want a cliff edge ; they want to know with some certainty how thing be go to go forward . that will be part of the work that we do in term of the negotiation that we be undertake with the European Union . ' ' Mrs May have say that she want to trigger Article @card@ , which begin the formal two-year process of leave the EU , by next March . however , Downing Street refuse to rule out a transitional deal and point out that the deadline for Brexit could be extend with the agreement of other EU nation . Mrs May also seek to repair her relationship with business leader by suggest that corporation tax will be cut to a record low . in her speech the Prime Minister commit Britain to have the low corporation tax of the world ' S @card@ big economy . the comment suggest the government will cut corporation tax further and faster than expect , potentially low than the @card@ per cent rate promise by Donald Trump , the US presidentelect . George Osborne , the former chancellor , seize on the comment and put pressure on Mrs May to deliver further cut to corporation tax . he say that reduce it to @card@ per cent would show that Britain be ` ` open for business ' ' . Downing Street yesterday play down the prospect of deep cut as ` ` speculation ' ' , highlight the fact that the government have already commit to cut corporation tax to @card@ per cent by @card@ . Mrs May also use her speech to warn that the behaviour of a ` ` small minority of business and business leader ' ' be ` ` undermine the reputation of the corporate world ' ' . she say business must recognise those on modest income believe capitalism be ` ` work well for the privileged few , but not always for them ' ' . it come as Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , deliver a rebuke to David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union . Mr Davis travel to Brussels yesterday to help ` ` lay the groundwork ' ' for negotiation before Britain formally trigger Brexit . however in the wake of the meeting Mr Barnier say : ` ` no negotiation without notification . my work be now focus on EU27 [ country ] . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@ business : page @card@ Easy do it Brexit and a ` ` transitional deal ' ' for business QWhat be a transitional deal ? a Business leader have raise repeated concern that they will be hit by a sudden ` ` cliff edge ' ' if Britain leave the EU overnight in March @card@ . Paul Drechsler , president of the CBI , raise concern that when the ` ` clock strike midnight ' ' Britain could find itself ` ` strand in a regulatory no man ' S land ' ' . he say Britain ' S port , airport and logistic firm could find themselves deal with ` ` new and potentially complex paperwork ' ' . business , he suggest , could effectively come to a halt . QWhat do Theresa May say ? a in her first keynote speech at the CBI ' s annual conference , Mrs May directly address Mr Drechsler ' S concern . ` ` I understand the point that Paul have make , that people do not want a cliff edge , ' ' she say . ` ` that will be part of what we be undertake with the European Union . ' ' the comment suggest that the PM be consider ` ` transitional ' ' arrangement for business in the immediate wake of Brexit . QWhat will that mean ? a in practice , Britain may have to pay a contribution to the EU in the immediate aftermath of Brexit to secure a ` ` transitional ' ' period for its business . the period would mean that they would potentially continue to enjoy tariff-free access to the Single Market for a limited period while alternative arrangement be in place . it could also mean that Britain have to agree to some concession on freedom of movement in the short term . QWo n't that delay Brexit ? a Mrs May be emphatic that it will not . Downing Street clarify that Britain will not seek to extend the two-year deadline set out under Article @card@ . the PM have say that she will trigger Brexit by March at the late , mean that we will leave the EU by @card@ . QAre Conservative Eurosceptics angry ? a No , on the most part they be satisfy . while some would prefer a ` ` quickie divorce ' ' , most be satisfy that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . Steve Baker , a Tory MP and Eurosceptic , say he be ` ` in favour of a transitional agreement ' ' . he add : ` ` it must come to an end when we move into a new bi-lateral free trade deal . it should be time limit . ' '
Scotland Brexit ? unequivocal , clear and unambiguous , it mean Brexit
o what do Brexit mean ? SAccording to Theresa May , it ` ` mean Brexit ' ' . helpfully , to ensure that no one be leave in the dark , she have repeat this explanation on numerous occasion . yet there be perhaps a dawn sense among some of her minister that not every voter be fully satisfy by Mrs May ' S explanation . without wish to place the Prime Minister under unreasonable pressure , some member of the public fear her explanation to be a little sketchy , vis-àvis the fine detail . they hunger for further knowledge . they thirst for elucidation . this desire be acknowledge yesterday by David Davis , make his first statement to the commons since his appointment as Secretary for State for Exiting the European Union . ` ` naturally , people will want to know what Brexit will mean , ' ' he concede . on tenterhook , MP wait to find out . ` ` simply , ' ' he reveal , ` ` it mean leave the European union . ' ' so now we know . as for what Brexit will or even may mean in term of international trade , immigration , job and security , however , Mr Davis be unable to be quite so enlightening . he speak for a good @card@ minute , but MP on the bench face him sound unconvinced that they have hear anything new . he inform them that negotiate with the EU ` ` will have to be get right ' ' , presumably in case any of them think it would have to be get wrong . he disclose that there would be ` ` challenge ahead ' ' , but add that he be ` ` confident ' ' of success . meanwhile , to ` ` establish the priority issue ' ' for the negotiation , he could ` ` announce that we will hold round table with stakeholder in a series of sector ' ' . ` ` Waffle ! ' ' shout Labour MP . ` ` be that it ? ' ' snort the SNP ' S Stephen Gethins . ` ` on the specific of his statement ... ' ' begin Iain Duncan Smith . Labour and the SNP laugh . almost every Tory MP ask a question or offer advice . Peter Lilley ( Hitchin & Harpenden ) say there be no need to negotiate for two year before leave ; after all , other country in history have gain independence far more quickly . as an example , he cite India . possibly not the ideal model of a smooth exit . a fresh-faced backbencher name Michael Gove triumphantly declare that the late economic figure mean that ` ` the soi-disant expert ' ' who forecast disaster ` ` have oeuf on their face ' ' . as I recall , the soi-disant expert be make prediction about what would happen after Britain leave the EU , which I gather have n't strictly happen yet . still , I ' m no expert . a Tory veteran offer Mr Davis his sympathy . ` ` Mr Speaker , I understand my right honourable friend ' S difficulty , and I congratulate him on not rush anything , ' ' say Ken Clarke , who just happen to be a staunch Europhile . ` ` I encourage him to take as long with his colleague as he possibly can in work out a policy , and I look forward to hear from him again when the government have agree what Brexit actually mean . ' ' Brexit mean Brexit . which mean leave the European Union . honestly , have n't he be listen ?
Tories ' fate hang on the new conservative ; the reshuffle be design to repair relation with over-60s but appeal more to @card@ and 40-somethings
what be Theresa May do with this reshuffle ? the answer may lie with a Conservative electorate that have undergo profound change . today , the Conservative Party ' S following be far more pro-Brexit , more working-class than that which hand David Cameron a surprise majority back in @card@ . make sense of this change be crucial to make sense of where the party should head next . it be no secret that British politics be in a process of realignment , yet many continue to underestimate the scale of this change . accord to the British Election Study , between the election of @card@ and @card@ alone , support for the Tories fall back among Remainers by around @card@ point but increase among Leavers by the same margin . Tory support among liberal fall back by around @card@ point but increase among conservative by @card@ point . it drop among graduate by around @card@ point but jump by @card@ point among those with no qualification . consequently , at the last election the Tories have one of their good result in modern time among worker , traditional social conservative and non-graduate - all of whom be far more supportive of a hard Brexit than many Conservative donor , big business and Cabinet minister . these voter be clear about where the Tories should head next and there be one big message - they really want the party to reform immigration . between @card@ and @card@ , support for the conservative among voter who think that Britain should prioritise control of migration increase by @card@ point - to a striking @card@ per cent , well ahead of the figure for those who want single-market access prioritised . this be a position share by around one in four Labour voter . all of which mean that the Tories ' fate depend on their most conservative backer of recent time - whose loyalty depend on whether or not the party will , finally , reform Britain ' s immigration system . how should the conservative deal with this dilemma ? they stand at a crossroad : down one path lie a Cameron-reboot aim at tempting millennials , middle-class liberal and Remainers in London and the university town with offer of a soft Brexit , tuition-fee reform or a new housing policy . the other path require respond to their much large army of fervently pro-Brexit working-class voter who be look for a ` ` real ' ' Brexit and who , it should not be forgotten , have already show their willingness to abandon the Tory when their concern be not meet . Ukip may no longer be a danger to the Tory in election but apathy easily could be . sandwich between these two route be a middle way , and this be where the reshuffle come in , exemplify by the appointment of a new party chairman , Brandon Lewis , who come from a very pro-Brexit and anti-immigration seat . this narrow path aim to repair the party ' s relationship with over-60s while admit that the focus must be on @card@ and 40-somethings who , while remain wary of Jeremy Corbyn ' S Labour Party , swing hard against the Tories last June . this mean promote a new generation of conservative to start a new conversation with these voter about how Brexit can be use to create a fair society and far strong public service . it mean launch a genuine revolution in social mobility as well , to speak directly to those working-class voter , include many socially conservative Labour supporter , who agree with the Tories on Brexit and immigration but remain sceptical about their stance on the economy . the evidence show that keep Jeremy Corbyn out of Number @card@ will require the Tories put themselves in uncomfortable territory ; speak far louder to worker who believe that the economy be not work for all ; to young family who worry intensely about housing , healthcare and the future for their baby-boomer parent ; and to the concern of non-London England , include the pro-Brexit Labour heartland . if they can walk this fine line successfully , the destination could be a landslide . but make no mistake , the tectonic plate of British politics be on the move and the Conservative Party need to move quickly to ensure that it be not leave behind . Matthew Goodwin be professor of politics at the University of Kent Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
we need a completely new Brexit hit squad - and we need it fast ; the current Whitehall set-up can not deliver the visionary deal we require . there must be a revolution
Brexit be Britain ' s moonshot moment , and yet we have no John F Kennedy at the helm , no visionary who can galvanise our nation and government to reach the seemingly unreachable . we can , at least , still find solace and motivation in his word , deliver at the height of the Cold War , implore Americans to back his vision for space exploration : they should by now have be adopt as the Brexiteers ' unofficial motto . ` ` we choose to go to the moon and do the other thing , ' ' Kennedy say in @card@ , ` ` not because they be easy , but because they be hard ; because that goal will serve to organise and measure the good of our energy and skill , because that challenge be one that we be willing to accept , one we be unwilling to postpone , and one we intend to win ... ' ' seven year later an American become the first man to walk on the moon . Brexit be in @card@ month ' time , so we need to get crack . Clarion call , as Kennedy understand , be just half the story . government be shockingly useless beast . only rarely and fleetingly can they be strong-arm into deliver the likes of Kennedy ' s rush to the moon or the Manhattan Project . a sale job be not enough ; success also require total political focus , superb management , extreme dedication from all part of the state , operational brilliance , the marshal of extraordinary talent from across the economy , an almost superhuman mastery of detail and lot of money . thanks to Boris Johnson ' s brilliant article in this newspaper last week , we at least now have the Kennedy-style visionary peroration ; but if Theresa May be to save her prime ministership , she must urgently move to tackle the nitty-gritty , operational side follow her Florence speech . the establishment make two major mistake with its Brexit preparation . the first be for David Cameron , and then May , to agree to a plan by Jeremy Heywood , the Cabinet secretary , to divide responsibility for Brexit by create a Department for Exiting the EU ( Dexeu ) . the post-referendum task - work out the final vision for Brexit , understand the legal and regulatory situation , begin and conduct negotiation with the EU and deliver the repeal bill - would have tax any experienced top-notch department . combine with the government ' S political dither and infighting , the daft decision to fight Gina Miller and the general election , they have prove far too much for a brand new one . Boris Johnson and Michael Gove have different idea : they would have create a supercharge Prime Minister ' S department , and drastically reform the machinery of government . but they self-destruct in one of the most disastrous heroto-zero moment in British political history , and so we be stick with the present dysfunctionality . the second major error be to allow the EU to dictate the timetable of withdrawal . there be strong pressure to trigger Article @card@ when May do : Brexiteers be paranoid that she do n't really intend to leave the EU . yet the government ' s failure to get anything meaningful do during its first six month in office mean the UK be still woefully unprepared for a ` ` no deal ' ' outcome and be therefore increasingly enfeeble in the negotiation . it be now too late to undo the creation of Dexeu . instead , all power should be centralise around the Prime Minister , a process which appear to have start and a solution which have the merit of befit her personality . a smallish Brexit Executive Committee ( or Exco , in the jargon beloved of boardroom ) should be create immediately . it would be make up of the good official from Dexeu , the Foreign Office , the Treasury , the Bank of England and a few outsider , such as Shanker Singham of the Legatum Institute . May would be in sole charge , end all power struggle . all member should be move to a single venue - ideally , in @card@ Downing Street - and treat like a core executive and operational team , responsible for the negotiation . the PM would be imbue with absolute authority and bear full responsibility , which mean that she would drive the committee ' S member very hard indeed . in turn , this sense of urgency , of emergency even , would be cascade down the rank , dramatically accelerate Project Brexit . once a week , or more frequently , official would be subject to a grill by the Prime Minister , and force to tell her exactly how everything be go , the state of the preparation for a ` ` no deal ' ' outcome , and how exactly the negotiation with the EU be unfold . the aim would be not just to get thing do but also to end the current habit of obfuscation and bury bad news ; these would be Cobra-style meeting . the first few would be grim : May would be tell by ashenfaced official about the parlous state of HMRC ' S system , or the fact that the Budget contain nothing at all to help smooth Brexit . but without some internal honesty - a commodity that be sorely lack in Whitehall - nothing will ever change . the other immediate change should be to appoint Francis Maude to a new job task with reform the Civil Service , with genuine change start before the end of the year . Maude deliver a devastating speech on the future of the Civil Service last week ; he understand that the system need a revolution if it be to deliver a good Brexit . Dexeu would be primarily task with provide detailed legal and other briefing for the Brexit executive committee , work on longer-term policy and produce economic work that the institutionally bias Treasury can not handle . crucially , run Brexit day to day would become May ' s main preoccupation ; she would have to leave policy on matter such as modern slavery to Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary . the Prime Minister would have no bandwidth for anything other than Brexit , broadly define . will this work ? I do n't know , but it ' s our good chance to make sure that we maximise the opportunity of Brexit , rather than stumble into a suboptimal , half-in , half-out arrangement that infuriate everybody . the Prime Minister can still just about pull it off , but only if she move very fast indeed . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Brexit must be negotiate with one voice ; the government have a mandate to secure control of our border , law and money
the clock be tick , and as we settle how the government will run and what arrangement the conservative will make with the DUP to navigate crucial parliamentary vote , one issue in particular hang over us : the need to get on with the Brexit negotiation . the question of what kind of relationship we want with the EU have be dominate by some of the most facile commentary imaginable . as a result , we have lurch between talk of hard Brexits and soft Brexits with no real idea of what be mean . some say a soft Brexit entail remain in the single market , or the custom union or both . now we have a new term , an open Brexit , although perhaps this be more about tone than substance . it all seem so vague as to leave anyone watching perplex as to what the argument be really about . hard or soft , even semi hard or semi soft or open , the Conservative manifesto be very clear . it state that the purpose of the government be to give effect to the referendum vote last year , define as take back control of our border , our law and our money . it be also clear that Britain would not remain a member of the single market or the custom union . ` ` ah , ' ' I hear people say . ` ` but you do n't win an outright majority so it need to be change . ' ' well , 13.6million British people vote for it , make the conservative the large party , which be a pretty powerful mandate . furthermore , the Labour manifesto be just as explicit and agree with the Conservative manifesto on this issue . that mean some @card@ per cent plus vote to support a policy that have us negotiate to get the well possible frictionless access to the single market once we have leave the EU . I note also that Messrs Corbyn and McDonnell reiterate at the weekend that Labour policy be to leave the single market and the custom union . surely be either party to change their position now , it would be interpret as a massive U-turn . nevertheless , some MP have call for a kind of cross-party group to negotiate a soft Brexit . now , I be all for talk to member of other party , which in fact go on all the time . whip talk to whip , backbench member do as well , and the Prime Minister often consult the Leader of the opposition on matter of national importance . but I do not believe that a government engage in Brexit talk can possibly seek approval from such a group during those negotiation , for that would make it impossible to achieve clarity . Labour have also make it clear that it do not want to engage in such a formal way , for that would mean that its traditional ability to critique the government ' s final agreement would be lose . anyway , the government have already say that it will report back regularly . in that way it can inform but not get bogged down by negotiate in public , by ` ` committee ' ' . the reality , in any case , be that we should n't assume , as those calling for a soft Brexit do , that we can cherry pick what we want . the EU can not grant us continued membership of the single market after we have take back control of our border as that would breach one of their four freedom . remain in the custom union would also be the bad of all world , for we would have leave the EU but would still be subject to its external tariff without any real chance of influence them . more importantly , we would give up the right to set our own trade arrangement with enormous market like the US or India . attempt to modify exist EU arrangement would prolong the negotiation to no purpose . surely what we should all agree on be that , as we leave , it be in the interest of the EU and the UK to achieve a trade deal that allow firm to continue to do business in the most benign circumstance possible . we should stop the pointless debate about what soft or hard Brexit look like . instead we should concern ourselves with what success look like . as former US trade negotiator Shanker Singham have say , the big gain from Brexit will come as we develop an economic policy base on competition , take advantage of opportunity for trade deal and , of course , secure a good frictionless trade deal with the EU . this be surely what success look like , enable an upbeat Britain to lead the global battle for increase liberalisation and the lower of trade barrier around the world .
Scotland ' there can be no turn back ' ; Theresa May prepare for parliamentary battle as opposition party plot to thwart clean Brexit
Jeremy CORBYN and Nicola Sturgeon be last night plot to undermine Theresa May ' s plan for a clean Brexit as the government insist there be ` ` no go back ' ' on the vote to leave . after the Supreme Court rule that Parliament would have to pass a new law trigger Article @card@ : ? Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , call for full access to the single market after Brexit and say he will table legislation demand that the term of any final deal be send back to Brussels if Parliament reject them ; ? the SNP say that it be prepare to table @card@ amendment , include a proposal to block Brexit entirely , while the Liberal Democrats will seek a second referendum and oppose trigger Article @card@ ; ? a dozen pro-European Conservative MP be also prepare to join force with Labour and the SNP in an attempt to force the government formally to set out its negotiate strategy . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , be expect to publish the Article @card@ legislation tomorrow and have warn MP and peer against try to ` ` thwart ' ' or ` ` delay ' ' Brexit . he yesterday insist that there would be ` ` no go back ' ' on the result of the EU referendum and describe attempt to block Brexit as ` ` patronise , undemocratic and improper ' ' . Sir Edward Leigh , a former Tory minister , say the government should be prepare to call an ` ` immediate general election ' ' if its opponent try to undermine Brexit . however , the Prime Minister be confident that she will be able to face down parliamentary opposition and minister believe they could trigger Brexit week earlier than her end of March deadline . the government hope to pass the legislation in the commons within a fortnight , with potential all-night sitting and the first vote schedule for next week . the conservative believe that will leave sufficient time for debate in the Lords , where the government do not hold a majority . ` ` we will let the Lords talk until they wet themselves , ' ' one government source say . Iain Duncan Smith , a former work and pension secretary , say : ` ` this be an attempt to yet again try to tie the government ' S hand and delay Brexit . ` ` the Prime Minister must stick to her gun and get this bill through as fast as possible . ' ' the Supreme Court yesterday rule that the government must table legislation before trigger Article @card@ and begin the process of exit the European Union . however , minister secure the support of three dissenting justice , with one of them warn that judicial intervention in political matter be ` ` fraught with risk ' ' and be not ` ` constitutionally appropriate ' ' . judge also rule that the government do not need permission from Scotland and other devolve administration before trigger Article @card@ . the ruling bring a furious response from Ms Sturgeon , the Scottish First Minister , who claim that the need for a second independence referendum be ` ` ever clear ' ' . the SNP have promise to put forward @card@ ` ` serious and substantive ' ' amendment to the bill , include a proposal that the UK would stay in the EU under a ` ` revise ' ' membership if MP reject the final deal . it also leave Labour in disarray . a spokesman for Mr Corbyn initially suggest that Labour ' S amendment to Article @card@ legislation would ` ` seek to build in the principle of full , tariff-free access to the single market ' ' , only to remove the line from a second press release half an hour later . Labour be prepare to table at least four amendment , include one that would require the government to take a final deal back to Brussels if Parliament vote against it . Mr Corbyn be ultimately expect to impose a three-line whip to support the Article @card@ legislation , but dozen of Labour MP - include shadow minister - will rebel and vote against it . Kate Hoey , a Eurosceptic Labour MP , warn today in an article for the Daily Telegraph that it will be ` ` incredibly damaging ' ' for the party if it be see to obstruct Brexit . ` ` this could be a real threat to our party ' S future , ' ' she say . there be also grow sign of a rebellion among pro-European Conservative MP . a dozen of them call on the government to publish a White Paper to set out its broad strategy before Brexit . the scale of the potential rebellion and the small Tory majority mean that minister could be force to back down and publish the paper or face a potential commons defeat . Mr Davis yesterday tell the commons : ` ` I trust no one will seek to make it a vehicle for attempt to thwart the will of the people or frustrate or delay the process of exit the European union . ' ' Ministers be privately warn that the government be prepare to flood the Lords with hundred of Conservative peer if it try to block Brexit . Lord Blunkett , a Labour peer and former home secretary , say it would be ` ` foolish in the extreme ' ' and ` ` unthinkable ' ' for Lords to block Brexit .
Siemens chief signal about turn on his Brexit warning
Europe ' S large industrial and engineering company have vow to press ahead with investment in Britain despite the vote to leave the EU , back away from early suggestion that Brexit would cause a painful freeze on new activity . Joe Kaeser , the chief executive of Siemens , say the German conglomerate remain fully commit to the UK whatever happen , but call on Theresa May to clarify the post-Brexit trade vision as soon as possible and tell the world what kind of country Britain intend to become . ` ` we ' re here for the long term and we do n't let ourselves get jerk up and down . we ' re stay because the UK be a good place to do business , ' ' he say . Mr Kaeser say the company have be misunderstand in the heat of the Brexit campaign . ` ` we never say the UK be in bad shape if it leave the EU : we say the EU would miss a massive opportunity . without the UK , the EU may never be able to stand up against superpower like China and the US , ' ' he say . the top management of the 350,000-strong company be converge on the Cotswolds for a retreat to thrash out its post-Brexit strategy . ` ` this be to show that the UK matter with or without it be a member of the EU , ' ' Mr Kaeser say . Siemens employ @card@ people in Britain , mostly in highly-skilled job . it already play a crucial role in Thameslink and Crossrail and be angle for a big share of the train and signal deal for HS2 , along with other prize contract in the gift of the British government . Mr Kaeser say the company would step up investment in UK research and innovation regardless of whether there be any trade deal . ' we never say the UK be in bad shape if it leave the EU : we say the EU would miss a massive opportunity '
Brexit fear rock global stock market ; UK ' s big firm lose £98bn in value in four day as leave camp pull ahead and FTSE @card@ dive
LONDON ' S benchmark index fall through the @card@ level yesterday as Brexit fear shake financial market around the world . investor offload risky equity in favour of safe-haven asset after the late referendum poll show the leave camp pull ahead . anxiety about the UK ' s possible exit from the European Union trigger the FTSE @card@ ' s steep daily fall since mid-February , with the blue chip index drop @card@ point , or 2.01pc , to @card@ . in just four day the value of Britain ' s big company have fall by more than £98bn . European bourse also flounder as volatility spike ahead of next week ' S referendum . Frankfurt ' s DAX and the CAC in Paris both fall 1.4pc . Mike van Dulken , of Accendo Markets , say investor be fearful of the ` ` heightened prospect ' ' of a Brexit , which would ` ` worsen an already fragile global growth situation by deliver an economic and political blow to a struggle eurozone ' ' . as stock market go into freefall , investor seek shelter from the Brexit storm in www.bonds.UK gilt yield fall to record low yesterday , while Germany ' s 10-year bund yield skid into negative territory for the first time ever . the negative yield mean that investor be effectively pay to lend money to the German government for a full decade . ant Gillham of Old Mutual Global Investors say : ` ` in the short to medium term [ after Brexit ] , I think we ' re likely to see concern in the market that some of the other European country might follow suit and that put break-up risk for the eurozone right back on the table . the natural reaction for investor who be pull out of peripheral bond will be to look for safe place to put their money , and we might see UK bond yield fall . ' ' however , he say that yield could increase if a vote to leave start to further devalue the pound . ` ` Brexit be likely to put real pressure on sterling . Sterling have one of the big current account deficit in the develop world , and we be likely to see a lot of downward pressure on sterling , exert inflation pressure . ' ' yesterday , sterling slump to a twomonth low against the dollar , drop by as much as 1pc to $ @card@ , while the cost of insure against volatility in the pound a month into the future soar to its high level since the height of the @card@ financial crisis . the Brexit-induced panic selling be also confirm by a Bank of America Merrill Lynch global fund manager survey which find that investor be sit on the big pile of cash since November @card@ . fund manager be now hold 5.7pc of their portfolio in cash it say . a new poll show more than eight in ten investment professional foresee a drop in the London stock market in the six month after a vote to leave the EU , with 39pc expect a sharp decrease in the wake of a Brexit decision . in a survey of more than @card@ investment staff by the industry body CFA UK , 71pc say they expect UK investment portfolio to suffer in the year after a vote for Brexit , against 8pc who feel the effect would be positive on portfolio and 17pc who think there would be a minimal impact .
Hammond ' s refusal to plan for a ' no deal ' Brexit be a dereliction of duty ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the Chancellor , Philip Hammond , be publicly and clearly undermine the UK ' s negotiate position on Brexit by refuse to sanction any spending on plan for a no-deal scenario until ` ` it be responsible to do so ' ' . the responsible thing be to sanction such spending at least @card@ month ago . how can Theresa may support the position that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' unless detailed planning be be undertake to prepare for a no-deal outcome ? I have always understand that there be contingency fund for emergency . with less than @card@ month to go before Britain leave the EU , this be an emergency . Adrian Beasley-Suffolk Cropthorne , Worcestershire sir - Mrs May start her career at the Bank of England - possibly the most risk-averse institution on the planet . therein lie the answer to why she be unable to function as a prime minister should . she will never do anything unless she have a copperbottomed guarantee that it ' s go to work . delivery of Brexit require bold , brave and decisive action , which be clearly not her forte . add that to her personal friendship with ` ` Spreadsheet Phil ' ' , and it be then clear why progress have not be make . Elaine McKie Appleby-in-Westmorland , Cumbria sir - I and many people I know be desperate for Mrs May to succeed and lead us away from the EU . yet have hear her evade and prevaricate on LBC when ask which way she would vote on Brexit now , I decide that George Osborne be right . the sooner she go , the well it will be for our country . Brian Farmer Chelmsford , Essex sir - I be perplex by Mrs May ' s answer to the question of how she would vote now on Brexit . the waffle that she come out with demonstrate why the Cabinet be such a mishmash of Remainers and Brexiteers . sorry , but this be the decider - she have to go , and quickly . Geoff Norman Littledean , Surrey sir - it ' s time that Mrs May move towards make Brexit an ` ` all-party ' ' affair - exclude the Lib Dems . why not create role for people such as Frank Field or Kate Hoey - or even Nigel Farage , without whose work there would never have be a referendum ? Alan Ashton Bishop ' s Stortford , Hertfordshire sir - Nigel Farage ' s criticism of the Prime Minister ' s refusal to confirm her support for Brexit be base on his assumption that it be not possible to deliver Brexit unless ` ` you truly believe in it ' ' . my wife and I do n't believe in Father Christmas , yet we manage to deliver our child ' S present from him without fail every year . Christian Froggatt Reigate , Surrey
the ball be in your court , ' optimistic ' May will tell Brussels ; Prime Minister to update MP on Brexit progress , say Britain will ' prove the doomsayer wrong '
Theresa May will today tell Brussel that ` ` the ball be in your court ' ' as she signal that she be not prepare to make any further concession to break the deadlock in negotiation . ahead of a European summit later this month , the Prime Minister will also say that Britain can ` ` prove the doomsayer wrong ' ' and that she be ` ` optimistic ' ' that Brexit negotiation will succeed . as Parliament return , Mrs May will update MP on the progress make since her speech in Florence in which she make a series of significant concession . Britain be offer to pay the EU ( Euro ) 20billion during a two-year transition period after Brexit and have also give an unqualified commitment to defence and security cooperation . it raise the prospect that Brexit negotiation could remain deadlocked , increase the chance of no deal . negotiation be at a standstill because the EU be refuse to allow talk about future trade deal to take place before ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make on the Brexit divorce bill , right of citizen and Northern Ireland . the Prime Minister will travel to Brussels in a fortnight ' s time for a crucial meeting of the European Council . she will tell the commons : ` ` as we look forward to the next stage , the ball be in their court . but I be optimistic we will receive a positive response . ` ` because what we be seek be not just the well possible deal for us - but also the well possible deal for our European friend too . ` ` so while , of course , progress will not always be smooth , by approach these negotiation in a constructive way - in a spirit of friendship and cooperation and with our sight firmly set on the future - I believe we can prove the doomsayer wrong . ` ` and I believe we can seize the opportunity of this define moment in the history of our nation . ' ' her more positive language will draw comparison with Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , in the wake of his 4,200-word article on Brexit in the Daily Telegraph last month . Mr Johnson have repeatedly hit out at the Brexit ` ` gloom-mongers ' ' . it come after the Sunday Telegraph disclose that Britain be prepare to release billion of pound of investment to help the UK prepare in case there be no deal . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be plan to release the money if no progress have be make on a transition deal by Christmas . Dominic Raab , a Eurosceptic Tory MP and justice minister , yesterday say that there could be significant advantage to leave the EU without a deal . he say : ` ` there be advantage to it , countervail advantage if there be n't a deal in term of the early repatriation of the money ' ' in term of ` ` thing like the external EU tariff ' ' - worth several billion pound - ` ` that would come to the Chancellor ' s coffer if we have those arrangement ' ' . it also emerge that the European Parliament be plan to host a string of speech by European leader in a bid to boost its profile . the Telegraph have see leak minute of the parliament ' s secretive conference of Presidents , a behindclosed-doors meeting of leader of EU political group . it reveal that MEPs believe that their view on the future of the EU after Brexit be be overshadow by major speech by Emmanuel Macron , the French president , Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European commission and Mrs May . ` ` there be Macron in the Sorbonne and even May in Florence , ' ' one source say . ` ` the plan now be to make sure speech like that by head of state and government be hold in Brussels or Strasbourg . ' ' the parliament now plan to invite a string of EU head of state and government to debate the EU ' s future in the institution ' S two seat of Brussels and Strasbourg in the run up to ` ` Brexit Day ' ' on March @card@ @card@ and the European Parliament election in May . Labour yesterday say it be prepare to offer annual payment to Brussel indefinitely in order to keep access to the single market after Brexit . Jenny Chapman , the party ' s Brexit minister , say Labour would leave the single market ` ` on the table ' ' . Ms chapman tell BBC Radio @card@ Live ' s Pienaar ' S politics : ` ` we would leave the single market on the table , and it may be that there ' s an arrangement that ' S in the UK ' s good interest that involve some sort of payment for access . ` ` that be something that we would leave on the table , unlike the government that ' S decide ' we do n't want to be part of the custom union , we do n't want to be part of the single market ' . ' ' ( Euro ) 20bn The amount Britain be offer to pay the European union during a two-year period after Brexit have be achieve
BBC negativity about Brexit be mislead ; establish @card@ body : what be the condition of Britain today ? the fact suggest a country do well . economic growth be robust and employment be at record level . socially , Britain be perhaps the most harmonious and diverse nation in the develop world , largely untouched by the xenophobia and bigotry that stalk the politics of other nation . politically , we have a popular government enact a policy of Brexit that be endorse by @card@ million voter , the big democratic mandate for anything in our history . yet anyone regard Britain through the prism of its national broadcaster would see a nation in crisis , rack by doubt and division . the BBC never neglect any opportunity to highlight the challenge that might face Britain during and after its departure from the European Union . far from describe the opportunity that await the country outside the EU - or merely describe the positive vision of Brexit that Theresa May have offer - the Corporation inevitably present Brexit as a www.problem.No doubt much of this be a result of what be fashionably call ` ` unconscious bias ' ' . most BBC journalist be young , university-educated citydwellers , the group most likely to have vote Remain . try as they might to be objective , they will always struggle to understand the case for ` ` the other side ' ' . some be say to feel a bizarre sense of guilt about Brexit , fret that by try to make their pre-referendum coverage more balanced , they fail to warn voter about the risk of leave . of course , the BBC be not the only media outlet in Britain , but it be , thanks to the vast resource it extract from the public , the big and most dominant . for well or worse , the BBC ' S worldview help shape Britain ' s idea of itself - and the idea other have of us . that be why Conservative MP be right to confront the Corporation about its slant Brexit coverage , which could easily have real and negative consequence . the UK economy rely on the confidence of consumer and international investor : what if they succumb to the BBC ' S gloom ? and as Mrs May prepare to invoke Article @card@ , consider the diplomatic risk : EU leader might be persuade by the BBC to mistakenly overestimate Britain ' S regret about Brexit , holding out hope we will change our mind , instead of seek a mutually beneficial exit deal . the Corporation be use to brush off Conservative complaint about its bias , but its chief must take this late warning seriously . Brexit Britain deserve well from the BBC .
Sturgeon ' s last-ditch bid to ruin Brexit ; Scottish leader ready to derail Article @card@ vote with threat of new referendum date ; Sturgeon want referendum in autumn @card@
Nicola Sturgeon will today threaten to derail Brexit by set out plan for a second independence referendum unless Theresa May offer Scotland a special deal . the Scottish First Minister could name the date she intend to hold a new referendum as early as this week , the Daily Telegraph understand , if Mrs May do not bow to her will . Ms Sturgeon have previously hint that autumn @card@ would be a suitable time to call a referendum . the ultimatum be expect to be deliver this morning with the intention of influence a Commons vote tonight on MP be give a ` ` meaningful ' ' say on the final deal offer to Britain by the EU . she also want to pile pressure on Mrs May just @card@ hour before the Prime Minister hope to be in a position to formally trigger Article @card@ . if the Article @card@ Bill be pass tonight , it could receive royal assent as early as tomorrow , clear the way for Mrs May to begin the two-year Brexit process by inform the EU of Britain ' s decision to leave . but Ms Sturgeon want the Prime Minister to include in her letter to the EU a series of demand for Scotland to be give special treatment in the Brexit negotiation . Downing Street have refuse to bow to any such demand and be highly unlikely to alter its plan unless face a parliamentary rebellion over the issue . it come as : Boris Johnson insist Britain would be ` ` perfectly OK ' ' without a deal on Brexit and should be prepare to walk away from EU talk without one ; a Tory rebellion on Article @card@ that would have see a Lords amendment enshrine in law appear to be falter ; MP affect by rail strike today on Southern , Merseyrail and Arriva Trains North be tell to drive to Parliament so they do not miss the crucial vote ; Theresa May prepare to use Commonwealth Day today to stress the importance of the 52-nation organisation to the UK ' s post-Brexit economy . Ms Sturgeon have call a press conference this morning at Bute House , her official residence in Edinburgh , but in a highly unusual move decide not to make an official announcement of it . Downing Street last night appear unaware that the event be take place , suggest the SNP intend to spring a surprise for maximum impact . the First Minister be also likely to be hope it will bolster support for the Article @card@ amendment in tonight ' S vote , by suggest to MP that they could help avoid the break-up of the Union by use a ` ` meaningful ' ' vote on the Brexit deal to give ground to the SNP . SHUTTERSTOCK Ms Sturgeon want to keep Scotland in the EU single market even if the rest of the UK leaf , which would involve the devolution of nearly every policy area except defence and the macroeconomy . REX/ ROOKE/ with the UK government highly continue on Page @card@ Tim Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ likely to reject her proposal , it be think the First Minister will attempt to blame Mrs May for push her towards a second referendum . the First Minister say last week that autumn @card@ be her preferred time for another vote , when the shape of the Brexit deal become know but before the UK leave the EU . however , senior Tory source have say Mrs May be unlikely to allow a vote to be stage until after Brexit take place in March @card@ . they be also wary of hold a vote in the immediate aftermath as this would still allow an independence campaign to be conduct in parallel with the Brexit talk . Ms Sturgeon have be give a boost by opinion poll which show Scotland divide @card@ on the question of independence , compare with the @card@ referendum result which favour stay in the Union by @card@ per cent to @card@ . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour Party leader , make his own intervention in the debate by say it would be ` ` absolutely fine ' ' for Scotland to hold a second poll . Ian Murray , Labour ' s only MP north of the border , react by angrily accuse him of ` ` destroy the party ' ' . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , try to reassure Tory MP consider defy the whip on the vote that it be ` ` inconceivable ' ' they will not get a say on the outcome of the negotiation . in a final plea to the rebel , he say on the BBC ' S Andrew Marr show : ` ` what I do n't want to do be take a simple bill which be design to do nothing more than put the result of the referendum into law ... please do n't tie the Prime Minister ' s hand in the process of do that for thing which we expect to attain anyway . ' '
our path to the exit door remain clear ; the judge ' criticism of the last government over the referendum law have wide constitutional implication
the Supreme Court ' s ruling that Parliament must pass legislation before Article @card@ can be invoke have many implication , and not just for Brexit . in its lengthy judgment , the Supreme Court Justices chide the last government for not make it clear , in law , if it mean for the EU Referendum Act @card@ ( which give us last June ' S vote ) to be strictly legally binding . that may complicate the holding of future referendum , where ostensibly straightforward ` ` Yes or No ' ' question still leave the elect government a range of possible outcome in implement the result . in addition , the ruling could have far-reaching implication in other area of foreign policy . if Parliament must authorise the beginning of negotiation to exit an international organisation or treaty , it ' S only a short step to require Parliament to approve the start of negotiation to join one in the first place . that may be no bad thing , but it risk complicate Britain ' s multilateral diplomacy . all side should recognise the thorny issue our high court have to deal with in their ruling on Article @card@ . the Justices be themselves divide - by eight to three - with Lord Reed lead a thoughtful dissent , explain why the government should be free , at least to begin its Brexit diplomacy , without Parliament ' s legislative blessing . equally , the Supreme Court usefully clear up some issue around Brexit.It narrow the scope of what be a rather nebulous High Court judgment . that should put pay to the wreck tactic of those try to frustrate Brexit - and enable the government to begin negotiation on time . the Supreme Court dismiss suggestion that the devolve settlement with Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland precluded Brexit - or require the consent of their legislature . the justice also rule that the question of where precisely UK jurisdiction end , and Scottish jurisdiction start , be a matter for political resolution accord to convention - not for the court . in time , this will strengthen the UK Government ' s hand in other area , such as enact a British Bill of Rights to replace the Human Rights Act . crucially , the Supreme Court make clear that Parliament can pass a short , sharp Bill to approve the start of Brexit negotiation . this should allow the government to keep the scope of its legislation tight , avoid wreck amendment from the diminish rank of Labour and Liberal Democrat saboteur in the House of Commons and House of Lords . that alone vindicate the government ' s decision to appeal the ruling of the High Court . beyond the Inns of Court and the Westminster bubble , there be a grow feeling among the public that we need to get on with Brexit . we have the forecast of doom , and our economy confound the pessimist . we ' ve have the flounce resignation of our ambassador to the EU . that do n't stop the Prime Minister set out strong , detailed plan for negotiation . and we ' ve have these legal shenanigan design to frustrate proceeding . yet still the path remain clear for negotiation to begin . it ' S now the duty of every democrat in both Houses of Parliament to pass the government ' s simple bill to respect the will of the people . it ' s time to end the political wrangling and get behind the government ' s post-Brexit vision for Britain as a self-govern democracy , a good European neighbour , and a global leader in free trade . the vigour of our economy and trade with the EU mean Britain ' s negotiate leverage be strong . Theresa May ' S plan command the support of the public , as a recent YouGov poll demonstrate . and EU leader recognise the economic damage that a vindictive response would do to European company and job . that ' S why key figure such as Wolfgang Schäuble , the German finance minister , have vow to ` ` minimise any risk of damage for both of us ' ' . the Brexit process will soon be underway and the work of take Britain out of the EU can begin in earnest . we can and should enter these negotiation with confidence and a generosity of spirit towards our European friend . it ' s time to end the phoney political war at home , and start the serious diplomacy abroad . Dominic Raab be the Conservative MP for Esher & Walton Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
May go into battle for Brexit ; Prime Minister tackle rebel by challenge MP to vote in favour of trigger Article @card@ before end of March
Theresa May last night dramatically announce that MP will today be give the opportunity to vote on her timetable for trigger Article @card@ and formally begin Brexit . just over @card@ hour after the Supreme Court begin consider whether Parliament should be allow a vote on Article @card@ , the Prime Minister formally amend a backbench motion on Brexit . MP will be ask to back the government ' s plan to formally serve Article @card@ by the end of March @card@ . Mrs May also commit to reveal the official plan for Brexit before the process begin . the unexpected announcement come after month of the government refuse to give a ` ` run commentary ' ' on Brexit , or formally to allow Parliament a vote on the process . today ' S vote be welcome by both leave and Remain campaigner , with Brexiteers back the Prime Minister ' s de-cision to finally tackle the issue headon . Downing Street source say that it be now time to ` ` see if those who say they accept the result really do ' ' . MP and Remain campaigner have spend month plot how to undermine the result of the referendum - while say they support the will of the people - and will now have to reveal their intention . Conservative MP will be force to support the amendment although a small number be expect to either abstain or vote against the government . Labour also say last night that it would back the amendment , although it be unclear whether its MP would support the position . the Liberal Democrats and SNP be expect to vote in defiance of the referendum result in an attempt to block Brexit . the Supreme Court be to continue sit today and tomorrow and may refuse to accept the result of the parliamentary vote , which be non-binding . judge may demand that Parliament go further and pass a piece of legislation which detail exactly how Brexit will be negotiate . although Mrs May be expect to win today ' S vote , which be only be hold in the House of Commons , pass full legislation through both the low and upper house of Parliament would prove far more problematic . Steve Baker , a lead Eurosceptic Conservative MP , say : ` ` since @card@ many of us have be scold for try to give the people their say on the referendum . now be a great opportunity for all those who have say they respect the result to do so by support the government . it ' s time to put up or shut up . ' ' the Prime Minister intervene after Labour table a motion in the commons in an attempt to force her into ` ` publish the government ' S plan for leave the European Union ' ' . Anna Soubry , a former employment minister who be campaign for the UK to stay in the Single Market , have say she and up to @card@ other Tory MP could rebel and back the Labour motion because it ` ` transcend party politics ' ' . the Government yesterday respond by largely accept the motion , which say there ` ` should be no disclosure of material that could be reasonably judge to damage the UK in any negotiation ' ' . however , the government add an amendment ` ` recognise that this House will respect the wish of the United Kingdom ' ' in the Brexit vote and say negotiation should be trigger by the end of March . Tory rebel indicate yesterday that they would support the amendment with Ms Soubry hail it as a ` ` victory ' ' . Mrs May make the announcement as Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , cause a row with Downing Street after say that Britain would have just @card@ month to strike a deal before it leave the European Union . Downing Street say that it would not be ` ` nail to ' ' a deadline , although Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say @card@ month be ` ` ample time ' ' in which to conclude a deal . in the Supreme Court yesterday the country ' s foremost judge say minister could have avoid legal action over Brexit if they have make sure the EU referendum be legally binding . Lord Neuberger , the President of the Supreme Court , be among the judge who question why the government have fail explicitly to state in legislation that the result of the vote have legal effect . James Eadie QC , who be represent the government , tell the judge that they risk ` ` step over the line ' ' and impose ` ` serious ' ' control on Parliament if they rule against the government . Mrs May intend to trigger Article @card@ by March @card@ , but Remain campaigner have demand that the Prime Minister must announce her plan and MP should be give a vote . she have resist , argue that lay her plan before a parliamentary vote would weaken her negotiate position as she attempt to secure a deal on the term of Britain ' s relationship with the remain EU nation ahead of Brexit . both Labour and Conservative MP have claim they do not want to stop Brexit , but merely want detail of the plan first . the amendment by Mrs May will flush out whether that be the case . the Prime Minister say yesterday during a visit to the Gulf that she be plan for a patriotic ` ` red , white and blue ' ' Brexit . it follow report that she want a ` ` grey ' ' Brexit with control on migration but payment for access to the Single Market . minister have privately concede they be unlikely to win the Supreme Court case . the government argue that Mrs May have the power to invoke Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty , which give notice of Britain ' s intent to leave the EU , use a royal prerogative , without the need for a specific act of Parliament . however , Lord Neuberger say the @card@ legislation that provide for the referendum be ` ` very carefully silent ' ' on what the effect of the referendum should be . report : page @card@ ' now we will see if those who say they accept the result really do ' Downing Street
delay Britain ' S exit raise the risk of violence , minister warn peer ; Brexit turmoil ; Anger from Conservative MP at prospect of Lords attempt to delay and water down term
peer and MP who be plan to delay Brexit be ` ` anti-democratic ' ' and try to ` ` thwart the decision ' ' make by Briton to leave the European Union on June @card@ , minister have warn . other Conservative MP say that should opposition party go through with their threat there would be a risk of ` ` protest that could lead to violence ' ' . minister privately admit that they be likely to lose a Supreme Court appeal next month follow this week ' S High Court decision that MP and peer must have a say over the timing of Brexit . the government be brace itself to have to push legislation quickly through both the Commons and Lords to trigger the start of formal talk about leave the EU at the end of March . however , Nick Clegg , the former deputy prime minister , say MP and peer could use the opportunity to force the government to water down the term of Brexit . the Liberal Democrat MP say : ` ` we will seek , with other party , in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords , to amend the legislation such that Parliament would say to government that it should pursue a soft Brexit not a hard Brexit , and that there should be some means by which the British people can have a say on the final deal when the negotiation with the EU be finally complete in the year ahead . ' ' Mr Clegg add : ` ` if we be to be able to marshal opinion behind that approach then people will vote in favour of Article @card@ trigger on that basis . ' ' although the Lib Dems have just eight MP , they have more than @card@ peer who could frustrate effort to get the legislation through the Upper Chamber . there be also speculation that in the House of Lords - where the conservative be in a minority - the Lib Dems could be join by hundred of Labour and cross-bench peer . the peer be embolden because by convention they be allow to block or reject legislation which be not in the ruling government ' s general election manifesto . they argue that leave the EU be not a Conservative policy at the time of last year ' S election . one senior cross-bencher say that the Lords ` ` might well ' ' try to amend the legislation , add : ` ` that remain to be see . ' ' the comment prompt a furious response from the government , which will set out the next step after the ruling in a statement to MP on Monday . David Jones MP , a minister in the Exiting the European Union department , say : ` ` it be profoundly antidemocratic . people be sick and tired of see certain politician try to thwart the decision they make on June @card@ . ' ' Sajid Javid , the Local Government Secretary , suggest the government would win a vote on implement Article @card@ in Parliament next week , but warn the legal ruling could have serious consequence . ask on BBC one ' S Question Time if he be ` ` fearful ' ' that Parliament would vote against trigger Article @card@ next week , he say : ` ` that be what I be not fearful about - what I be concern be that process would lead to a much bad deal for the British people . ' ' Sir Gerald Howarth , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP , say that any attempt to delay Britain leave the EU would be ` ` the most unconscionable betrayal of the people ' ' . ` ` this be a direct challenge to the unequivocal verdict of the British people and a naked attempt to thwart them . there will be real anger across the country if unelected peer seek to do that . the risk be very angry protest that could lead to violence . ' '
Ireland Brexit will be a tragedy if it undermine the UK ' s role in help to defend democracy ; Commentary
as we enter @card@ , Europe continue to face threat and instability , from an increasingly autocratic Russia , which be wage a multi-faceted , hybrid war against the West , to continued instability in the Middle East , an Islamist terror threat and a refugee crisis . these threat and challenge know no border and will not relent because Brexit . as we have see with the terrorist attack perpetrate in both Belgium and the UK , the security of the EU and the UK be interlink . we now know that Mohamed Abrini , a Brussels airport bomber , go to the UK to raise fund for his network ' s terrorist activity in Belgium and France . Youssef Zaghba , the London Bridge attacker , travel in Europe and be on a European database . the terrorist who seek to harm us know no border . a post- Brexit approach to cooperation must reflect this . the EU need British security and intelligence capability , but the door to defeat terrorism swing both www.ways.UK authority will continue to rely on the assistance and resource of their European counterpart to keep Britain ' S street safe . it be imperative that EU-UK cooperation do not become a casualty of the negotiation . Theresa May , as David Cameron ' S Home Secretary , be well remember in Brussels for negotiate an opt-out of EU judicial and home affair instrument , only to then opt back into the European Arrest Warrant , Europol and other programme vital to the fight against international crime and terrorism . in her Florence speech last year , Mrs May tell the EU : ` ` Our determination to defend the stability , security and prosperity of our European neighbour and friend remain steadfast . ' ' it be regrettable that Britain have recently treat EU country ' effort to enhance joint defence capability as a threat , rather than an opportunity . as Boris Johnson hint , Brexit may yet reverse this . likewise , it be important we find a way to ensure that the UK can continue to participate in the development and delivery of EU sanction regime , on a @card@ + @card@ basis . Britain ' s commitment to European stability , however , be likely to be test even before Brexit . with the support of the European Parliament and a clear majority of EU member state , the European Commission recently trigger legal proceeding against Poland for undermine the democratic functioning of its judiciary . the adherence to democratic governance be rightly one of the key criterion for EU membership and I hope it will remain a priority for the UK , too . ignore the rise of ` ` mini-Trumps ' ' , as Francis Fukuyama have coin them , in Central and Eastern Europe would be incompatible with the commitment make by the Prime Minister in Florence and could lead many in European capital to question Britain ' s commitment to a future new security and defence partnership . the action take by Warsaw be not compatible with decade of British foreign policy and the principle of EU membership . Britain rightly lead call for the accession of post-Soviet country to the European Union . it would be a tragedy if the outcome of Brexit undermine its role as a defender of liberal democracy . poll consistently show voter ' main concern be illegal immigration and security . these must be address and Brexit can not disrupt our effort to keep European safe , which be why it be important that ideological grandstand-ing and red line announce in haste at party conference do not stand in the way of a cast-iron security and defence partnership . it ' s clear the only way we can respond to the challenge we face be if European nation come together and defend the international , values-based order we have build post-war . Brexit will weaken the UK and the EU economically and geopolitically . it must not be allow to undermine our security , nor dilute our shared value . Guy Verhofstadt be the European Parliament ' s chief negotiator for Brexit and a former prime minister of Belgium ' the terrorist who seek to harm us know no border . a post-Brexit approach to cooperation must reflect this '
Adonis say May ' be voice of Ukip ' as he quit as tsar
lord Adonis , the Europhile Labour peer , have resign as the government ' s infrastructure tsar , accuse Theresa May of become ` ` the voice of Ukip ' ' in her Brexit policy . he use his resignation letter to tell Mrs may she be put Europe ' S peace and security at risk , compare the ` ` isolation ' ' of Brexit to the policy that precede the First World War - something he remove from the version he later publish . it be understand he be plan to resign in the new year but bring it ahead when the Daily Telegraph obtain a draft of his letter to Mrs May . although as a peer Lord Adonis be unelected , he lecture Mrs May about pursue a Brexit policy for which she have ` ` no mandate ' ' , while say he will ` ` relentlessly ' ' oppose the EU Withdrawal Bill in the House of Lords . Lord Adonis be make chairman of the National Infrastructure Commission by Mrs May in April , with the task of draw together policy on road , rail , HS2 and broadband . but he have attract more attention for his stance on Brexit . he describe it as ` ` self-mutilation ' ' and in October be accuse of try to thwart Brexit . in his letter , Lord Adonis say he be step down because of ` ` fundamental policy difference which simply ca n't be bridge ' ' . he say : ` ` the European Union Withdrawal Bill be the bad legislation of my lifetime , ' ' add : ` ` after the narrow referendum vote for an undefined proposition to ' leave the EU ' , it could have be attempt without rupture our essential European trade and political relation . ` ` however , by become the voice of Ukip and the extreme nationalist Rightwing of your party , you have take a different course , for which you have no parliamentary or popular mandate . ' ' he predict that Britain return to the EU would become ` ` the mission of our child ' S generation , who will marvel at your wanton destruction ' ' . he tell the Times last night that he also resign in protest at an ` ` indefensible ' ' rail franchise ` ` bail-out ' ' of the Stagecoach and Virgin east coast main line . he tell the paper : ` ` this will potentially cost the taxpayer billion , threaten investment and push rail fare higher . I doubt Mr [ Chris ] Grayling [ the Transport Secretary ] can survive in his post when the full fact about his bail-out of Stagecoach and Virgin become clear to state auditor and the medium . ' ' in his draft letter , he also claim that Russian aggression , the rise of nationalism in Poland and Hungary , and British isolationism be create condition similar to those that come before the First World War . he warn : ` ` no one can doubt the resonance with the past or the danger ahead . ' '
Economy ' will grow without deal ' ; the path to Brexit
the economy will continue to grow next year even if the UK remain on a path to leave the European union without a deal , an influential think tank say yesterday despite compare Brexit to the Blitz . the OECD , an organisation partfunded by Britain , yesterday warn that Brexit could ` ` stifle growth for year to come ' ' and suggest a second referendum would have a ` ` significant ' ' positive impact on the economy . however , the organisation ' s own forecast suggest that even in the ` ` least favourable scenario ' ' of the UK leave without a deal in @card@ the economy will grow by @card@ per cent next year . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , face a furious response from Eurosceptic Tory MP yesterday for help launch the report in the Treasury . Mr Hammond try to distance himself from the finding , insist that the UK will leave the EU in @card@ and rule out a second referendum . however , one Tory MP say : ` ` he ' S associate himself with Project fear all over again , it ' s shocking behaviour . he have to go . ' ' Government source suggest that Mr Hammond have be ` ` ambush ' ' by the OECD and be unaware of the content of the report until shortly before the launch . the OECD say there be a risk of a ` ` disorderly ' ' Brexit , in which the UK leave without a deal , cause an ` ` adverse reaction ' ' in financial market and push exchange rate to new low . it go on to say : ` ` in case Brexit get reverse by political decision ( change of majority , new referendum , etc ) , the positive impact on growth would be significant . ' ' Angel Gurria , the secretary-general of the OECD , say : ` ` what be it Churchill say ? keep calm and carry on . it ' s like in the Blitz . except without the bomb . ' ' the OECD admit that Brexit negotiation be difficult to forecast , and could ` ` prove more favourable ' ' than assume - boost trade , investment and growth - but stress that this would require ` ` an ambitious EUUK agreement and a transition period to allow for adjustment ' ' . Gisela Stuart , a lead leave campaigner , say : ` ` it be laughable that the EU-funded OECD have the gall to intervene in our negotiation and call for Brexit to be reverse . instead of try to hijack Brexit talk , the OECD should urge its financial backer in the European Commission to negotiate in good faith and stop try to bully the UK into submission . ' '
Scotland EU official : Brexit vote ' be stupid and it could be reverse '
people who vote for Brexit make a ` ` stupid ' ' decision which could still be reverse by the British public , one of the EU ' s most powerful official say yesterday . Martin Selmayr , chief of staff to Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission President , say it be ` ` legally ' ' possible for the UK to reverse its decision to leave . his comment be describe as ` ` pig head ' ' and he be accuse of try to meddle in the parliamentary process ahead of a week in which MP will begin debate the EU Withdrawal Bill . the Bill will come before Parliament for its second reading on Thursday ahead of a crucial vote next week at which Labour could attempt to derail the Brexit process . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , yesterday tell Tory rebel who might be consider voting with Labour to amend or delay the bill that ` ` now be not the time ' ' to disrupt proceeding . meanwhile Downing Street say it want Brexit talk to ` ` intensify ' ' to ensure a deal can be reach by the time Britain leave the EU in March @card@ . Mr Selmayr , speak at a conference in Brussels yesterday , say : ` ` Brexit be bad , and it ' S a stupid decision . the only people who can reverse it would be the British people and I be not a dreamer , I be a realist . Brexit will happen on March @card@ @card@ . ' ' he say that while it be ` ` legally ' ' possible for the UK to reverse its decision , ` ` it would be arrogant of us ' ' to say the EU could force it to happen . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , say : ` ` his comment amount to a pig-headed denial in Brussels that Brexit be happen and a desire to be uncooperative at every step of the way . ' ' Mr Farage suggest that Mr Selmayr be try to interfere in the forthcoming parliamentary vote , add : ` ` he be directly appeal to the Tory rebel and the Labour Party and do his good to upset the parliamentary process . ' ' Anna Soubry , a lead Tory Remainer , say suggestion that rebel Conservative MP would try to vote down the bill be ` ` absolute nonsense ' ' . but she say she would put her name to ` ` sensible ' ' amendment to the legislation at a late stage . she be unhappy that the Bill will give minister so-called ` ` Henry VIII power ' ' to alter legislation without further vote in Parliament . Mr Hammond tell the BBC : ` ` I ' d say to backbencher who be think about seek to amend or delay the Withdrawal Bill , that now be not the time to disrupt this vitally important piece of enable legislation . we be make progress in our discussion with the European Union . we be map out a course for Britain ' S future . ' ' the next round of Brexit talk be schedule for late September , and a spokesman for the Prime Minister say : ` ` we ' re ready to intensify negotiation . nothing have be formally agree , but that be something we can discuss . typically in negotiation as time go on you ' ll see the pace pick up , but certainly we would n't rule that out . ' ' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' s chief negotiator , suggest that the talk could be delay because Theresa May will make a major speech on Britain ' s relationship with the EU in the third or fourth week of this month , but Downing Street deny there would be a delay . Mrs May will make her most important Brexit speech since January when she set out her vision of Britain ' s future dealings with the EU .
Cable hold talk with Tory MP to frustrate Brexit ; the man likely to lead the Lib Dems say concern over negotiation have end ' tribal difference '
the front-runner to be the next Liberal Democrat leader have admit he be in secret talk with Conservative MP about frustrate Brexit . Sir Vince Cable say that he be hold informal negotiation with Tory MP who back Remain at the referendum about work together to soften the impact of leave the European union in @card@ . that come as the Lib Dems be expect to table an amendment to the Queen ' s Speech to keep Britain in the single market and the custom union , and require minister to commit to spending £350million a week on the NHS after Brexit . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have be in talk with the Democratic Unionist party for @card@ day now about its @card@ MP prop up the minority Tory Government . however , even with the backing of the DUP , it would take only seven Tory MP to switch side during a vote in the House of Commons to defeat the government . Sir Vince , whose opponent for the party leadership , Ed Davey , be likely to declare today , say Tory MP be be ` ` sound out ' ' to see if they could work with the Lib Dems on vote against the government on some Brexit measure . he say that the ` ` tribal difference between the party have break down ' ' and he want MP from all party ` ` to be encourage to work together ' ' . speak to Chopper ' S Brexit Podcast on the Telegraph ' S website , Sir Vince say that ` ` informally all kind of network be be establish and I have be sound out by several of them ' ' . he say : ` ` there be a lot of Conservative MP who may not have put up a flag call Remain but be very , very worry about the more extreme option on the table and would like to keep either the custom union or the single market or both . ' ' Sir Vince praise Ken Clarke , the veteran Tory MP who have long argue against leave the EU . he say : ` ` we have to work with like-minded people across the spectrum try to get a soft , more sensible version of Brexit . ' ' David Jones , the former Brexit minister who lose his job in last week ' s Cab-inet reshuffle , say ` ` the arithmetic be challenge but I think deliverable ' ' in the Commons . but he say there could be ` ` all sort of alliance the other way ' ' and the Tories could try to persuade Eurosceptic Labour MP such as Kate Hoey or Kelvin Hopkins to vote with the government on Brexit measure . Mr Jones tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` MP from all side should now be work to ensure a smooth and successful Brexit . voter will not forgive politician who be indulge in shabby game rather than support the government in deliver on the referendum result . ' ' that come as the LibDems table an amendment to the Queen ' S Speech design to appeal to Tory Remain MP to keep Britain in the single market and the custom union . but David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , indicate the UK Government will call the SNP ' s bluff over threat to withhold consent for the repeal bill . the Scottish Secretary say it would be ` ` incredible ' ' for the nationalist to refuse to pass a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) as this would create extraordinary ` ` uncertainty ' ' in Scotland alone . LCMs allow Westminster to pass law that cover devolve responsibility . he say he be ` ` very relax ' ' about the Scottish Parliament give its approval to the Bill and point out that try to frustrate Brexit would mean turn down extra power repatriate from Brussels . Nicola Sturgeon later urge MSPs at First Minister ' S question to unite behind her demand that the Scottish Parliament be formally consult about power repatriate from Brussels and ` ` this Scottish government , democratically elect , have a seat at the negotiate table so that we can properly defend Scotland ' s interest ' ' .
Germans accuse of campaign to influence election ; the Telegraph Election @card@ ; Tory believe leak and briefing be aim at undermine May and weaken her mandate
Germany have be accuse by ally of Theresa May of try to influence the General Election by undermine the Prime Minister over Brexit talk . ally of Mrs may believe Germany , in tandem with the EU , be embark on a new ` ` project fear ' ' by repeatedly brief against her . last night senior figure in Brussels even claim that she would be bar from negotiate the term of Brexit with her fellow EU leader . Senior official in the German government and in Brussels have openly mock Mrs May or leak sensitive information about private meeting in what be be see as an attempt to undermine the Prime Minister . last week Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , also suggest Britain have ` ` illusion ' ' over what it could hope to achieve from Brexit . weakening Mrs May ' s mandate with the electorate would tilt the balance in favour of the EU negotiator , and Conservative source have suggest she be the victim of a co-ordinate plot before next month ' S election . one close ally of Mrs May say : ` ` there be a long-standing tradition that country do not involve themselves in the election of other country , and they seem to be break that . ' ' Martin Selmayr , the German chief of staff to Jean-Claude Juncker and a personal friend of Angela Merkel ' s righthand man , be believe to be behind a leak that claim Mrs May be ` ` delude ' ' over her Brexit demand . Michael Roth , Germany ' s finance minister , also seek to undermine Mrs May , use Twitter to say : ` ` the British government must abandon [ the ] myth that all British will be well off post-Brexit . ' ' and Guy Verhofstadt , the lead Brexit negotiator for the European Parliament , have openly mock Theresa May ' s negotiate skill . pick up on her slogan of ` ` strong and stable leadership ' ' , he say : ` ` any Brexit deal require a strong & stable understanding of the complex issue involve . the clock be tick -it ' s time to get real . ' ' Tory MP Sir Bill Cash , chairman of the Commons European scrutiny committee , say he be ` ` certain ' ' Germany and the EU be try to influence the election by undermine Mrs May . he say : ` ` what they be do be try to exploit a new kind of ' project fear ' and that be not go to work on the British people . they be also try to use negotiation as a means of influence the German general election later this year . they be play an unwise and dangerous game and I think they have be work towards this for a long time . ' ' EC spokesman Margaritis Schinas say he would not comment on leak , but add : ` ` I have the impression sometimes that our British friend - not all of them - do underestimate the technical difficulty we have to face ... there be issue that clearly be not understand the same way . ' ' Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , insist the government would not enter into a ` ` briefing war ' ' with Brussels . she say : ` ` I ' m not surprise that there be briefing come out from different side of a negotiation . but what we will always do be make sure that we conduct our negotiation more discreetly , shall we say , so that really we can have a free negotiating hand . ' ' Yanis Varoufakis , the former Greek finance minister and an outspoken critic of the EU , tell BBC Radio @card@ ' s world at one : ` ` nothing be more predictable than this kind of clash , the substantial policy and tactic of the Brussels politician and bureaucrat of effectively stall and constantly shift the goalpost in any such negotiation . ' ' he say any attempt to negotiate a mutually beneficial deal ` ` be go to be defeat by the reality in Brussels ' ' . the EU have raise Britain ' s exit bill from the bloc to ( Euro ) 100billion ( £85billion ) , accord to the Financial Times . the figure , which comprise an upfront gross payment rather than the final net bill , be derive from new demand by the @card@ member state , in particular France and Germany , as the EU take a more stringent approach to UK obligation . Philip Johnston : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ ' they be play an unwise and dangerous game and they have be work towards this for a long time ' ' what they be do be try to exploit a new kind of ' project fear ' ... that be not go to work on Briton '
Scotland Davis admit he have no plan for Brexit without a deal
the EU be not ` ` intimidate ' ' by the threat of no deal with the UK , Donald Tusk have warn , as the Brexit Secretary admit that the government have not plan for the possibility of walk away without a settlement . Mr Tusk , president of the European Council , tell MEPs the outcome would be bad for Britain and the EU if an agreement for trade after Brexit be not reach . meanwhile , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , tell a committee of MP that minister have not assess the implication of leave the union without a deal . a Number @card@ source be force to stress that there be ` ` rigorous work go on across government about the implication ' ' . Mr Davis tell the Brexit select committee that it would not make sense to forecast such an outcome because minister believe some agreement could be reach . he confirm that leave under World Trade Organisation rule would mean tariff of @card@ per cent on agricultural export and @card@ per cent on car , the loss of European health insurance card for traveller and passporting right for financial firm . ask whether he think leave without a deal would be bad for the UK , Mr Davis tell the committee : ` ` I think it be not as good an outcome as a free trade , friction-free , open agreement , which be why we be try for that . ' '
Scotland Ministers to argue that Article @card@ can be stop ; Government hope to avoid parliamentary vote by convince Supreme Court that Brexit be reversible
the government will argue that Brexit can be stop in its Supreme Court battle over whether Parliament must be give a vote on trigger Article @card@ . Senior ministerial source have tell the Daily Telegraph that lawyer will make the case that Article @card@ , which formally begin the Brexit process , be in fact reversible . it would undermine a High Court rule last week which say that Theresa May have no right to trigger Article @card@ without the agreement of Parliament . the concession be embarrass for the government , which have until now argue that Article @card@ be an unstoppable process once it be trigger . in their High Court ruling , the judge decide that because Brexit be ` ` irreversible ' ' , trigger Article @card@ without first consulting Parliament would mean voter lose right grant to them through the @card@ European Communities Act . however , if government lawyer argue that at any point in the Brexit process MP could vote to stop - or pause - the negotiation , then Parliament have not lose its sovereignty . ` ` the government say in its argument that once you trigger Article @card@ it be irreversible , ' ' the source say . ` ` now , I personally think I do n't think that be right . I think you probably can stop Article @card@ . ` ` let ' s say there be a massive financial crisis in Europe and the euro collapse , you could say we be far too busy sort that out and push the pause button on Article @card@ . ' ' the source add : ` ` let ' s imagine there be a force majeure like an invasion by Russia of the Baltics or a collapse of the euro . ` ` the European institution could say , ' Look , we have not get the capacity or the time to deal with this at the moment . you can either have a messy Brexit with no complete negotiation or you can pause it - there would be a lively debate in the UK about that , but I can see it as a political possibility that the whole thing could be pause if there be a crisis of that nature . ' ' it come as minister and MP react angrily to a Europhile plot to vote in Parliament for a second Brexit referendum . more than @card@ MP , lead by Tim Farron , the Lib Dem leader , want to vote for a second referendum on the term of Britain ' s exit from the EU . Labour MP and peer will not support the Remain supporter ' motion in Parliament , mean it will not pass . however , it will be debate in the Commons and could prove embarrassing for the government , particularly if Conservative rebel support Mr Farron ' S plan . the SNP be believe to be prepare to support call for a second referendum alongside @card@ Labour MP and a handful of conservative . David Jones , a minister in the Brexit department , say : ` ` Parliament vote by a margin of six to one to put the decision on whether to remain in or leave the EU in the hand of the British people . now , because they do n't like the first answer , Liberal Democrat and Labour MP seek to put the question all over again in hope of a different answer . ' ' Jacob Rees-Mogg , say : ` ` the problem with the Lib Dems be that they be neither liberal nor democratic . their position be democratically and politically immature . ' ' Remain ' s rearguard action why Europhile MP be ready to cause trouble Q what be Europhile MP try to do ? a follow the High Court ruling state that Theresa May must consult Parliament before trigger Article @card@ , a group of backbencher promise to delay any legislation by lay down a series of amendment to any forthcoming bill . the Prime Minister want to trigger Article @card@ by March next year and by lay down score of amendment , Remain-supporting MP believe that they can delay her timetable . Q why be they call for a second referendum ? a until now , MP have stop short of demand a second referendum , fear a backlash from voter who back Brexit in June ' S referendum . but a group of more than @card@ MP have say they will vote in Parliament to hold a second referendum on the term of Britain ' s eventual exit from the EU . the Prime Minister have repeatedly say that any attempt to delay , stall or vote again on Brexit be an attempt to thwart the will of the British people . can Europhile MP derail Brexit ? a No , the Remain supporter prepare to demand a second referendum do not have the number in Parliament to do any lasting damage to Mrs May ' S plan . although Labour be deeply divide on Brexit , the party have say it have no intention of block Article @card@ . that mean that even with Liberal Democrats , SNP and a few Labour rebel back their plan for a second referendum , it will never be back by Parliament . however , the government be face a difficult negotiation with Brussels and know that nearly @card@ MP openly call for a second referendum in Parliament be damage . Peter Dominiczak
British Jews who flee Nazi seek German paper after Brexit vote
hundred of British Jews and their descendant , who be strip of German citizenship by the Nazi , have inquire about obtain German passport in the wake of Britain ' s vote for Brexit , figure from the German embassy in London have show . application for German citizenship from dispossess British émigré Jews and their family - which normally run at just @card@ per year - have jump sharply after the June @card@ vote which cast a pall of uncertainty over Britain ' s future relation with Europe . Thomas Harding , a Jewish writer whose late work the house by the Lake tell the story of his ancestral summer home outside Berlin that be vacate after his family flee the Nazi in the 1930s , be among the first to stake his claim . ` ` I hear about Brexit around 6am and by 9am I have emailed the German embassy in London ask how I could go about request citizenship , ' ' he say . under Article @card@ of Germany ' S Basic Law , any jew whose citizenship be revoke by Nazi-era ordinance pass between January @card@ and May @card@ be entitle to have it restore . the rule also apply to their descendant . the German Embassy in London confirm yesterday that it have receive more than @card@ inquiry in the seven week since the Brexit vote , at least @card@ of which have already be convert into firm application for citizenship . and there may be many more application to come when the detail of Britain ' s post-Brexit relationship with Europe become clear , accord to Michael Newman , the chief executive of the Association of Jewish Refugees ( Ajr ) . ` ` immediately after Brexit a couple of Ajr member call to ask about the process but , more anecdotally , when speak to member , there be a lot of interest in do it , particularly if live and work in Europe post-Brexit become more complicate for Briton , ' ' he say . Mr Newman add that he have investigate seek German citizenship himself , but his claim be complicate by the fact that his grandmother have live in Germany but have flee for Britain use a Polish passport . the Ajr estimate that about @card@ refugee come to Britain because of Nazi oppression , many of whom make great contribution to British life , like Sir Rudolf Bing , the founder of the Edinburgh Festival , who will be honour at a ceremony at Glyndebourne today . the Ajr say it estimate that some @card@ former victim of the Nazi era be still live in Britain , mean that - count their descendant - several thousand Briton would be eligible to apply for German citizenship . for many Jewish refugee and their descendant the idea of take up German citizenship be still ` ` a deeply difficult dilemma ' ' , Mr Newman add , but the Brexit vote have open mind to the idea .
Scotland May rule out Sturgeon ' s ' veto ' over quit EU ; New leadership ; New Prime Minister reject First Minister ' s suggestion as she issue challenge to MP to make most of Brexit
Theresa May have rule out claim by Nicola Sturgeon that Scotland will have a veto over when Britain leave the European Union . the Prime Minister tell Scotland ' S First Minister on Friday that she would not start the Brexit process until she have agree a ` ` UK approach ' ' . Ms Sturgeon later say her comment put the Scottish government in a ` ` very , very strong position ' ' over when Britain begin the formal process of leave the EU . ask if Mrs May have give her a veto over trigger Article @card@ , she say : ` ` that certainly appear to be an interpretation that some put on the Prime Minister ' s remark after the meeting . ` ` and certainly from what she say after the meeting , I think that put Scotland in now in a very , very strong position . that ' s a position I be go to use as well as I can . ' ' but Downing Street make clear yesterday that Mrs May will have the final say on when Britain leave the EU . the Prime Minister ' s official spokeswoman say : ` ` the point I would make be that the Prime Minister have be clear that leave the EU be what the British people vote for . ' ' she add that Mrs May ' s comment on Friday ` ` should not be interpret that she be suggest Scotland have some kind of block on this [ Brexit negotiation ] ' ' . it come as Mrs May say Britain must not be ` ` define by Brexit ' ' and everyone should prosper from the ` ` opportunity ' ' of leave the EU , speak before the first meeting of her Cabinet . the Prime Minister will today tell minister that it be their ` ` duty ' ' to improve education and skill and ensure that social mobility be ` ` at the heart of my government ' ' . she say that minister must ` ` deliver success on behalf of everyone in the UK ' ' after a Brexit and not just for the ` ` privileged few ' ' . Mrs May will tomorrow travel to Berlin for her first face-to-face meeting as Prime Minister with Angela Merkel , the German chancellor . Downing Street confirm that they will discuss Brexit despite the insistence of European leader that no negotiation should take place until the formal process of leave the EU have begin . she will use the meeting to insist that Britain will not turn its back on the Europe after Brexit , but instead build strong partnership with EU nation . Mrs May yesterday make her first visit to Wales as Prime Minister and say that she want the Welsh government to be ` ` involve and engage ' ' in Brexit negotiation . she make the comment after meeting First Minister Carwyn Jones for talk in Cardiff . the new Tory leader say she recognise concern on EU funding , and say she want Welsh steelmak to continue . Ms Sturgeon have warn that a second independence referendum be ` ` highly likely ' ' follow the Brexit vote after Scotland vote by @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent to remain in the EU . she say she be examine way to keep Scotland in the EU while it remain part of the UK , although the idea have be dismiss as ` ` fanciful ' ' by David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary . she insist that the UK be now in ` ` uncharted territory ' ' and therefore it may be possible to find a way of Scotland retain its status in the EU while be part of the Union . the First Minister say on Sunday that a snap second referendum be possible as early as the first half of next year if the UK Government start Brexit negotiation in December without Scotland ' S position be protect . she have instruct Scottish government official to draft legislation for Holyrood in preparation for a second vote . meanwhile , a former SNP leader have call for the official campaign for Scottish independence to be resurrect immediately because of the possibility of another referendum . Gordon Wilson say the revival of the Yes Scotland campaign group would enable the party to build a strong support base for any future vote , and put pressure on the UK Government . yes Scotland lose the @card@ referendum , after @card@ per cent of Scot opt to stay in the UK . ' the Prime Minister have be clear that leave the EU be what the British people vote for '
Brexit could drive UK into recession , warn Carney ; House price will plunge and pound will suffer , state Bank of England in dramatic EU intervention
Britain could fall into recession if it vote to leave the European Union , the Governor of the Bank of England have warn in his big intervention yet in the referendum debate . Mark Carney say Brexit could have a ` ` material economic impact ' ' result in fall house price , rise mortgage cost and low living standard . the Bank ' S Monetary Policy Committee unanimously vote to keep interest rate at a record low of 0.5pc yesterday . the Bank cut its growth forecast over the next three year and say household spending be likely to slow regardless of the outcome of the June referendum . its quarterly inflation Report say the pound , which have already fall by 9pc against a basket of other currency since last November , could drop ` ` sharply ' ' in the aftermath of a Brexit vote , raise import cost and push up price . Mr Carney say the economy face a ` ` material ' ' slowdown that could even push the UK into a ` ` technical recession ' ' - two consecutive quarter of fall economic output . policymaker would face a ` ` challenging trade-off ` ` between ` ` stabilise inflation on the one hand ' ' by raise interest rate , and ` ` stabilise output and employment on the other ' ' by ease monetary policy . while Mr Carney stress that the Bank would take ` ` whatever action be need ' ' to stabilise the economy , he add its ability to control the fallout would be limit , add : ` ` Monetary policy can not immediately offset all the effect of a shock . ' ' the Bank also suggest that a Brexit vote could spark violent market movement in an environment of evaporate liquidity that could lead to a credit crunch . George Osborne describe Mr Carney ' s intervention as ` ` a very big moment ' ' . he say Brexit be a ` ` lose-lose situation ' ' that would either reduce real income or ` ` hit the economy and job ' ' . however , Lord Lamont , a former chancellor , accuse Mr Carney of talk down the economy and warn his word could trigger a crisis . while supporter of Brexit have argue that a big depreciation in sterling would help to boost the competitiveness of exporter , the Bank say the benefit of a weak pound be ` ` unlikely to offset ' ' the drag on activity from increase uncertainty . the turbulence in financial market would drive up fund cost for bank that would be pass on to household , push up consumer cost and drive down house price . the Bank say there be further sign that uncertainty before the Brexit vote be weigh on UK output as it cut its forecast for growth in the second quarter to 0.3pc , down from 0.5pc . it now expect the UK economy to grow by 2pc this year , from a previous forecast of 2.2pc . the Bank also say the government ' s renewed austerity drive would reduce household ' desire to dip into their saving to fund purchase , reduce the Bank ' s growth forecast to 2.3pc in both @card@ and @card@ from previous forecast of 2.4pc and 2.5pc , respectively . Andrew Goodwin , an economist at Oxford Economics , say he expect the Bank to cut interest rate if Britain vote to leave the EU . ` ` the mention of the importance of growth and employment suggest that rate cut would be squarely on the table in the event of Brexit , ' ' he say . ` ` in our short-term Brexit scenario we assume that they would be cut to zero by the end of @card@ and we would interpret today ' s commentary as be supportive of that . ' ' Analysis : page @card@
MP raise no-deal border fear ; Turmoil in Europe
the government ' s approach to prepare the UK ' s border in the event of a no-deal Brexit be ` ` reckless ' ' and base on ` ` wishful thinking ' ' , an influential committee of MP have say . the public account committee ( PAC ) be warn the government to do more or the border could be expose from day one of the UK ' S departure . in a report , the committee fear official be work on the assumption of a post-Brexit transition period after March @card@ , which would allow time to put in place border infrastructure . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , announce in the Budget last month that he be set aside £3billion to prepare for Brexit on top of the £700million already invest . but Meg Hillier , PAC chairman , say the government ' S approach be ` ` not fit for purpose ' ' . she say : ` ` government preparation for Brexit assume that leave the EU will present no additional border risk from freight or passenger . it have act - or rather , not act - on this basis . this approach ... might generously be describe as cautious . but against the hard deadline of Brexit it be borderline reckless - an over-reliance on wishful thinking that risk immediately expose the UK . ' ' in @card@ , 300million people and 500million ton of good cross the border , she add . ` ` after Brexit , the number of decision require about people or good crossing could more than treble and more than quadruple respectively . ` ` these figure should concern all in Government and in our view its current approach be not fit for purpose . ' '
EU be secretly prepare for no deal , admit Barnier aide
the European Union have secretly begin prepare for Britain to leave without a deal , a senior adviser to Michel Barnier have admit . Donald Tusk , the President of the European Council , say earlier this month that EU leader be not work on a ` ` no-deal ' ' scenario and be negotiate in ` ` good faith ' ' . Emmanuel Macron , the French President , last week accuse Britain of ` ` bluff ' ' by threaten to leave the EU without a deal . however , Stefaan de Rynck , an adviser to Mr Barnier - the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator - yesterday concede that preparation be under way . speak at the Institute for Government think tank , he say : ` ` on advertise no deal , it be not something we want to advertise , oversell . there be a clear negative impact from no deal , I think that be clear , for both side ... especially for the UK economy , but it be not a scenario that we want to work towards . ` ` we be prepare for it , that be for sure , the @card@ , but it be not something we in the negotiation room want to bring in that negotiation room . ' ' Ministers yesterday suggest that separate Brexit legislation will be need to cover a transition period after the UK have leave the EU . Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , say that the EU withdrawal bill currently go through the commons do not cover the transition . it mean that there could be another opportunity for pro-European rebel to table amendment in a bid to frustrate the government ' S plan for Brexit . it come as Nicky Morgan , a former Cabinet minister , say that she and other pro-European Tory MP be ` ` deadly serious ' ' about rebel in a bid to force the government to give Parliament a vote on the final deal before the UK leave the EU . the European Union be expect to offer Mrs May a transition period after Brexit last just @card@ month , it be report yesterday . the prime minister have previously say that she want a transition period last ` ` about ' ' two year , leave open the option of it take significantly longer . however , senior EU official be say to have stipulate that any transition period must come to an end by Dec @card@ @card@ . the news be likely to be welcome by Eurosceptics include Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , who have argue for a ` ` speedy ' ' transition . at the Exiting the European Union Committee , Mr Baker be yesterday accuse of have not fully read report about the impact of leave the European union on different sector of the UK economy , but he insist that he be keep up to date with the finding but have not read all as he have to ` ` ruthlessly prioritise our time ' ' . the prime minister have also be challenge over whether she have read the document , which have not be make public because of official concern they could damage the government ' s negotiate position .
Scotland UK will refuse to discuss Brexit bill as stalemate set to continue ; Tory conference fallout
Britain will refuse to tell Europe how much it be prepare to pay to settle the so-called ` ` Brexit bill ' ' when negotiation re-open in Brussels next week , the Daily Telegraph can reveal , in a move that risk plunge the Brexit talk into fresh crisis . the British move come as doubt emerge across Europe that Theresa May have the political clout to seal a Brexit deal follow her disastrous party conference speech and public disagreement with Boris Johnson . Senior Whitehall source say that negotiator will refuse to say which financial ` ` commitment ' ' Britain will honour , set up a fresh showdown with Brussels . the UK stance be take after it become clear EU negotiator would not open talk on a transitional deal and trade talk at this month ' S European Council summit , despite Mrs May ' s recent offer to pay ( Euro ) 20bn during a transition deal . ` ` there wo n't be any political movement from the British side on the bill until the EU broaden its package to discuss transition and the future relationship , ' ' say a high-placed Whitehall source , add that the UK would seek to hold ` ` technical talk ' ' on the bill . the renewed stand-off over the EU ' s demand for ( Euro ) 60bn to ( Euro ) 100bn risk shatter the fragile détente establish in September ' s fourth-round negotiation after Mrs May ' s speech in Florence , which contain key concession on money and citizen ' right . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Michel Barnier , the EU chief negotiator , both describe the talk as ` ` constructive last month , but acknowledge that major difference remain on money and the role of EU court in police the divorce deal . it be now clear that EU expectation that Britain would flesh out those ` ` commitment ' ' without reference to a future trade deal be misplace . Whitehall official now privately concede that the fundamental impasse will not be break next week and the UK will not open the door to trade talk when Mrs May meet fellow EU leader at the summit on Oct @card@ and @card@ . in the absence of a substantial discussion on money , the UK will instead field a slimmed-down team of negotiator from its usual cast of @card@ Whitehall official , the Daily Telegraph understand . the rump team will focus on a secure a handful of success on EU citizen ' right in order to avoid a com-plete breakdown in negotiation . ` ` it be damage limitation , ' ' say a second a Whitehall source , ` ` but we want as much progress as possible . ' ' source say Oliver Robbins , the UK ' S senior Brexit official , will present further idea on how to give the European Court of Justice what Mr Barnier call an ` ` indispensable role ' ' in enforce the Brexit deal , without cross the UK ' s red line on sovereignty . however , EU source say that Mr Barnier would not be satisfy by the UK ' s piecemeal approach , and would demand ` ` sufficient progress ' ' on all three area - the financial settlement , citizen ' right and Northern Ireland - before talk trade and transition . ` ` Two out of the three file be not acceptable . it be three out of three or nothing . you can expect him to be quite tough on that at the beginning of next week , ' ' one EU source say . the decision on sufficient progress will be make on the morning of Oct @card@ by EU leader , who do not expect the hurdle to be clear and will reaffirm their support for Mr Barnier . Senior EU diplomat tell the Daily Telegraph the decision to drop plan to talk about an early transition come after Mr Johnson ' s public intervention on Brexit undermine EU confidence that Mrs May have the authority to make good on her own promise . ` ` the long the unravel continue in London , the less likely it be that Michel Barnier will ask for a relax of his mandate so he can talk about transition , ' ' say one diplomat . ` ` no one can be sure if May can keep the promise she appear to make in Florence . ' ' Senior source in the European Parliament working on Brexit add that the Tory party conference have sap confidence in Mrs May and whether her cabinet would ever be able to decide which version of Brexit it want . ` ` the Tories have to decide what they want , now it remain undecided , so now the unrest will continue . it be not good for the negotiation , ' ' the source say . ` ` in Brussels we want clarity on what the UK and especially the Tory want . ' ' Mrs May ' s travail in Manchester lead the Confederation of German industry to warn business to ` ` prepare for a very hard Brexit ' ' . Joachim Lang , the head of the influential group , say the UK Government ` ` talk plenty ' ' but have ` ` no clear plan ' ' , and it would be ` ` naive ' ' for German business not to start planning for a hard Brexit . he also criticise the UK ' s proposal on future custom agreement as ` ` unreasonably bureaucratic ' ' and ` ` not practical for business on a daily basis ' ' . Theresa Griffin , a Labour MEP , say that Mrs May ' s inability to control her team have leave the EU ` ` bewilder and frustrate ' ' with the impasse in London . ` ` Conservative infighting have leave the EU confused and unclear about the UK ' S position , ' ' she say . Andrew Duff , a former liberal MEP now at the European Policy Centre think-tank , say that the European Commission be positive that Mrs May have not resile from the promise make in her Florence speech , and be still look to her to survive . ` ` Desperate as they find the UK team of May and Davis to be , the alternative , in the form of Boris Johnson , be bad . ' ' he say . ` ` but it will need a stunning performance by David Davis next week to rescue her . ' ' ' the Tories have to decide what they want . in Brussels we want clarity on what the UK and especially the Tories want '
Juncker snub Britain as he push for great EU integration
JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker will today use a flagship speech to snub Britain and insist that , despite Brexit , the European Union will move towards great integration . the Daily Telegraph can reveal that Mr Juncker ' s top aide Martin Selmayr tell a meeting of EU diplomat that European Union country that wish to remain at the ` ` core ' ' of the European project after Brexit will have to join the euro . the president of the European Commission be expect barely to mention Brexit in his state of the Union address in the European Parliament in Strasbourg , with the focus overwhelmingly on the future of the EU without Britain . Theresa May be mock yesterday by European Parliament leader after she refuse to face all @card@ MEPs in a debate on Brexit . she will instead address the behind-closed-doors conference of the chief of EU political group . Philippe Lamberts , the Belgian copresident of the European green , say that Mrs May be right to avoid the plenary session , because she be ` ` a lady out of her depth ' ' . it emerge yesterday that the planned fourth round of Brexit negotiation next week be to be postpone until Sept @card@ . during a meeting of EU deputy-ambassadors at a private dinner last week , Mr Selmayr say that ` ` @card@ per cent of EU citizen ' ' would be live in eurozone country after Brexit and that these would probably become the core of the new Union . he promise there would be ` ` more Schengen , more banking union , more eurozone and the prospect of enlargement in @card@ for the Balkans , ' ' say source report on the dinner . accord to a confidential diplomatic readout of the meeting , both the Czech Republic and Hungary challenge the idea that the eurozone country should form the new core of the EU after Brexit , argue instead for a more inclusive approach .
Scotland May warn of loom Brexit constitutional crisis ; Labour and Liberal Democrats threaten to derail Government ' s EU exit plan in the Lords ; Labour and LibDems will move to bring down the government
Theresa May be face a constitutional crisis after Labour and the Liberal Democrats threaten to use the House of Lords to water down Brexit . the Prime Minister be face a battle to get the crucial legislation through the upper chamber after it emerge that peer may seek to ignore a 72-year convention and block new law pave the way for Britain leave the single market and EU custom union . the Salisbury Convention state that manifesto commitment make by a govern party should not be block or significantly alter by the Lords . however , within hour of yesterday ' S Queen Speech , which set out the various Brexit bill to be present before Parliament in the come month - opposition party begin to argue that the convention do not apply as Mrs May do not win a majority and have not agree to govern in coalition . the legitimacy of the convention be set to spark a major constitutional row between legal expert . meanwhile , the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) be demand that a separate vote be hold in Scotland to determine whether Mrs May can repeal EU law - a crucial step in the Brexit process . Downing Street say last night that the legal role of the Scottish Parliament be also still be consider . the grow constitutional row over Brexit have add to the pressure on the Prime Minister to secure a formal deal with the Democratic Unionist Party ( DUP ) that would add to the legitimacy of her government . yesterday , as the talk continue to drag on , it emerge that the DUP be demand a £2 billion payment to Northern Ireland , and a guarantee to end austerity , as the price of the deal . Mrs may put Brexit at the heart of her agenda as she set out her plan for the next two year , but the Prime Minister be force to abandon flagship policy include new grammar school and plan to pay for social care . the Queen deliver yesterday ' s speech with the Prince of Wales by her side after the Duke of Edinburgh be take to hospital on Tuesday night suffering from an infection cause by a pre-exist condition . address the House of Commons , the Prime Minister acknowledge that she now face a divide country but say she be determine to ` ` see Brexit through ' ' . ` ` the election show that , as it face the big challenge of our future , our country be divide - red versus blue , young versus old , leave versus Remain , ' ' she say . ` ` the test for all of us be whether we choose to reflect division or help the country overcome them . with humility and resolve , this government will seek to do the latter . ` ` we will do what be in the national interest and we will work with anyone in any party that be prepare to do the same . ' ' she also pledge to ` ` seek to build a wide consensus ' ' on the Brexit negotiation amid call for her to soften her plan . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , continue on Page @card@ Inside Reports Pages @card@ David Owen Page @card@ Editorial Comment Page @card@ Juliet Samuel Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ back the Prime Minister ' S agenda and question whether Labour would try to block the result of the referendum . ` ` will they try to frustrate the will of the people , and block the Brexit bill ? ' ' he say . ` ` the Tories get @card@ more seat than Labour . we will ... govern the country with drive and determination , and these measure deserve support . ' ' last night , Mr Johnson rule out run for the Tory leadership until Brexit be deliver in @card@ . he say he would not run while negotiation be ongoing , tell Channel @card@ News ` ` we have to get on and deliver on the priority of the people ' ' . the Prime Minister fly to Brussels today for what EU official have warn could be a ` ` humiliate ' ' encounter when she hold talk on Brexit with EU leader for the first time since lose her majority . she will set out plan to give EU citizen legal right in this country after Brexit to help curry favour with her European counterpart . Mrs May will be give a short slot at a summit dinner before be escort from the room while Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council , update the other @card@ leader on last Monday ' s opening day of Brexit talk . a formal paper set out the UK plan be expect on Monday . EU diplomat warn Mrs May could expect a muted reception at the dinner , in part as a signal that she will not be allow to circumvent the multilateral negotiating process lead by Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator . ` ` the election have throw the entire process back up in the air , and no one thanks Mrs May for that , ' ' a senior EU diplomat who will attend the talk tell the Telegraph . ` ` the reality be that no one know where Britain stand - or indeed will stand - on the key issue . we want to get on with it . ' ' Mrs May now face a series of potential roadblock before her key Brexit policy can be enshrine in law , in a move which will further weaken her negotiate hand in Brussels . the big hurdle in her path appear to be a row over whether peer be duty-bound to back new law that be promise in the Tory manifesto . Downing Street ' s own legal advice on the Salisbury Convention be that it still apply , but a joint Commons and Lords commission in @card@ fail to reach any conclusion in the case of minority government . Liberal Democrat peer insist yesterday that they be not bind by the convention , and a Labour source in the Lords say that while its policy be that ` ` the will of the Commons must be respect ' ' , individual Labour peer could decide to follow the example of the Liberal Democrats . the conservative have only @card@ of the @card@ member of the Lords , mean the upper chamber could hold up legislation by repeatedly amend it and send it back to the Commons . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , make clear his own plan to exploit Mrs May ' s weak position as he tell the commons : ` ` we will use every opportunity to vote down government policy that fail to win public support ... we be ready to offer real strong and stable leadership in the interest of the many not the few . and we will test this government ' s Brexit strategy , and what legislation come forward , against that standard . ' ' in the Commons , the LibDems and Labour will try to bring down the government within the week by table amendment they hope will defeat the Queen ' s Speech . in Scotland , Nicola Sturgeon be to demand the right for a vote in Holyrood on the repeal bill and other legislation in the Queen ' s Speech . ' we will use every opportunity to vote down government policy that fail to win public support '
Britain on the threshold of Brexit as MP vote down Lords ' amendment ; Brexit : Parliament
Britain stand on the threshold of the ` ` most important negotiation for a generation ' ' after Parliament give Theresa May the power to trigger Brexit , the Secretary of State for Exiting the EU , David Davis , have say last night the government ' S Brexit Bill clear though both Houses of Parliament , pave the way for the Prime Minister to trigger Article @card@ . peer in the House of Lords back down and accept the supremacy of elect MP after the Commons reject amendment on the issue of give MP a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal and guarantee the right of EU citizen . speak after the result , Mr Davis say : ` ` Parliament have today back the government in its determination to get on with the job of leave the EU and negotiate a positive new partnership with its remain member state . ` ` we have a plan to build a Global Britain , and take advantage of its new place in the world by forge new trading link . ` ` so we will trigger Article @card@ by the end of this month , as plan , and deliver an outcome that work in the interest of the whole of the UK . ' ' Earlier Mrs May have quash a rebellion by pro-European Conservatives as MP vote overwhelmingly to reject the House of Lords amendment . up to a dozen Conservative MP have threaten to rebel and back the ` ` meaningful vote ' ' amendment . however , Mrs May enjoy a significant boost after not a single Conservative MP vote against the government on the issue and just @card@ abstain . the government defeat the meaningful vote amendment by @card@ to @card@ and the migrant right amendment by @card@ to @card@ . it come after Mr Davis warn MP that commit to a meaningful vote would hinder the government ' s ability to ` ` walk away ' ' from a deal that seek to ` ` punish ' ' the UK . he say that the government would not block a parliamentary vote on Brexit if the UK leave without a deal . however , his comment be not enough to persuade Tory rebel . Dominic Grieve , the former Attorney General , say that try to stop Parliament from have a vote on leave the EU without a deal would be ` ` derange ' ' . he say it be ` ` inevitable ' ' that the government would have to present its Brexit deal to Parliament , add that he find the refusal to commit to a vote ` ` a bit odd ' ' . on the subject of the right of EU citizen live in the UK and Briton live in Europe , Mr Davis say Britain have a ` ` moral responsibility ' ' to protect them both . he warn that the House of Lords amendment to force the UK to ` ` unilaterally ' ' guarantee the right of EU migrant live here would undermine Britain ' s negotiate hand and jeopardise the right of British citizen live in the EU . however , Mr Davis say that he be determine there would be a ` ` swift ' ' agreement on migrant right once Article @card@ be trigger and Britain begin the formal process of exit the EU . around @card@ million EU citizen live in the UK , while more than a million British expats reside in other EU member state . Mr Davis say : ` ` that be why we must pass this straightforward bill without further delay so the Prime Minister can get to work on the negotiation and we can secure a quick deal that secure the status of both European Union citizen in the UK and also UK national live in the EU , of which there be around one million . ` ` we take very seriously , I take very seriously our moral responsibility to all four million United Kingdom and European Union citizen . ' ' Two Tory MP openly rebel against the government while around a dozen abstain on the amendment .
King : MP ' attitude make Brexit inevitable ; politician and elite treat public as ' British equivalent of deplorables ' , say former bank governor
British politician have ` ` lost touch ' ' with their voter and attempt by the London elite to suppress the EU debate make the referendum on membership that lead to the Brexit vote ` ` inevitable ' ' , Mervyn King have say . the former governor of the Bank of England say he ` ` resent [ editor ] ' ' suggestion by friend and acquaintance that Briton who ` ` even contemplated ' ' voting for Brexit be ` ` ignorant ' ' or ` ` racist ' ' . he describe the backlash as ` ` the British equivalent of the deplorables ' ' - the term use by US presidential candidate Hillary Clinton to describe half of Donald Trump ' S supporter Lord King say the ` ` striking ' ' difference between vote pattern in London , Scotland and Northern Ireland compare with the rest of the UK in the June vote highlight a stark divide between the capital and the majority of English region in the debate . ` ` that gap between London and the rest of the country be something that I , live outside , noticed but all my friend in London do n't really appreciate , ' ' he tell an audience at the London School of Economics last night . ` ` @card@ [ be ] tell , but if you even contemplate voting for Brexit , you must be either ignorant , uneducated , stupid or racist . [ My ] response be : I ' m none of those , and I resent be describe in those term . ` ` it be the British equivalent of the deplorables . and I think the reaction against it do play some role [ in the Brexit vote ] . ' ' Lord King , who retire from the Bank of England in @card@ after a decade as governor , have say the vote to leave the EU represent ` ` real opportunity ' ' for economic reform and have also call for a hard Brexit where the UK leave the single market of good and service . Theresa May , the prime minister say last month that the UK ` ` can not possibly ' ' remain in the single market . Lord King have also signal that the country would be good off outside the custom union . he say the Brexit vote and the election of Mr Trump as US president ` ` raise question ' ' over whether ` ` the [ political ] party we have at present - in the US or the UK - actually have lose touch ' ' . he add : ` ` why they be create in the first place no longer seem relevant , and it ' s more difficult to see what each party stand for , hence the rise of people who could represent one party or another but see themselves as the individual who can save the country . ' ' Lord King say he believe pressure for the EU referendum stem from an existing political party system that ` ` do not give people a chance to vote on issue they really care about ' ' . the main party ' failure to address public concern about aspect of EU membership see ` ` demand for a referendum grow and grow ' ' and lead to the rise of Ukip , which receive @card@ million vote in the @card@ general election , he add . ` ` where you ' ve see that in the UK be exactly on those issue where party in a sense suppress the debate ... and in the end it may well have be inevitable either that there be a referendum or that one of the party would have have to represent in a very clear way their position on the EU and give people a chance to vote on it . ' ' he describe the election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader by the party ' S member amid a backlash by his own MP as ` ` odd ' ' . ` ` I think this could be a sign of the future - that people become very nervous about the idea that so-called direct democracy may not be the good way of give the country a choice between both party and leader . so rather than turn it into a personality contest [ there could be attempt ] to try to give great weight to the professional party politician in help to choose a leader . ' '
Scotland Souter dismiss SNP fear over Brexit ; Souter say Brexit can be positive ' if we have gut '
the SNP ' s most prominent business supporter yesterday undermine Nicola Sturgeon ' s warning that Brexit will inflict economic devastation on Scotland and the UK by state it be ` ` not as big a deal as people be make out . ' ' Sir Brian Souter , the Stagecoach transport tycoon , say critic of the EU referendum decision be ` ` overestimate the damage ' ' and Britain could be in a ` ` positive place ' ' if there be a deal for the financial service sector . the entrepreneur tell an audience of business leader in Edinburgh than Brexit will not have as large an impact as the financial crash and that voter back the leave campaign because they ` ` do not want to be part of a European superstate ' ' . although he deny be a ` ` Brexiteer ' ' and say he could not make up his mind how to vote in the referendum , Sir Brian say the UK could make a success of Brexit if ` ` we have the gut to make our own way in the world ' ' . the Scottish Conservatives welcome the intervention of the longstanding SNP donor , who be estimate to be worth around £1 billion , as ` ` a much need dose of reality ' ' in contrast to the SNP ' s ` ` doom-mongering ' ' . it follow a series of pessimistic prediction by Ms Sturgeon about the impact of the vote and a threat to call a second independence referendum if Scotland be not keep in the EU single market . the First Minister have warn that she will not ` ` stand back and see Scotland be drive off a hard Brexit cliff edge ' ' and her government have publish an analysis claim Scottish GDP could be £11 billion low by @card@ than it would have be without the leave vote . however , she have so far refuse to order an analysis on the impact of leave the UK single market , which be worth more than four time as much to Scottish exporter . address a Virgin start-up meeting in Edinburgh , Sir Brian say there be other trade link open to Britain but he question whether the country ' s political leader be up to the task of deliver them . Sir Brian , the co-founder and chairman of Stagecoach , say : ` ` I be not so negative on Brexit as other seem to be . ` ` there will be some challenge , but our currency have adjust ... I just think we be overestimate the damage . provide we get a settlement for our financial service sector we could be in a positive place . ' ' he add : ` ` it [ Brexit ] be not as big a deal as people think . it will not have the impact that the financial crash , or a war in the Middle East will have on us . ' ' Sir Brian accuse both side of the referendum campaign of be ` ` hysterical and polarise ' ' and say the leave side have emerge victorious because voter be suspicious of politician and the EU . ` ` they want the project revisit and change . they do not necessarily continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ want to pull out . but it may prove to be good for Europe . we may end up with a sensible agreement , ' ' the Daily Business website report him as say . ` ` there be a whole world of trade relationship out there . the question be whether we have the gut to make our own way in the world now we be out of this club . ' ' as well as donate £2.5 million to the SNP , Sir Brian give £1 million to the Yes side in the @card@ independence referendum campaign . Murdo Fraser , the Scottish Tories ' Shadow Finance Minister , say : ` ` the SNP have be doom-mongering about Brexit since day one , all in the hope that they can use our decision to leave the EU to push up support for independence . ` ` Sir Brian ' S intervention be therefore very welcome and add a much needed dose of reality to the debate . ' ' a SNP spokesman say : ` ` Brexit be far and away the big threat to Scotland ' S economy , job and long-term prosperity , with a potential cost of up to £11.2 billion per year by @card@ and up to @card@ lose job over the next decade . ' '
welfare bill will ensure Brexit work for animal too , say Gove
BREXIT will help Britain improve animal welfare standard and combat problem such as puppy smuggling , Michael Gove have say . the Environment Secretary say it be ` ` good news ' ' that an agreement have be reach in the first stage of negotiation over Britain ' s departure from the European Union , add that the focus could now turn to trade and the positive outcome of leave . his comment come as a draft bill , enshrine animal sentience into UK law post- Brexit and introduce jail sentence of up to five year for animal abuser , be publish . the plan be part of government effort to ensure that Brexit work ` ` not just for citizen but for the animal we love and cherish too ' ' , Mr Gove say . speak during a visit to Battersea Dogs and Cats Home in London on Monday , he tell the Press Association : ` ` I think it ' s good news that we ' ve get an agreement to move to the next stage of the Brexit negotiation , where we can talk about trade and talk about some of the change that will work in Britain ' S interest . ` ` I ' m glad that we ' re now at this stage because actually Britain outside the EU can have high standard on the environment and on animal welfare . ` ` one of the reason why people vote to leave be to make sure that we have the rule which ensure there be appropriate welfare and protection for animal and for human . ' ' the draft bill say the government ` ` must have regard to the welfare need of animal as sentient being in formulate and implement government policy ' ' . it also increase the maximum prison sentence for animal cruelty from six month to five year in England and Wales . pa
Scotland Davis refuse to back may as ' writer of Brexit final chapter '
David Davis have say he do not expect another election within the next five year but he decline to confirm that Theresa May would ` ` write the final chapter in Brexit ' ' . at a speech in Washington , the Brexit Secretary also admit that the late round of Brussels talk have be ` ` tense ' ' and add that he expect more ` ` turbulent ' ' time ahead . ask how long the current government will remain in power and whether the Prime Minister would write the final chapter as the UK leave the EU , Mr Davis say it be his ` ` expectation ' ' that there will not be another snap election . he tell the US Chamber of Commerce : ` ` we have change our structure recently . it use to be prime minister would call the election whenever they like . now we have a five-year [ term ] which make it actually quite difficult . ' ' but in response to the second part of the question the Brexit Secretary give a garble response . ` ` the real issue on Brexit be mostly practical . what deal we need , what can we sell to the other European country , what ' S in the mutual good interest of all of us ? and that ' s the driver . it ' S the same driver within the parliamentary ... there be a majority to carry through Brexit in the UK Parliament and it will get do , ' ' he say . the response will prompt question about whether Mrs May can , as she announce in Japan this week , lead the conservative into the next election . Mr Davis also reveal he be ` ` proud ' ' of be call a ` ` charming b -- -- -- ' ' after a confrontational press conference with the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier . ` ` I have say from the beginning it will be turbulent . ' '
Boris : EU can ' go whistle ' over £50bn Brexit demand ; ' Extortionate ' divorce bill comment laugh off by David Davis who will go through claim line by line
Boris Johnson have say that the European Union can ` ` go whistle ' ' over its ` ` extortionate ' ' demand for a £50billion Brexit divorce bill . the Foreign Secretary be ask by a Eurosceptic Conservative MP to tell Brussel that the UK do not owe a ` ` penny piece more ' ' after decade of contribution to the EU ' S budget . Mr Johnson reply : ` ` I ' m sure that your word will have break like a thunderclap over Brussels and they will pay attention to what you have say . ` ` he make a very valid point and I think that the sum that I have see that they propose to demand from this country seem to me to be extortionate and I think ' to go whistle ' be an entirely appropriate expression . ' ' Mr Johnson have previously suggest that Brussels could end up have to pay a bill to Britain because the UK have contribute to so many EU asset . the Foreign Secretary also say yesterday that Britain be not make contingency plan for Brexit negotiation break down without a deal because ` ` we be go to get a great deal ' ' . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , claim that Mr Johnson ' s ` ` silly ' ' language risk jeopardise negotiation with the EU . however , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , laugh off the comment and say the UK be already challenge whether it be legally oblige to pay a divorce bill at all . Mr Davis say the strategy be ` ` not to pay more than we need to ' ' and that Britain would not accept the EU ' s ` ` first claim ' ' without go through it line by line . he tell the House of Lords European Union select committee : ` ` there will be a process of challenge go on here , and that will happen and have start already in the negotiate process to establish whether or not we believe they have make a legally defensible argument or not . ' ' ask about Mr Johnson ' S comment , the Brexit Secretary laugh before tell peer : ` ` Bluntly , I would n't worry . I mean you will have to get the Foreign Secretary here to explain his view if you really want to . ' ' Mr Davis tell the committee that all of the British newspaper be read in Brussels and they ` ` take them , if anything , too seriously ' ' . Mr Davis say Michel Barnier , the European Union ' S chief Brexit negotiator , be a principled man who be ` ` very French , very logical , tough but not wholly inflexible ' ' . he suggest that Emmanuel Macron , the French president , who be consider one of the most difficult figure in Brexit negotiation , in fact want to prioritise a deal . he say that there be unlikely to be a ` ` domino ' ' effect for other EU nation in the wake of Britain ' s vote to leave the European Union . Mr Davis also reject claim that the government have soften its stance on Brexit since the election , and suggest that European resident will still be able to take complaint about Britain ' s use of the European Arrest Warrant to the European Court of Justice after the withdrawal . despite a series of Cabinet row , Mr Davis insist that there be not ` ` a cigarette paper ' ' in difference between him and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , over Brexit . ' I ' m sure that your word will have break like a thunderclap over Brussels and they will pay attention '
Labour ' S Remain MP say they wo n't back Corbyn ; Rebels fear they will be unelectable in the next election if they go against constituent ' wish
Jeremy CORBYN be face an increasingly divide Labour Party last night after Remain-supporting MP warn they can not back his position on Brexit because their constituent do not support it . MP in pro-Remain constituency say they can not vote in favour of the leader ' s position on leave the European Union - which be see as increasingly hardline - for fear of lose their seat in another general election . their admission mean the deep split be likely to widen in the come week unless Labour can reconcile the two opposing viewpoint . it follow a rebellion by @card@ Labour MP over an amendment call for the government to retain access to the single market after Brexit which weaken Mr Corbyn ' s ability to oppose Theresa May ' S plan . it be lead by a group of Remain-supporting Labour MP , many of whom have already receive letter and emails call on them to support Liberal Democrat effort to soften the UK ' S exit , source tell the Daily Telegraph . they warn of grow frustration and a determination to act as a backstop against drop out of the single market , put Labour MP on a collision course with Mr Corbyn who have say the UK should leave the market . the rift highlight a grow chasm within the party , which be yet to reconcile the fact that it win swathe of seat in the general election with the backing of pro-remain constituent who do not support the party ' s official line . earlier this week the leader be force to sack three member of his shadow cabinet after the MP vote in favour of the amendment put forward by Chuka Umunna . Ruth Cadbury , Catherine West and Andy Slaughter all leave the front-bench team after back the call for Britain to remain inside the single market and custom union after Brexit , despite the party ' s official position be that the UK must leave these institution . a party source reveal there be a grow split between Labour MP who represent Remain-leaning constituency and those whose electorate be staunchly behind Brexit . they fear that back the official line will make them unelectable at the next ballot . another source claim the leader ' S office be ` ` not receptive ' ' to concern among Labour MP who be unable to support the hard-line position on Brexit because of the pressure they be under in their constituency . it be fail to address the issue , MP say . stay inside the single market be know as a soft Brexit position but it be widely think to be untenable because it would also force the UK to retain freedom of movement right for EU national . Pro-Leave MP claim voter back Brexit in order to control the UK ' S border . a Labour MP say Mr Corbyn ' s amendment to the Queen ' s Speech on Brexit , which do not pass , be ` ` too weak ' ' and that many in the party be frustrate at the lack of opposition to Theresa May ' S plan . it come as Tom Watson , the party ' s deputy leader , say Mr Umunna ' S amendment , which also fail to pass a House of Commons vote , be ` ` unnecessary ' ' and ` ` unhelpful ' ' . he tell Channel @card@ that he be ` ` very disappointed ' ' at Mr Umunna ' S decision , add : ` ` to break away like that be politically unhelpful at a time when the entire Labour Party be buzz because we do far good in the General Election . I just hope we can come back together very quickly . ' ' last night the shadow Brexit secretary say Labour would pay for access to the European single market and appear to question the merit of leave the custom union amid a fresh bout of party infighting over Brexit . Sir Keir Starmer say a Labour government would cut the amount of money the UK send to the EU , but stress it be ` ` inevitable ' ' the country would have to pay for access to the single market after leave it . editorial comment : page @card@
minister must listen to the business community ; discussion on how , when and - even if - we Brexit should not be leave to politician alone who have only prove they ca n't be trust
by the end of last year ' s bitter European Union referendum campaign , Lord Rose of Monewden be nowhere to be see . the leader of the cross-party ` ` Britain Stronger in Europe ' ' group , which lead the cheerleade to stay in the continental bloc , be miss in action in the week that immediately lead up to June @card@ @card@ . so calamitous have his unveiling be back in October @card@ - alongside one-time TV presenter June Sarpong and Green Party leader Caroline Lucas - that come the culmination of the month of claim and counter-claim , the Remain campaign feel it wise to roll out Home Secretary Amber Rudd and even then Prime Minister David Cameron to make their case , than leave it in the hand of the former Marks & Spencer boss . and they be probably right to do so . by late January , before the Referendum date have even be set , he could n't even remember what his campaign be call . he tell a Sky News interviewer he be represent the ` ` Stay in Britain , Better in Britain campaign , ' ' before correct himself twice , and opt for the ` ` Better Stay in Britain ' ' campaign . it do n't get any good as the vote draw closer , tell the Commons Treasury select committee that wage would rise be Britain to leave the EU , while later confusing Sweden for Switzerland at a public event when discuss country that have a bad deal outside the bloc . funny then that in the wake of last week ' s uncertain election result , which suggest to some that a soft Brexit be on the card , Lord Rose appear on our airwaves discuss which way now for our impending EU exit . slightly more on message one year on , he say it be ` ` too simplistic ' ' to say the result of the general election be a vote for soft Brexit , but say that the slowing economy have perhaps lead part of the electorate to question their referendum ballot . his late intervention , unremarkable as it be in that he do n't say anything that other have not already , be a reminder that since the referendum , the voice of business have be largely ignore . as I write a fortnight ago in this column , the sevenweek election campaign be the first in live memory in which neither of the main political party cozy up to the business fraternity . partly the result of the ethos of the two main leader , partly the result of the public ' s continue mistrust of all thing corporate , there be perceive to be no vote in offer olive branch to any part of the business world . but just as the election result put pay to the work of the majority of pollster , so it also , in my opinion , mark the end of suggestion that business must be beat with a sharp stick . if the lobby rumour mill be to be believe , what will be leave of the Conservatives ' Queen ' s Speech - should we get that far - will not contain the moot price cap on energy company nor the corporate bashing with which Theresa May seem to want to become involve in her much-malign manifesto . and in much the same way , the government ' s approach to the upcoming Brexit negotiation must now soften . whether a hard , medium or soft Brexit be on the card , the election result - which deliver no real winner - suggest that the economy as a whole would benefit from a conversation around how we exit the European Union , rather than a diktat from no @card@ . as well as be cross-party , as Lord Hague suggest in this newspaper earlier this week , that conversation must now include the business community . for have be thrust into uncertainty in the wake of the referendum result and the prolonged seven-month wait until Mrs May confirm exactly what Brexit mean in January , spare a thought - go on , I dare you - for how business executive must now be feel . what seem a certainty - a UK out of the single market , out of the custom union - now be not quite that . Chancellor Philip Hammond be say to be mind to push the Prime Minister to keep the UK in the custom union . so where do that leave those planning for Brexit ? the answer be that , despite the rhetoric , and despite the suggestion from European politician of a year extension to the negotiation , little have change . large , particularly foreign , company plan to gain licence in EU nation or move portion of staff further afield be likely still to do so . the added uncertainty cause by the general election - and the sense that our continental neighbour be strong ( economically ) and more stable ( politically ) will only accelerate such decision . small company with less time and less resource to ponder the impossible will simply be leave in limbo , and be just as unclear on where they will be to export to and operate in come April @card@ as they be before last week ' S vote . that do not mean that the voice of business should not be hear in the ensue discussion on how we Brexit and when we Brexit - dare I even say , if we Brexit ? clearly Lord Rose should n't be at the front of the queue when any Brexit business liaison committee - please do n't let it be call that - be form . but , give our politician clearly ca n't be trust , we need grown up . and we need them soon . james.quinn @ telegraph.co.uk ' the approach to the upcoming Brexit negotiation must soften '
good Brexit deal ' worthless ' unless politician focus on economy
a Leading UK business group have warn that the good Brexit deal ` ` wo n't be worth the paper it ' s write on ' ' if politician fail to address the country ' s chronic skill shortage and create a globally competitive business environment . the British chamber of Commerce ( BCC ) warn politician not to lose sight of the economy as the UK prepare to enter Brexit negotiation . it urge party across the political spectrum to focus on five key area - Brexit , devolution , the business environment , infrastructure and trade - to support economic growth and boost live standard across the UK . the BCC say it be vital that MP ` ` deliver the third runway at Heathrow ' ' as well as maximise the economic potential of other airport across the UK so that the country can ` ` compete effectively on the world stage , encourage inward investment , attract tourist and increase employment . ' ' the BCC say a positive Brexit deal would be underpin by ` ` frictionless future trade arrangement with the EU ' ' and continue access to talent . it urge the government to work with the business community to ensure the smooth implementation of future custom procedure and rule of origin and ` ` guarantee the UK ' s position as a global distribution hub ' ' . upgrade Britain ' s physical and digital infrastructure and a focus on devolution deal that empower region be also key , the BCC say . it urge policymaker to foster a ` ` globally competitive business environment ' ' with a stable tax system and no new upfront tax on business for the next five year . speed up the plan process to address the housing crisis while ensure enough office space for fast grow company be also a priority , it say . Adam Marshall , director general of the BCC , say : ` ` while business all across the UK want a good Brexit deal , they be very clear that decision take here at home matter as much - if not more - to our future growth prospect . ' the well possible Brexit deal wo n't be worth the paper it ' s write on if firm can not recruit and train the right people ' , get decent digital connectivity , or get their good to their market . ' ' Green levy should be keep at a ` ` minimum ' ' , the business group warn , as it say add to the burden already impose on industry would harm its competitiveness . ` ` the next government should incentivise energy efficiency measure , whilst keep environment tax and cost to a minimum to ensure our energy-intensive industry remain internationally competitive . ' ' ' the well possible Brexit deal wo n't be worth the paper it ' s write on if firm can not recruit and train the right people '
the airline fly into turbulence over Brexit ; shareholder nationality could become crucial to avoid disruption , write
UK-based airline be clamour to be at the front of the queue when negotiation over Brexit begin earnest . meeting have be take place between European Union official and airline in recent week in an attempt to flesh out the issue that need to be tackle for the travel sector . there have be mount concern from the airline industry that it could be hobble if discussion between the UK and the EU turn acrimonious . the issue of Brexit be particularly acute for the airline industry give existing agreement allow company to fly between the UK and EU - as well as between mainland European country - and these will need be renegotiate before the UK formally exit the bloc . a key sticking point be that the agreement , know in the industry as EU Open Skies , be oversee by the European Court of Justice , but Theresa May , the Prime Minister , want Britain to be unencumbered by ECJ ruling . most airline have some form of contingency planning in place , and in many case this be now be act upon . EasyJet the Luton-based company could be view as the most expose to a hard Brexit because it be base in the UK and have only a UK and a Swiss air operator certificate , or AOC . the UK AOC , as thing stand , allow the company to fly between the UK and EU country ( and vice versa ) as well as between EU state . to fly between EU state post-Brexit , it be likely to need another AOC , because Switzerland be not a member of the EU . just week after the EU referendum in June easyJet say it be in the process of apply for an EU AOC , which should be enough to allow it to operate intra-European flight after March @card@ . currently only EU-owned airline can operate flight within the EU - this mean that 50.1pc of shareholder must be base in Europe . there be some flexibility to this geographic limit : for example Norwegian Air be base in Norway , which be outside the EU . however it should be note that Norway sit within what be know as the European Economic Area , which include all EU country as well as Iceland , Liechtenstein and Norway , allow the three latter nation to be part of the EU ' s single market . it be increasingly unlikely that the UK will be a member of single market after Brexit . Liberum transport analyst Gerald Khoo say the ownership and control structure that easyJet would be use - have multiple AOCs and operate company - would be the same as that of Air France-KLM . therefore , ` ` if easyJet ' S arrangement be challenge successfully [ by the EU ] , Air France-KLM would have to be break up too ' ' . a spokesman for easyJet say the company ' S headquarters would remain in the UK post-Brexit and that it be 49pc own by European shareholder at present , so cross the 50.1pc threshold under European ownership rule should be simple enough to do . Ryanair the low-cost giant be already base in Dublin and will therefore remain an EU company even once Brexit be do and dust . this mean the Irish carrier will not have any problem with its flight between EU state . however the UK be an important market for the airline and so it will be hope for the exist regulation to be replicate to ensure barrier-free fly between Britain and the EU . if this do not happen and the exist EU Open Skies policy be not replicate , it might need to apply for a domestic UK AOC to fly its intra-UK route . a potential issue for the company be the make-up of its shareholder , over half of which must be in the EU for it to operate as before . once the UK leave the EU , the percentage of EU-based owner on the Ryanair register could drop , as much of its shareholder base consist of UK-based institution . to get around this , any fund manager hold the stock could simply switch ownership from one of their UK-domiciled retail fund , sometimes know as Oeics or uni trust , into either Irish- or Luxembourg-based equivalent , often know as Sicavs . IAG British Airways , own by International Airlines Group , do not fly any intra-continental route and so would not be hit if the EU prevent UK airline fly within the confine of the bloc after March @card@ . furthermore , IAG ' s other airline include Spanish-based Iberia and Vueling , as well as Ireland-based Aer Lingus , mean the wide group already possess permission to fly within Europe . as for ownership , IAG be the listed entity and trade on both the London Stock Exchange and Madrid bourse thanks to its Spanish registered office . the company decline to provide a breakdown by nationality of its shareholder but it say it would comply with EU regulation . Qatar Airways own 20pc of IAG , but it do so via its Luxembourgbased company , something that be likely to help it maintain the necessary 50.1pc ownership by EU-based investor to continue its operation . uncertain flightpath industry want contingency for worst-case scenario it ' S important to note the mutual benefit of barrier-free travel between the UK and Europe post-Brexit - and this be something that be acknowledge by various party on either side of the Channel . Brussels-based ACI Europe , an arm of industry group Airports Council International , have express concern about the uncertainty create for the aviation industry by the Brexit . Olivier Jankovec , director general of ACI Europe , tell its annual London conference this week : ` ` as responsible business , at this stage we simply can not rule out a cliff-edged scenario for Brexit and aviation . the potential impact of this on air connectivity , consumer and the wide economy need to be address by Brexit negotiator - on both side . ` ` this mean that adequate contingency need to be establish ... in case the UK would exit the EU without any agreement on its future relationship with the bloc . ' ' he note 53.5pc of passenger handle by UK airport be fly to or from the @card@ EU member state while more than one in @card@ passenger handle by its EU airport be fly to or from the UK . nearly 40pc of Ireland ' s air traffic come from the UK while the figure be 33pc for the Slovak Republic , 31pc for Malta 20pc for Poland and 17pc for Spain . ' most airline have contingency planning in place , and in many case this be be act upon '
Leighton : after Brexit nobody can ignore the public again
the saga over the vote to leave the European Union should teach British business how not to communicate , Co-operative Group chairman Allan Leighton say yesterday . Mr Leighton , who be Asda chief executive before embark on a ` ` plural ' ' career of non-executive post , make the comment in the opening address of the @card@ Telegraph Festival of Business . ` ` Brexit be totally about people talk at people , tell them what be good and bad for them and what the consequence would be , ' ' he say . ` ` Brexit be all about listen to respond , not listen to hear . when people say , ' I hear what you say ' , that mean that they do n't hear what you say . it mean the opposite , so there be no listen ; there be no talk with . ' ' Mr Leighton , who also chair Danish jewellery company Pandora and medium business Entertainment one , believe the Brexit vote will mark a shift in the way individual expect to be treat as voter , employee and customer . ` ` nobody be go to get away with that [ listen to respond ] any more , ' ' he say . ` ` Brexit be a revolution ; a democratic revolution , and it ' S about people say that they have get their own thought and be not go to be talk at . ` ` they want to be listen to and treat with respect . they do n't want thing stuff down their throat . that ' s the world we now live in . ' ' Mr Leighton have write a book about leadership and tell the conference that he use the concept of ` ` followship ' ' to explain how business need to adapt . he say it be about embrace diversity and equality in the workforce to use the brainpower of all individual regardless of their gender or colour . Mr Leighton add that ` ` followship ' ' be also about accept that respect be something give , not earn , and that the new Britain have to be build ` ` community up ' ' - not ` ` government and business down ' ' . ` ` Brexit be fantastic because it ' s go to refresh all the way we think about thing . ` ` we can say that we do n't know what ' s go to happen ; we ' ve get all this uncertainty and it ' S really difficult . all of those thing be true , but when have business ever be easy ? ` ` let ' s think about how we can turn this into a competitive advantage for us because we ' re think about it differently . the certainty be that Brexit be do . therefore , in this world where we want change and where we can turn this into a catalyst , the process of followship become the most important thing . ' ' ' people want to be listen to and treat with respect . they do n't want thing shove down their throat '
Jeremy Hunt , the Remainer who ' have be prepare to say he be wrong ' on Brexit ; Profile
on the day Boris Johnson be whip up the Tory conference crowd with his ` ` let the lion roar ' ' Brexit speech in October , Jeremy Hunt be quietly go about his business talk Brexit on LBC Radio . as a lead member of the Remain campaign , the Health Secretary be ask , have he change his mind at all about Brexit since the EU referendum vote ? Mr Hunt disclose that indeed he have , and now consider leave the EU to be a positive move , blame the ` ` arrogance ' ' of the European Commission for turn him against the bloc . it may not have be obvious at the time , but his sudden conversion from Remoaner to Brexiteer clear the final hurdle for his expect promotion to the role of de facto deputy prime minister later to be vacate by Damian Green . by have a foot in both camp , Mr Hunt be now ideally place to bring the oppose side of the Cabinet together , and chair the nine Cabinet subcommittee - three of them Brexitrelated - that be adeptly head by Mr Green before his downfall . Mr Green , of course , be still very much in post when Mr Hunt make his comment about Brexit to LBC ' s Iain www.Dale.No one could have foresee the Westminster sexual harassment scandal that bring down Mr Green ; even the Harvey Weinstein scandal be yet to break at the time . but Mr Hunt have be tip for promotion ever since Theresa May keep him as Health Secretary in her first Cabinet in @card@ . on that occasion he enter Downing Street without his customary NHS lapel badge ? interpret as a sign that he think his time as Health Secretary be over ? but leave with the badge return to his buttonhole . he have reward Mrs May ' s patronage by loyally push on with a series of reform , and have become one of the government ' s most dependable medium performer . have lead the Department of Health for more than five year ( he would be the longestserving Health Secretary if he carry on until June ) Mr Hunt may be a hate figure for much of the NHS , but he have earn the respect of colleague for tough out such a difficult job for so long . he also serve as culture secretary for two year , encompass the London @card@ Olympic , and with five year as a shadow minister before that , Mr Hunt be one of the most experienced minister in the Cabinet . ` ` he have earn his spur , ' ' one government minister say yesterday . ` ` to keep the lid on health for nearly six year deserve reward , and he do n't really have any enemy in the Cabinet . ` ` unlike Damian Green , he can also appear on the radio and television defend Brexit , because he have be prepare to say he be wrong when he campaign for Remain . that ' S something neither Damian nor Theresa May have be able to bring themselves to do . ' ' as well as defend Brexit , he have also defend Theresa May to the hilt while other be brief against her . last month he memorably warn Tory rebel that if they do not get in line behind their leader they risk scupper Brexit altogether . in an interview on ITV ' s Peston on Sunday programme , Mr Hunt warn those consider voting against the government on the progress of the EU Withdrawal Bill : ` ` if we do n't back Theresa May we will have no Brexit - and she be do an unbelievably challenging job amazingly well . ' ' at the age of @card@ , Mr Hunt still have the energy and ambition to take on fresh challenge , without Mrs May have to look over her shoulder to check he be not about to stab her in the back . like Damian Green , Mr Hunt have never harbour serious ambition of succeed Mrs May as Prime Minister or Conservative Party leader - which can not be say for many other senior member of the Cabinet . ` ` he be a likeable chap , ' ' one Cabinet source say yesterday . ` ` he will have plenty of support from the Cabinet if he take on Damian ' s old role , and that ' S not something you could say about many minister . ` ` the Prime Minister need someone who can go into bat for her when she ' S not there , someone who can take on the workload of the Cabinet committee and make progress without threaten her authority , and Jeremy be the person who tick all those box . ' '
May urge to stick with ' clean ' Brexit
more than @card@ Eurosceptic Tory MP have warn Theresa May that she must end payment to Brussels after Brexit and resist attempt to keep the UK in the EU by ` ` stealth ' ' during a transition period . a letter , organise by Chance Britain , the Brexit-supporting lobby group , say that it would be a ` ` historic mistake ' ' to stay in the Single Market in March @card@ and state that the UK must leave the Customs Union so it be free to negotiate and sign trade deal . it will be see as part of a move to put pressure on the Prime Minister to resist call by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and other minister to try to water down her plan for a ` ` clean ' ' Brexit . the letter be circulate by Suella Fernandes , a Tory MP and leader of a Eurosceptic group of MP , who also serve as Parliamentary Private Secretary to Treasury minister . last night there be question about whether the letter represent a breach of ` ` collective responsibility ' ' because she be a member of the government . the intervention prompt a furious response from pro-European Tories , who say that the letter be try to ` ` tie the government ' s hand ' ' during a transitional period . Brexit report : page @card@
hard Brexit given force of law as May commit to end of free movement ; State Opening of Parliament a future outside Europe dominate legislation in the making as PM adamant she will get the job do
the Prime Minister have enshrine her commitment to a hard Brexit in law as she use the Queen ' s Speech to unveil legislation that will end free movement and enable the UK to strike new trade deal . Theresa May announce plan for nine new law on Brexit - equivalent to a third of the legislation in the Queen ' s Speech - as she stake her future in Downing Street on successfully negotiate Britain ' s departure from the European Union . she unveil relatively little domestic legislation after be force to abandon unpopular policy in a bid to ensure that the Queen ' s Speech pass into law and she can form a minority government . Mrs May say : ` ` we need to get Brexit right . that mean get a deal which deliver the result of last year ' S referendum and do so in a way that command maximum public support . ` ` while we will be a government that consult and listen , we be clear that we be go to see Brexit through , work with Parliament , business , the devolve administration and other to ensure a smooth and orderly withdrawal . ' ' repeal bill in one of the big legislative exercise in history , the government will formally revoke the European Communities Act of @card@ on the day that Britain leave the European Union . the government will transfer up to @card@ European law and regulation into British law in one of the big shake-up of Britain ' s statute book in history . the Bill create power for Parliament to make what be expect to be a huge number of technical amendment to EU rule and regulation to ensure they be appropriate . it will pave the way for Parliament to repeal or amend unwanted EU law after Brexit , with Tory MP call for a reduction of EU red tape . the legislation be previously refer to as the Great repeal Bill but the prefix have be drop , apparently on the order of parliamentary draftsman . Erskine May , the bible on parliamentary procedure , say a government bill must not use an ` ` argumentative title or slogan ' ' . custom and trade in a significant win for senior Eurosceptics in the government , Mrs May announce two new law that will enable Britain to strike new trade deal after it leave the European Union . a Customs Bill will enable the UK to create its own ` ` standalone ' ' customs regime - mean that it will be able to set its own tax on import good and have great control over its border . it will enable Britain to leave the EU ' S custom union and develop its own trade policy . Mrs May say that the Bill would help ` ` create a country that be strong , fair , more unite and more outwardlooking than ever before ' ' . the end of free movement the Prime Minister unveil plan for a new immigration bill that will formally bring an end to the free movement of EU national - one of the key demand of those who vote for Brexit . while pledge to ensure that Britain can still attract the ` ` bright and the good ' ' , the legislation will make ` ` EU national and their family member subject to the relevant UK law once the UK have leave the EU ' ' . the government be expect to introduce a quota system for low-skilled worker while allow the continued free movement of high-skilled worker . Downing Street say that the government still remain ` ` absolutely ' ' commit to reduce net migration to less than @card@ , although the pledge be not include in the speech . farming and fishery farmer be increasingly concern that they will lose billion of pound ' worth of EU subsidy after Brexit . minister have commit to an Agriculture Bill which will help support ` ` a thriving and more self-reliant farming sector that be more competitive , proeventually ductive and profitable ' ' . the government have pledge to match agricultural subsidy until @card@ - what happen afterwards be one of the most contentious aspect of Brexit . a new Fisheries Bill will enable Britain to control access to its water and set fishing quota , likely to become a key aspect of Brexit negotiation . other Brexit legislation Ministers have also announce a Nuclear Safeguards Bill that will ensure Britain meet international obligation after leave the EU . an international sanction law will be introduce to ensure that Britain can impose sanction on Russia and other nation . Grenfell in the wake of the Grenfell Tower disaster , a new Independent Public Advocate will be appoint to represent victim and their family . minister will also consider plan for a new Civil disaster Reaction Taskforce to help at time of emergency follow criticism of the lack of support give to victim of the fire last week . Transport Ministers have announce a package of policy that will help Britain become a ` ` global leader ' ' in driverless and electric car . motorway service and petrol station will be force to install electric charge point under the automate and Electric Charges Bill , while car insurance will be extend to self-driving car . VEYSEY James the government also unveil new power that will license a new generation of space flight from the UK , include vertically launch rocket and satellite . the legislation will also pave the way for Britain ' s first spaceport . JACKSON/ Chris MELVILLE.TOBY the new High Speed Rail Bill will enable the development of the next phase of the line from the West Midlands to Crewe . the line be expect to open in @card@ and the new law will enable the compulsory purchase of land . Holidaymakers who book online will also be give great protection under the Atol scheme , which be devise before the explosion of travel websites . law and order victim of domestic violence will no longer face direct cross-examination by their alleged abuser in family court . under the Courts Bill they will also be allow to give evidence by video so they do not have to meet their attacker face to face . minister have also announce plan to relieve pressure on court by allow those charge with less serious criminal offence to opt to plead guilty and pay a fix penalty fine online . the government have also announce plan for a new Domestic and Violence Abuse Commissioner to ` ` stand up for victim and survivor ' ' and raise public awareness . there will also be a crackdown on whiplash claim under the Civil Liability Bill , which will stop claim be settle by insurer without medical evidence . armed force the government will try to address the Armed Forces ' current recruitment crisis with a series of policy design to improve their appeal to those with young family . the legislation will enable serviceman and woman to work part-time and to avoid be deploy far from home unless there be significant operational reason . mother return from maternity leave will also be give more support to help them return to work . mental health a new Mental Health Act will ensure those suffering from mental illness be treat fairly and protect from discrimination . it be expect to consider whether too many people be be detain on mental health ground , especially black and ethnic minority . right to be forget a new Data Protection Bill will give people a ` ` right to be forget ' ' , give Facebook user a new legal right to wipe clean all photo , message and information that they put online before turn @card@ . there be concern that people ' S career prospect be be damage by comment they make as teenager . tenant ' fee bill landlord and estate agent will be bar from charge their tenant let fee amid concern that million of people who rent be be rip off . however landlord have warn that they be prepare to increase rent . patient safety amid mount concern about the scale of claim against the NHS , the-Government have announce a new Health Service Safety Investigation Body to carry out independent investigation into patient risk . it will also ban the disclosure of information hold by the new body , ` ` enable participant to be as candid as possible ' ' . Royal progress the Imperial State Crown be drive to the House of Lords yesterday for the State Opening of Parliament . the pomp for this year ' s Queen ' S Speech be scale down as the monarch arrive by car rather than carriage and dispense with the usual heavy Robes of State . the Queen later make a dash to Berkshire for the second day of racing at Royal Ascot .
French bank may quit City after Brexit , warn minister
major French bank be likely to shift some of their activity away from the City of London in the event of a vote for Brexit on June @card@ , the French finance minister have warn . Michel Sapin say that France would respect the will of the British people , but predict that a vote to leave the EU would provide a negative shock to Europe ' s nascent economic recovery as well as boost the nationalist ambition of populist political party all across the continent . while concede that the City would retain many of its traditional advantage even in the event of a Brexit , Mr Sapin say that Britain could not expect that a Brexit vote would be ` ` without effect ' ' for London as a global financial centre . ` ` we would have to wait and see which way the red carpet would be roll out , ' ' he say while at David Cameron ' s anti-corruption summit . ` ` French bank have tell me it would have consequence for them , and some activity which be the rule for French bank would not continue the way that they be ; that be what the French bank have tell me , ' ' he say . Mr Sapin do not name name , but France have a grow footprint in the City , both from the number of French expat banker work on trading floor and exchange and the presence of major player like Societe Generale , BNP Paribas and Credit Agricole . the impact of Brexit may also not be confine to French bank , with Stuart Gulliver , the HSBC chief executive , warn last month that his bank could move up to @card@ staff to Paris from its global banking and market business in the event of a leave vote . more broadly , Mr Sapin say that a Brexit vote would have political and economic consequence at a time when Europe be face its most prolonged period of economic stagnation and political upheaval since @card@ . on a positive note , Mr Sapin say that a medium-term ` ` solution be on the table ' ' to enable Greece to access its late bailout fund while retain IMF support . while reiterate France ' s position that the Eurozone must rapidly adopt move towards deep fiscal and political union , Mr Sapin say that France be determine to ensure that non-Eurozone country ` ` find their space ' ' in a more tightly integrate EU . ask if he believe Brexit would cause a domino effect , Mr Sapin say that a Brexit would give a boost to populist political movement that have gather force since the Eurozone crisis . ` ` Populist movement would be likely to say ' we want to do the same ' as the UK ' , ' ' Mr Sapin predict , add that the force of nationalism be urge a ` ` retreat ' ' behind national border that would ` ` impede the movement of capital and the movement of people ' ' . ' it would have consequence . some activity which be the rule would not continue the way that they be '
UK in talk over long transition for Brexit ; EU relax about long transition for UK
British official be in discussion with Brussels about extend the Brexit transition period to almost three year , the Daily Telegraph have learn . the official target for transition be ` ` around two year ' ' but many senior Whitehall official remain concern about the practicality of such a short exit period , give the potentially massive change that would be require by a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit . this newspaper understand that although it be not formally government policy , Britain have discreetly begin sound out senior EU figure over whether transition could be extend amid grow disarray within the Cabinet over the ultimate term of a long-term deal with the EU . Theresa May have face a series of challenge from senior government figure in recent day and be brace for another testy Cabinet session on Monday over the Brexit strategy , with some Tory MP demand that Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be move . any push to extend the transition period , which will begin when Britain formally leave the EU in March next year , be likely to lead to a fierce backlash from Brexiteers . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the leader of a 60-strong group of Eurosceptic Tory MP , tell the Telegraph yesterday that Britain be head for ` ` Brino ' ' - Brexit in name only - rather than the clean break for which the country vote . Harris talk on the transition be about to begin in earnest , and yesterday David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , say he be ` ` confident ' ' an agreement could be reach at the March meeting of the European Council . make a speech in Middlesbrough , Mr Davis say Britain would agree ` ` a strictly time-limited implementation period ' ' but do not make any mention of its length . Richard however , last night Mr Davis , Mr Hammond and Greg Clark , the Business Secretary , send a letter to business leader set out the plan for transition in which they say it would last for ` ` around two year ' ' . the EU have set a date of Dec @card@ @card@ for the end of the transition period , leave just @card@ month after Brexit for preparation for new custom and trade arrangement , which have yet to be even discuss . one EU source say the issue of extend transition hadbeen discuss , but without specify a preferred end date . a second source say the British side have raise the possibility of transition continue until Dec @card@ @card@ . one EU source with knowledge of the talk say : ` ` what difference would a year make , honestly ? ' ' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' s Brexit chief , say this week that the EU ' s current cut-off date of Dec @card@ @card@ be not ` ` a question of religion ' ' and that the Parliament could accept a period of up to three year . the British side say it remain determine to seal a deal on transition by the European Council summit on March @card@ , amid warning from business group that failure to deliver a deal by March will force them to activate Brexit contingency plan . a Government spokesman say the suggestion of a long transition period be a ` ` categoric lie ' ' . the spokesman say : ` ` the time-limited period should be determine by the length of time it take to put in place new arrangement and we believe that should be around two year . ' ' the UK be still fight to soften the term of the transition agreement , after the EU agree a toughen set of guideline that , if turn into legal agreement , would mean EU citizen who arrive in the UK right up until the end of the transition period would be eligible to apply for full settle status . the Telegraph understand that the UK be seek up to eight concession , include assurance over implementation of EU rule , EU citizen ' right and British representation on important EU committee . the EU have signal that it be in no mood to grant such request .
Dublin hold the key to Britain ' s post-Brexit future , say Tusk
Donald TUSK , the President of the European Council , last night warn Britain that the key to its future be hold by Dublin , as he heap pressure on Theresa May to prevent a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic after Brexit . speak in Dublin alongside Leo Varadkar , Ireland ' s prime minister , Mr Tusk say that talk over a future UKEU trade deal or a transition agreement would not happen without Irish backing . ` ` if the UK offer be unacceptable for Ireland , it will also be unacceptable for the EU , ' ' say Mr Tusk , who chair meeting of EU leader in the Council . ` ` I realise that for some British politician this may be hard to understand , ' ' Mr Tusk say yesterday . ` ` but such be the logic behind the fact that Ireland be the EU member while the UK be leave . ' ' after speak in Irish and before share a warm handshake with Mr Varadkar , Mr Tusk add : ` ` this be why the key to the UK ' s future lie , in some way in Dublin , at least as long as the Brexit negotiation continue . ' ' the stark reminder be issue just day before Mr Tusk ' S deadline - which be set last Friday after meet Theresa May in Brussels for Britain to make ` ` sufficient progress ' ' on the three issue of the Brexit bill , Ireland and citizen ' right - expire on Monday . when Britain leave the EU on March @card@ @card@ , the invisible border between Ireland and Northern Ireland will become an external border with the EU . without an agreement in place , Brexit risk disrupt vital and frequent cross-border trade with custom control that could inflame dormant tension quell by the peace process . on Monday , Mrs May will meet Jean-Claude Juncker , the President of the European Commission , in Brussels for a ` ` work lunch ' ' in a bid to work through ` ` sufficient progress ' ' before a crunch Dec @card@ European Council summit . the EU be refuse to talk trade until the sufficient progress hurdle be clear on all three issue . the Daily Telegraph exclusively reveal this week that agreement in principle have be reach over the EU ' s demand for a ( Euro ) 60billion ( £53billion ) reckoning for Brexit . EU diplomat also believe that a ` ` landing zone ' ' will be find on citizen ' right despite the EU ' s contentious insistence that the European Court of Justice remain the final arbiter of the right of the three million EU expats live in Britain . however , Dublin have be firm that Britain must provide workable and credible way to guarantee that the currently frictionless border between Ireland and Northern Ireland be preserve no matter the result of the Brexit negotiation . if the EU decide that sufficient progress have not be make , vital trade talk will be delay , for a second time , until March @card@ . that date be a year after Mrs May trigger the Brexit process and a year before the two year negotiation period for the UK-EU divorce elapse . ` ` the border , ' ' say Mr Tusk last night , ` ` be no longer a symbol of division , it be a symbol of cooperation and we can not allow Brexit to destroy this achievement of the Good Friday Agreement . ' ' he add : ` ` the UK decision to leave the EU have create uncertainty for million of people in Europe , perhaps nowhere be this more visible than here . ' ' Mr Varadkar tell reporter : ` ` Irish concern be very much Europe ' S concern . the EU be a family and a family stick together . ' ' the Irish prime minister say the simple solution would be for the UK to remain in the single market and custom union , which would avoid the need for a hard border . Charles Moore : page @card@
Spaniard take swipe at May for ' forget about Gibraltar ' ; Road to Brexit
Theresa May ' S Government appear to have ` ` more important thing ' ' to worry about than the fate of @card@ Gibraltarian , accord to Spanish source , who claim that Gibraltar would crash out of the single market without the cushion of a Brexit transition deal . after Mrs May trigger the Brexit negotiation in March , the EU blindside the British government by insist that any Brexit deal could only apply to Gibraltar if Spain agree . the EU-27 negotiate mandate effectively take Madrid ' s side in the centuries-old territorial dispute over the rock . Senior Spanish government source be report to have say the British government have make no proposal at all to it regard the future of Gibraltar . in a thinly veil swipe as Mrs May ' S struggle since she lose the Conservative majority at the general election , the source say : ` ` I honestly believe they have other more important issue . ' ' they insist that the effective Spanish veto over a Brexit deal for Gibraltar also apply to any UK-EU transition deal design to soften the blow of leave the single market and custom union . the Daily Telegraph ask the European Commission , which be handle negotiation on behalf of the EU-27 , if it agree with the Spanish analysis . official point to the negotiate mandate , which read : ` ` after the United Kingdom leave the Union , no agreement between the EU and the United Kingdom may apply to the territory of Gibraltar without the agreement between the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom . ' ' Mrs May ' S spokesman have say : ` ` The [ Brexit ] deal must work for Gibraltar , too . ' ' a spokesman for the government of Gibraltar refuse to comment . however , Fabian Picardo , Gibraltar ' s prime minister , have previously say that a hard Brexit would pose an ` ` existential threat ' ' to the island . ' I honestly believe the British have more important issue to worry about '
' Brexit may make it easy to prevent slavery ' ; Head of UK commission into human trafficking say enhanced border control could help stop criminal
BREXIT could make it easy for Britain to help prevent human trafficking , the independent anti-slavery commissioner have say . Kevin Hyland OBE , a former police officer of @card@ year experience , tell the Daily Telegraph the UK be lead the fight against modern slavery and would do so ` ` before or after Brexit ' ' . and he suggest enhanced border control after the country leave the UK could even improve the country ' s ability to keep tab on people . he also say that Brexit should have no impact ` ` whatsoever ' ' on its partnership with Europol , the EU ' s law enforcement agency . it come after campaigner claim that leave the EU would make it ` ` impossible ' ' to tackle slavery and human trafficking due to a loss of regulation and funding from Brussels . ` ` if you look at the real fact and figure , there ' S nothing at the moment that suggest any change , [ with ] the presence of Brexit loom , ' ' say Mr Hyland . ` ` for the UK fight modern slavery , we have create legislation . we ' ve create an anti-slavery commissioner , we ' ve get life imprisonment sentence for human trafficker . the legislation be still new and I want it to be more effective , but this be a piece of UK legislation and it will remain before or after Brexit . ' ' ` ` I know the relationship [ with Europol ] have to change , for a number of reason . but I ' ve work with , in my past role , country like the US , Thailand and India . when an offence happen , with those country we have mutual legal assistance treaty . we will still have a relationship with Europol . ' ' on the issue of free movement , Mr Hyland suggest enhanced border control could help keep tab on people who be vulnerable to people trafficking , but add it be ` ` too early to say what effect it will have . ' ' ` ` we do n't know what the term and condition be and how it be go to be manage . if that be all manage well , and govern well , it could actually create a process whereby we know who ' s come in and where they ' re working , ' ' he say . Mr Hyland , the former head of the Metropolitan Police ' s anti-human trafficking unit , say the UK police force already have strong link with other force worldwide . in term of the EU he say : ` ` a lot of the victim that will arrive in the UK will have go through several European country before they arrive . so it ' S also important we have those relationship and there ' s no reason whatsoever why that do n't remain . we have to step outside of whether it ' S an EU or non-EU issue . it ' S a global crime . ' ' an estimated 45million people worldwide live in slavery . there be around @card@ potential victim in the UK . it affect thousand , lure to Britain and force to work long hour in horrific condition with little or no pay . the independent anti-slavery commission , the first of its kind worldwide , be set up by Theresa May , who appoint Mr Hyland to hold the government to account .
EU ' s dire warning over regulation do n't match the economic reality
shortly before he be sack in @card@ , a colleague and I interview Martin Wheatley , then-head of the Financial Conduct Authority , for the Wall Street Journal . the City be debate Brexit and we want to know what he think about the risk , as a regulator . expect dire warning , we be surprise when he declare : ` ` in the short term , not as much would change as you might think ... we ' ve operate reasonably successfully , as a number of country have , outside of the eurozone , so it ' S not to say that there be n't a model that can work but it ' S a different model . ' ' shortly afterwards , he be fire by George Osborne . he would have be sack anyway , but his rather honest assessment of Brexit ' S impact probably do n't help . yesterday , two year after that interview , Andrew Bailey , the current FCA chief , make his own contribution to the Brexit debate . his view ? Brexit require an institutional rearrangement , but should not fundamentally threaten the UK or EU ' s ability to cooperate on financial regulation and keep market open . ` ` Does [ Brexit ] require membership of the single market to get the benefit of free trade with the EU ? no , ' ' he say . protectionism and close off market ` ` be not a necessary response to the choice of Brexit ' ' , he add . in order to understand why Mr Bailey be right , it ' S helpful to know the current arrangement . at the moment , the framework for international financial regulation be agree at forum like the Financial Stability Board and Iosco , which be nothing to do with the EU . it be the FSB ' s Basel committee that come up with the Basel capital rule , a major regulatory response to the financial crisis . within the FSB , the UK be a heavyweight and respected contributor in its own right . the FSB rule be then pass down to the EU and regulator everywhere else . in Brussels , member state thrash out important detail of how to implement the framework . and then , national supervisor like the FCA ensure that the rule be implement and follow . this deep level of cooperation within the EU have help to build a consensus for open up financial market and try to keep them open . they remain much less open than the EU like to claim , but be free than they have ever be in the past . the UK have accept both this and some US involvement in supervise firm in London as a quid pro quo for open market . it be easy to see how , post-Brexit , these arrangement could be adjust to ensure that the EU and UK continue to cooperate on financial service regulation . the UK will still be intimately involve in the FSB , Iosco and other forum . thereafter , the difference be that Britain will decide for itself how to implement those framework and will negotiate cross-border arrangement with the EU from the outside , rather than inside . as both Mr Wheatley and Mr Bailey have point out , the UK be unlikely to embark on a regulatory bonfire and , indeed , often make rule much tough than the international framework require . it should therefore be possible for Brussels and London to agree that their financial regime be both highly rigorous , to set up a mechanism for how to resolve any future divergence or dispute , and to allow EU-UK trade to continue unimpeded . at the same time as Mr Bailey be deliver his speech in Canary Wharf , however , Michel Barnier , the EU Brexit negotiator , be give his own oration across the Channel in Brussels . Mr Barnier ' S message be very different from Mr Bailey ' S . ` ` you can not leave the single market and then opt in to those sector you like most - say , the automobile industry and financial service , ' ' he say . ` ` [ some ] argue that one can leave the single market and keep all of its benefit - that be not possible . ' ' as far as financial service be concern , Mr Bailey disagree . he argue it be possible to keep market open without be inside the single market , provide the UK and EU be prepare to cooperate on regulation . the UK , Mr Bailey have indicate , certainly be . the EU begin to recognise the importance of cooperate with non-EU country several year ago , in an initiative that Mr Barnier himself lead . it start with the need for EU client to use derivative trade platform provide by US firm , for which they need EU regulatory authorisation . the EU therefore build something call the ` ` equivalence ' ' regime . its regulator would assess whether or not US rule govern its derivative platform be as rigorous as the EU ' S . this be an arduous process but , eventually , the US be indeed deem equivalent in this area , free up derivative market . what the UK now face be a long , tortuous tussle over equivalence . it wo n't always be easy and Britain will have to argue its case constantly against protectionist or destructive demand , but the basis for cooperate to keep market open already exist . the alternative be that the EU decide to single out Britain for particularly punish treatment . proponent of this approach claim that London can not use the ` ` equivalence ' ' regime and need special , disadvantageous treatment because the eurozone be so reliant on its market . but freeze out London while cooperate with New York will simply push activity to the US , over which the EU have very little influence . the EU face the same choice over clearing . we be tell over and over by naysayer that clearing would be ` ` stripped ' ' from London if Britain vote leave . but when the new rule come out last month , Brussels have blink . after all the rhetoric , it settle just for give its regulator the potential power to force euro clearing house to move into the EU - a power that be unlikely to actually be use because it will impose huge cost on European firm . so Mr Barnier can issue ` ` wake-up call ' ' and warning , if he like . but the economic reality be that EU and UK financial regulator need to work together for our mutual benefit . it wo n't always be a harmonious working relationship , but it will work . the only alternative be for the EU to shoot itself in the foot by cut its firm off from the world ' s big financial centre . ' the economic reality be that EU and UK financial regulator need to work together for our mutual benefit '
health care pledge for UK tourist ; Briton guarantee free treatment in Europe as Davis set out negotiate position on migrant right ; Pensioners offer Brexit guarantee
British tourist will be guarantee free health cover when they be on holiday in the EU , David Davis have disclose , as the government prepare to publish its detailed Brexit negotiate position on migrant ' right . the Brexit Secretary will ask the EU to continue with the current European Health Insurance Card ( EHIC ) scheme , and say that if Brussels refuse , the government will foot the £155million a year bill . Mr Davis give fresh detail of what will be in a 12-page document send to the EU today set out Britain ' s position on migrant right , which will form the basis for tough head-to-head negotiation over the come week . he say EU citizen will have to undergo criminal record check when they apply for ` ` settled status ' ' that will allow them to remain in Britain for life and promise to deport anyone who be consider undesirable . after Brexit , the Home Secretary will only have to prove that remove EU citizen would be ` ` conducive to the public good ' ' in order to deport them rather than prove that they be a serious threat to the ` ` fundamental interest ' ' of society as the current EU directive require . Mr Davis also reiterate the government ' s so-called red line on judicial oversight of migrant ' right , say the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) would have no jurisdiction over EU citizen live in the UK after Brexit . a week after Brexit negotiation officially get under way , the government will today publish its negotiate position on the right of three million EU citizen live in the UK and one million Briton live in the EU - the first detailed paper on any aspect of its Brexit stance . last week Theresa May set out the broad outline of the deal she be offer migrant , say EU citizen already live here would be give the same right as Briton but without any oversight from the ECJ . Mr Davis put meat on the bone yesterday as he be interview on BBC one ' S the Andrew Marr Show , say : ` ` we ' re look to see if we can get a continuation of the EHIC scheme as it now exist and , of course , if we ca n't get one then we would provide one unilaterally . ' ' Whitehall source confirm that if the EHIC scheme be scrap , a new arrangement would begin on the day Britain leave the EU so that traveller ` ` wo n't notice any difference ' ' . critic suggest that Mr Davis have damage his negotiate hand by admit that Britain would pay for traveller ' health insurance if the EU do not keep the EHIC scheme . Tom Brake , the Liberal Democrat MP , say : ` ` this show how desperate the government be . they have fail to plan properly for Brexit and be now willing to let British taxpayer pick up the piece . ` ` David Davis inspire about as much confidence as a drunken trapeze artist , continue on Page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ but it be the country as a whole that will suffer when he come crash to the floor . ' ' Mr Davis also say the government would ` ` unilaterally ' ' guarantee that British citizen live in the EU would continue to receive index-linked state pension . the Brexit Secretary admit he could not be ` ` @card@ per cent sure ' ' a deal would be agree , say : ` ` at the end of the day the key in any negotiation , it ' S not about sort of macho clash of antler , it ' S about find the place that suit both side and that be what we be about . ' ' he say he believe European leader would come under pressure from ` ` the German car industry , Bavarian farmer , French farmer , Italian white good manufacturer , you name it ' ' to strike a trade deal because the EU have a £60billion trade surplus with the UK . although there be no way the government will allow the ECJ to have any say over citizen ' right , Mr Davis say , it be possible there would be an ` ` arbitration arrangement ' ' as part of transitional arrangement . baroness Chakrabarti , the shadow attorney general , say Labour might not have ` ` complete control ' ' over migration if it get into power , and even suggest some form of free movement might continue . she say : ` ` it may be call something else but what it be call do n't matter . what be important be that job come first , the economy come first and that mean get tariff-free access to the single market and the formality we will negotiate . ' ' meanwhile , the archbishop of Canterbury urge Theresa May to set up a cross-party commission to advise her to ` ` draw much of the poison ' ' from the debate . write in the Mail on Sunday , the Rt Rev Justin Welby warn that it would be a ` ` disaster ' ' if Britain ' S negotiator go into bat against the ` ` united determination of the EU ' ' without know they have the full confidence of the people . but Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary , reject the archbishop ' S argument , tell BBC Radio Five Live : ` ` this be n't about commission ... our job as government now be obviously secure the right deal for the country and not rerun those argument of Remain and leave from last year . ' '
a positive attitude and united front will make a big difference to Brexit ; as the popular mood turn towards make a success of our departure , the sniping should be stop
as Winston Churchill observe , ` ` attitude be a little thing that make a big difference ' ' . it ' S time , on all side of the Brexit debate , to stop carp and unite to deliver the good deal for Britain . sure , a vocal but dwindle minority of diehard Remain MP and unelected peer will continue to predict doom and try to trip Brexit up . but they be pit themselves squarely against the popular mood . accord to YouGov , the public be now commit by three to one to respect the referendum , however they vote , and make Brexit work . in Scotland , that view hold , too , by two to one - with an even large proportion of Remain voter resolve to see Brexit through than across the rest of Britain . just @card@ per cent of Scots back Nicola Sturgeon ' s SNP in seek to frustrate the process . during the roller-coaster of Brexit negotiation , this grow moderate majority need to be guardian of the nation ' s blood pressure , avoid over-reacting to every bump along the way . take the economic good news last week . somehow , record employment datum , dip inflation and Google ' s announcement of £1 billion of fresh investment in the UK be eclipse by medium furore over a fake memo by Deloitte , dress up as a critical review of the government ' s Brexit preparation . it be a classic triumph of tittle-tattle over what really matter . similarly , we risk miss positive political development . for all the understandable concern around the US election , President Trump will offer Britain the opportunity of a free-trade deal shun by Barack Obama , as well as present ( more regrettably ) a key role in shore up our European ally within Nato . and last week the German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , publicly signal her flexibility on free movement , a significant diplomatic move before formal Brexit talk - or German election - have even begin . as more and more Remainers make their peace with the referendum result , we Brexiteers need to avoid sound miserly . at home and on the continent , we ' ve leave people in little doubt as to what we ' re against . they be less clear about what we ' re for . I support the @card@ Conservative MP who have say publicly that Britain should leave the custom union , because we ca n't deliver on the Prime Minister ' s ambition to end free movement and the jurisdiction of the European Court , or make Britain a global leader in free trade , without do so . but we also need to set out a positive and optimistic vision of the UK ' s relationship with the EU after Brexit - for the British people , and our European friend . Britain ' S ambition should be to prove we can be an even well European neighbour , free from the fetter of the flawed political club . Let ' s start talk the language of friendship with a great generosity of spirit . for its part , the government be wise to avoid dripfeeding its negotiate stance into the public domain , which would just offer critic - at home and on the continent - a target for their daily sniping . equally , the Prime Minister have commit to spell out the high-level principle guide our negotiate strategy by the new year . that will be crucial to communicate a compelling , positive offer we can take to Brussels . what should that package include ? our top negotiate priority should be to avoid new barrier to trade - base on rational , economic and mutual selfinterest . we should n't just be take this message to European www.governments.UK politician and business leader should be permanently tour Europe , speak to industry , business group and union , make the case for maintain our current trading tie , and avoid the harm that protectionist measure would inflict on UK and - disproportionately - European profit and job . we need to be equally clear , with diplomatic brow duly furrow , that we take no solace from the fact that apply the EU ' s external tariff would bring in £8 billion more to the UK than the EU in tariff revenue . it ' s not what we want . Brussels would have to force us into such a retrograde move . second , as a net contributor to EU justice and home affair cooperation , Britain should offer to maintain - and enhance - our commitment to collaborate on security matter . from data-sharing to joint police investigation at Europol , depart from the EU be no bar to operational law-enforcement cooperation . we must leave our fellow European in no doubt that Britain be loath to abandon them in the aftermath of the terrorist attack in Brussels and Paris . likewise , we stand shoulder to shoulder in solidarity with our Baltic and eastern European ally in the face of the increasingly bellicose Russian president , Vladimir Putin - whatever President Trump do . third , rule out acceptance of EU free movement hardly preclude sensible reciprocal arrangement on immigration . we can offer visa waiver for tourism and business trip , flexible term to allow recruitment of top European talent by UK company and a permit system for skilled labour . between open-door immigration and pull up the drawbridge , there be ample scope for a deal that preserve UK national control over the volume of immigration , as well as the sensitive rule on skill eligibility , welfare entitlement , residence condition and security check . the public have see with its own eye that Remain ' s referendum forecast of economic Armageddon post-Brexit be partisan propaganda . they now yearn for some unity of purpose to make the good of Brexit , and mitigate the real risk and genuine uncertainty that be inherent in the process . accord to ComRes , two third of Briton feel positive about Britain ' s post-Brexit future . meanwhile , a survey this month by US consultancy Synechron find that @card@ per cent of UK banker believe London will still be the financial centre of Europe in five year ' time . forget the medium froth , there be quiet but grow confidence that the UK will thrive outside the EU . Britain be strong enough to withstand the economic buffet of Brexit , and we should be confident enough to make a generous overture to our European friend . now , we need a positive attitude and a unite front , reach out across the overwhelming majority who want to make Brexit work , however they vote back in June . with a Churchillian dose of stubborn optimism , we can grasp the kind of deal most people want - and see Britain go from strength to strength . Dominic Raab be the Conservative MP for Esher & Walton Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Government in turmoil over ECJ influence ; Prime Minister at odd with Whitehall over end of foreign judicial supremacy when Britain leave the EU
Theresa May have be contradict by her own official over the future status of the European Court of Justice after they say it could still hold sway over British court after Brexit . as the Brexit department publish a key negotiate paper on the role of the Luxembourg-based court , the Prime Minister insist that ` ` when we leave the EU we will be leave the jurisdiction of the ECJ ' ' . but in an official briefing to journalist at almost the same time , Whitehall official say the ECJ could still have supremacy over Britain ' s court during the transition period follow Brexit in March @card@ . they say an independent body that will arbitrate over post-Brexit dispute between the EU and the UK must be in place before the ECJ ' s jurisdiction in the UK can be end . there be no guarantee that the arbitration service would be ready by the withdrawal date . Labour say it amount to an admission that Mrs May ' s ` ` red line ' ' on end the ECJ ' S authority be ` ` completely untenable ' ' , while the Liberal Democrats describe it as a ` ` climbdown ' ' by the government . it come after the Daily Telegraph disclose that Britain could be bind by future decision of the ECJ in perpetuity , despite Brexit , if it adopt arbitration arrangement outline in the same document . the ECJ be the high legal authority over law that be generate by the EU , and can overrule Britain ' S Supreme Court on matter of EU law . end its influence be one of the key plank of the leave campaign . on a visit to a bus factory in Guildford , Surrey , Mrs May say : ` ` when we leave the EU we will be leave the jurisdiction of the ECJ . we will be able to make our own law . it will be British judge who interpret those law and the Supreme Court that be the ultimate arbiter of those law . ' ' however , official from the Brexit department be rather more equivocal during an official briefing for journalist . they refer to a section of the position paper that say : ` ` the UK will work with the EU on the design of the interim period , include the arrangement for judicial supervision , enforcement and dispute resolution . ' ' Earlier , Dominic Raab , the justice minister , say that the UK will keep ` ` half an eye ' ' on the ruling of the ECJ after Brexit . he tell the BBC : ` ` ultimately we may need some form of international arbitration . typically widespread practice be that the UK would appoint an arbitrator , the EU an arbitrator , both side might appoint a third . that ' S the balanced way you make sure both side have confidence in the process . ` ` Dominic Grieve , the pro-European former attorney general , say the ECJ will continue to have a ` ` profound influence ' ' after Brexit . he say it be ` ` pie in the sky ' ' to think Britain can escape its influence . but Jacob Rees-Mogg , the Conservative MP , say there be ` ` no legal basis ' ' for the ECJ to have any power in the UK after Brexit . editorial comment : page @card@
labour in a muddle over free movement ; Shadow Brexit secretary flip-flop within hour of say EU migrant ' unfettered entry must end
a FLAGSHIP Labour pledge to end free movement immediately unravel yesterday after the party state that European Union migrant should be able to come to Britain as long as they have a job offer . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , appear to be at odd with Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , by announce ` ` free movement have to go ' ' . however , the pledge crumble within hour as he subsequently say there should be ` ` free movement of labour ' ' , add that ` ` we must have immigration ' ' for the economy . Labour ' s commitment to Brexit be further question after one shadow minister say the party could keep Britain in the EU if Brussels offer ` ` significant reform ' ' . Theresa May say that Labour ' s position on leave the EU be ` ` nonsensical ' ' and ridicule Sir Keir ' s announcement as the party ' s ` ` seventh Brexit plan ' ' . Sir Keir attempt to harden the party line on Brexit and immigration , with poll suggest Mrs May be poise to make huge inroad into Labour ' s northern heartland . ` ` the Labour Party can not spend all its time try to rub out yesterday and not accept the result . we accept it , we respect it . ' ' he add : ` ` we recognise that immigration rule will have to change as we exit the EU , but we do not believe that immigration should be the overarching priority . ' ' in a subsequent interview , Sir Keir say that business will go bankrupt without free movement of labour . he tell the BBC ' S John Pienaar : ` ` we must have immigration that work for our community and for our economy . and that mean that there have to be a movement of people to come and work in this country . ' ' the party ' s commitment to Brexit be question after shadow Brexit minister Paul Blomfield say Britain may not leave the EU if Brussels address the concern of voter . ` ` that ' s a whole new ball game , ' ' he say . Labour also vow to retain and ` ` fully protect ' ' all EU law and red tape after Brexit , include keep the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which have be heavily criticise for help criminal avoid deportation. . Sir Keir also say Labour would ` ` unilaterally ' ' guarantee the right of EU migrant live in the UK on ` ` day one ' ' . he say he want to give MP the power to veto any Brexit deal and send negotiator ` ` back to the table ' ' but concede there will have to be an ` ` end point ' ' at which Britain leave . it come as a leak General Election script for Labour MP show that the party will direct its campaign focus on school , social care and the NHS rather than immigration , defence and Brexit . immigration be not mention , while MP be tell to say the election be not a ` ` rerun of the EU referendum ' ' . Labour will today unveil plan to give nurse and NHS staff a pay rise cost more than £1billion - without say how it will fund the policy . it will also announce the return of collective bargaining for public sector union . Mr Corbyn yesterday meet Jeremy Heywood , the Cabinet Secretary , to discuss the transition to government in the event of a Labour victory . editorial comment : page @card@ right EU national tell not to apply for residency EU national be be discourage by the Home Office from apply for permanent residence in the UK after more than @card@ application be receive last year . the decision not to guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK until reciprocal arrangement be agree for Briton live in Europe have lead to fear that there could be a surge in application . guidance post on the Home Office website urge people not to apply and to instead sign up to receive an email alert which will inform them of any change to their circumstance . the guidance state : ` ` there will be no change to the right and status of EU national live in the UK while the UK remain in the EU . under EU law you do n't need a document to confirm your residence status in the UK . ' ' Theresa May have say she want the right of EU citizen in the UK and Briton live on the continent to be resolve early on during Brexit talk . but she face considerable pressure to act unilaterally and guarantee their future .
Scotland Jamie ' s Italian nightmare ( and Brexit ' S to blame )
Jamie Oliver have be ridicule after blame Brexit for ruin his business , in a week that have see the economy booming as the FTSE @card@ hit new high . yesterday the chef announce that six of his @card@ Jamie ' s Italian restaurant in Britain will close , in a move affect @card@ staff . his company , Jamie Oliver Restaurant Group , say a ` ` tough ' ' market and uncertainty after the Brexit vote have raise pressure . his claim come as the economy be beat off gloomy forecast , with the FTSE @card@ , the index of Britain ' s big company , see its long streak of record since @card@ , close at @card@ point yesterday . last night influential figure in politics and the restaurant industry cast doubt over whether Brexit be the reason behind Oliver ' S decision , suggest failing within his own business may be to blame . Aldo Zilli , a chef and Italian restaurant chain owner , tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` how can you blame Brexit for close restaurant ? ours have be @card@ per cent up since the vote . ` ` his service be not as great as other Italian restaurant and they be not as authentic as other , which believe in import food from the right region in Italy . ' ' Andrew Bridgen , the Conservative MP , say Oliver , who have a history of restaurant closure , be use Brexit as an ` ` easy scapegoat ' ' and that he ` ` may have to look closer to home ' ' . business : page @card@
Hammond : I ' m here to stay ; put off runway decision for a year will cost million , say MP
Philip Hammond have tell Theresa May that he will continue to make clear the ` ` economic reality ' ' of Brexit and will not quit the Cabinet . the Chancellor have tell the Prime Minister directly that he will not stand down after Cabinet colleague accuse him of ` ` undermine Brexit ' ' . he will defend his warning about the potential risk today during an appearance before MP on the Treasury select committee . an ally of Mr Hammond tell the Daily Telegraph that he have make it ` ` absolutely clear ' ' to the Prime Minister that he will not stand down as Chancellor . the source say that Mr Hammond believe he be the ` ` right man for difficult time ' ' and will not be ` ` push about ' ' by Brexit minister . he will not formally rule out any option for post-Brexit Britain until after long-standing view that be already a matter of public record and to pass on the view of your constituent if they be directly affect . ' ' Grant Shapps , former chairman of the Conservative Party , say the fact a final decision would not be make for at least a year be ` ` very disappointing ' ' and would cost business ` ` million ' ' . he say : ` ` we be go to have another year or more of fudge . it mean that in this post-Brexit world , we be not able to get out and sell Britain to the world . ' ' the decision to put off the final decision surprise critic of Heathrow , who have be expect the government to hold a snap vote in Parliament . it come after decade of delay over airport expansion . Mr Cameron , the former prime minister , provoke anger from business leader earlier this year when he delay the decision oamid concern it would jeopardise Tory chance of win the London mayorality . Downing Street source deny there have be a delay in build the runway and insist there be always go to be a consultation before the matter be put to Parliament . Mrs May ' S comment suggest she will refuse to hold a free vote on expand Heathrow in the commons , raise the prospect that minister could take a leave of absence rather than vote against their will . she add in her letter : ` ` I do not want minister with a long record of oppose whichever scheme be choose , or whose constituency be directly affect , to be put in an uncomfortable position . ' ' the Prime Minister make clear the choice on the government ' s preferred option would be make not by the full Cabinet but by the airport sub-committee - on which neither Mr Johnson nor Ms Greening nor any other London MP sit . a Downing Street source say : ` ` as the Prime Minister say in her letter the sub-committee meeting will decide the preferred scheme later this month . ' ' it come as the government face a rebellion from Conservative MP in the South East if it push ahead with a third runway at Heathrow . Zac Goldsmith , the Conservative MP for Richmond Park , have say he will resign his seat and run as an independent if Heathrow be expand . he be support by Tania Mathias , the Conservative MP for Twickenham . airport capacity where the lead player stand Justine Greening the Education Secretary have be a staunch opponent of Heathrow . ask if she would continue to block expansion while in the Cabinet she say earlier this year : ` ` it ' s a debate that I ' m still aim to win . ' ' her Putney constituency be near the airport . Boris Johnson the Foreign Secretary , a west London MP , have be explicit in his desire to see Heathrow expansion block , once promise to lie down in front of bulldozer . last month he say the project be a fantasy and should be ` ` consign to the dustbin ' ' . Philip Hammond The Chancellor and former transport secretary back Gatwick in @card@ , add : ` ` the need for more capacity at London ' s airport system be undeniable , but the idea that this have to mean four-runway airport need to be challenge . ' '
confused rhetoric be rattle the City again
as far as the City of London be concern , this have n't be a good week . banker , fund manager and big , international company list on the stock exchange have become increasingly bad at decipher politics at the good of time , but the garble nature of the message they ' ve be receive from Birmingham have n't help . it ' S not just that the pound be down again as there be pro and con to this ( though it would be stupidity to deny that too much turmoil on the market be bad ) . the big problem be that the mood music have deteriorate again . this should n't be exaggerate : in the UK as a whole , business confidence have shoot up again . all of the survey be far more positive and while a bad month for oil and gas hit industrial production in August , manufacturing creep up . the National Institute of Economic and Social Research believe that GDP rise by 0.4pc in the third quarter . the economy be fine - but the City be n't . it ' s scared and nervous . so what be go on ? Brexit mean Brexit , as Theresa May have be say for weeks.But for some reason many in the City do n't quite believe her . the confirmation that she would indeed be trigger Article @card@ by March be interpret as significant news by some . Brexit , as astonishing as this may seem , be n't fully price in until now . next , the frenzy of claim and counterclaim about what Brexit may or may not mean have reach a new paroxysm , fuel by an information vacuum and a misunderstanding as to how the May Government actually work . there have be endless story about ` ` hard ' ' versus ` ` soft ' ' Brexit , and intervention from various Cabinet minister apparently contradict one another . everybody be hear what they want to hear . the truth be that , apart from the fact that there will be control on immigration ( detail unknown ) and that the European Court of Justice will no longer be our supreme court ( the implication of which we still do n't know ) , we be completely in the dark about what the government want to achieve . we do n't even know whether the government want to quit the custom union , with some claim that a hybrid model could work . even the ECJ rejection do n't really rule out an ` ` European Economic Area minus ' ' model . the Prime Minister , and nobody else , will decide in due course what her goal be - and the actual shape of Brexit will be determine by negotiation , so absolutely nobody can predict its final form . the next big worry be that for the opportunity of Brexit to be maximise , and the cost minimise , the UK need free-market policy at home and abroad . we may well get the latter , but the former be in doubt for the time be . May ' s embrace of big government Christian Democracy be striking , though it be unclear how the current direction of travel will change . the Chancellor , Philip Hammond , be send out a very different message . so which be it to be ? we need a shift in rhetoric and action to make it clear to car firm and bank that they can thrive here , regardless of any protectionism from the EU post-Brexit , and to attract more such business . it ' s legitimate for a country to decide to control immigration , as every non-EU country in the world do . but what be utterly wrong be the idea ( first float , paradoxically , by Ed Miliband ) that company that employ a lot of migrant will be name and shame , or for politician to claim that migrant be take job . they may , in some industry , be depress wage , but that be different . migrant be also undoubtedly increase wage in other industry , and without them many employer would n't exist . it ' S a complex picture that need to be treat sensitively . this dangerous conflation between control number of new entrant and bash existing , employ migrant have also rattle the City . the government ' S statement on business , interventionism and migrant worker have be damaging and have be compound by a communication vacuum . they have contribute to sterling ' S slide and a renewed angst over Brexit . this could hurt the real economy and be deeply counter-productive : the government need to recalibrate , and fast . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk ' The UK economy be fine - but the City be n't . it be scared and nervous '
Scotland more than half a million EU national could lose the right to remain after Brexit
more than half a million EU national will be force to leave Britain after Brexit , accord to the late analysis . under exist rule those who have live continuously in Britain for at least five year automatically have a permanent right to reside . the Social Market Foundation say @card@ EU national currently live in the UK , equivalent to a population the size of Glasgow , would not meet the residency requirement if Article @card@ be trigger next year and Britain leave the EU by @card@ . give the ` ` likely protracted nature ' ' of Brexit , the think tank add it be ` ` probable ' ' that all EU citizen who arrive in the UK before @card@ will have permanent residency right by the time Brexit actually occur . the report say it would be ` ` very difficult , if not impossible ' ' for the government to change its permanent residency criterion before Brexit and deny these people the right to stay . it find that by @card@ more than @card@ per cent of the @card@ million EU citizen currently live in the UK would meet the five-year requirement . Emran Mian , the foundation ' S director , say : ` ` the government should now provide its own analysis and articulate a plan for start discussion . ` ` until it do , EU resident live in the UK , the business which employ them and the community in which they live , be subject to uncertainty which will become more worrying as time go on . ' ' Theresa May be under pressure from Tory Eurosceptics to deliver ` ` hard Brexit ' ' that would result in EU citizen lose their right to come automatically to the UK in future . during the Tory leadership contest , the Prime Minister face a backlash after refuse to guarantee the right of almost three million EU national . last week Mrs May tell nearly @card@ Pole live in the UK that she ` ` want and expect ' ' them to remain in the country after Brexit . ' EU resident and business which employ them be subject to uncertainty which will become more worrying '
use radical idea to energise a free Britain
British factory production be at a 22-year high , there be record employment , and the UK have the high level of foreign direct investment in Europe . we all support Brexit , but if Vote leave have tell us before the referendum this would be the economic news after a leave vote , even we would have be sceptical . yet , a year on , that ' s exactly what ' S happen . so why then be Brexit still be treat as a problem we ca n't wait to be rid of rather than an opportunity to be seize ? this be n't about say I-told-you-so to Remain supporter - they be as concern about our country ' s future as us and deserve respect . nor be it about put head in the sand and pretend Brexit pose no challenge . but support Brexit be too often portray as a vote to turn back the clock . nothing could be further from the truth . for us , the referendum be about two competing vision of Britain ' S future - and we be excite about our prospect as a dynamic , global , independent nation . it be vital we start emphasise this optimistic vision . because if we sleepwalk into see the next two year as an exercise in damage limitation , we will wake up to find a once-in-a-generation opportunity have slip through our finger . and , like it or not , that failure will be blame on us conservative . if we lose confidence in Brexit as a party , we should n't be surprise if the British people lose confidence in us . in five key area the government must use this Parliament to make sure that do n't happen . the first be trade . free of the custom union , we can use our new power to link our exporter to dynamic growth around the world . simultaneously , the government should scrap the tariff protect EU special interest , a move that would instantly lower price for British shopper . second , immigration . not one of us believe in pull up the drawbridge to international talent . but , by refuse to give the public a say on how low-skill immigration be manage , the EU have cause faith in the system to collapse . by introduce a humane , controlled immigration regime that recognise talent and show compassion , we have an opportunity to regain the public trust necessary to reinvigorate British internationalism and once again become a beacon for the world ' s bright . next come regulation . just like company , government innovate good when they compete . it ' S not surprising , therefore , that European collectivism have leave our regulation flabby . Brexit be an opportunity to spur our regulator to innovate , force them to make rule that revitalise our economy , not bog it down in red tape . the fourth opportunity be economic innovation . Brexit can be our industrial strategy ' s rocket fuel . thanks to restrictive state aid rule , EU membership make support for infrastructure , like broadband , subject to onerous approval process or bureaucratic work arounds . Brexit be a chance to sweep these aside . well still , we can start use innovative tool currently constrain by the EU , such as beef up , low-tax enterprise zone and free port to attract job and investment to the country ' s most deprived area . last , but most importantly , Brexit be a chance to revitalise our democracy . by muddy the water of accountability , EU membership have make it too easy for politician in Westminster to pass the buck to Brussels . or they struggle against an interventionist European court that do n't reflect British value . with a clean break from the EU , British voter will once again know exactly who be responsible for everything , from support the steel industry and keep our river clean to set the VAT on tampon and raise animal welfare standard , make it easy to kick out lawmaker who do n't have their own bold conviction . opportunity like these be what Brexit mean to us and why we vote to set Britain on this bold future course . we British have always be suspicious of radical idea . but if ever our country need to soften its upper lip , to energise it politics with passion , imagination , and optimism it be now . we ' ve spend long enough on the back foot . it ' s time to shout about that idealistic and hopeful vision for post-Brexit Britain and find the self-confidence to deliver it for the British people . Suella Fernandes , Kit Malthouse , Will Quince , Rishi Sunak and Michael Tomlinson be Conservative MP Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
may to build bridge with Macron as official fail to agree Brexit talk start date
the start of formal Brexit talk be delay yesterday in the wake of the political uncertainty cause by Theresa May ' s disastrous election result . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , yesterday meet Oliver Robbins , the most senior civil servant in David Davis ' s Brexit department , but the two man fail to reach an agreement on a start date for talk . the Prime Minister will this evening start try to rebuild her authority when she visit Emmanuel Macron , France ' s new president , in Paris . Mrs May hope to make an ally of Mr Macron before the formal opening of Brexit negotiation , which be expect to take place next week . the pair will discuss counter-terrorism over dinner in the wake of the recent attack in London before head to watch England play France in an international football friendly . the trip to Paris be plan week before Mrs May lose her majority in the General Election , but could not have come at a more welcome time for the Prime Minister . Mrs May and Mr Macron will announce joint plan to fine social medium company such as Facebook , Twitter and Google if they fail to remove extremist content from their websites . however Mrs May will hope to use the meeting to build significant bridge ahead of Brexit negotiation after Mr Macron ' S predecessor , François Hollande , threaten to ` ` punish ' ' the UK . there be fear that Mr Macron , an ardent pro-European who be fresh from secure a landslide victory in the French parliamentary election , could harden France ' S already tough stance on Brexit . the visit come after England fan sing La Marseillaise in an act of defiance during a friendly with France at Wembley in the wake of the Bataclan massacre . speak ahead of the visit Mrs May say : ` ` we be unite in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil . ' ' Brexit talk be due to open on Monday next week but Mr Davis , the Secretary of State for Leaving the European Union , say yesterday that they be now likely to take place later in the week . the delay be because Mrs May need to publish her Queen ' s Speech , which will set out her legislative programme , before she start Brexit negotiation . however at the weekend it emerge that the EU have warn Mrs May that it could take a year for Mr Barnier to draft a new mandate for negotiation . such a long delay would make it almost impossible to complete negotiation before the end of the two-year negotiating period . it come as Angela Merkel signal yesterday that the triumph of Mr Macron ' s new centrist party in the first round of France ' s parliamentary election pave the way for deep EU integration . the German chancellor congratulate the French president on ` ` a strong vote for reform ' ' as a Franco-German working group draft proposal for close eurozone cooperation to be present next month . the two leader agree last month to draw up a roadmap for great EU integration that could entail treaty change , previously consider a taboo . a joint push to relaunch the EU and the eurozone by the currency bloc ' S two large economy could generate unstoppable momentum for ambitious reform . but the expect landslide victory for Mr Macron ' s party in the final parliamentary poll on Sunday may also mean tough Brexit negotiation . the French and German leader want to maintain the timetable for Britain ' s exit from the EU , clear the way for them to shape the bloc ' S future . proposal by Mr Macron for a joint eurozone budget , parliament and finance minister initially raise fear in Germany that Berlin could be force to pay for struggle country that resist reform . but Mrs Merkel say her government be ready to discuss Mr Macron ' s proposal after he deny German medium report that he be in favour of turn the national debt of eurozone country into shared eurozone debt . Germany ' s deputy finance minister , Jens Spahn , say yesterday that Berlin be open to the idea of a eurozone finance minister provide the role and responsibility be clearly define . Mr Spahn , a senior member of Mrs Merkel ' s centre-Right party , say Germany be also willing to increase its funding for European investment project . he also express the hope that Mr Macron will enact reform to boost economic growth in France . Mr Macron ' S expect parliamentary majority will strengthen his hand in an inevitable showdown with France ' S famously militant trade union as he loosen rigid employment law to end economic stagnation . the labour reform be a cornerstone of his election campaign . the rout of the Socialists after Mr Hollande ' s disastrous five-year presidency clear the way for a raft of business-friendly policy . the ex-banker , who have redrawn the French political landscape at the age of @card@ , now plan to push through his labour reform by presidential decree before September , a move likely to spark street protest by union . fall star Populist party fail at Italy ' s local election Italy ' S populist Five Star Movement have flounder at local election , raise serious doubt about its chance at a general election due by next year . the anti-euro party perform poorly across dozen of key town and city , suggest the national battle will be between the Democratic party of the ruling prime minister and a centre-Right coalition head by Silvio Berlusconi ' S Forza Italia . Nick Squires ' we be unite in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil '
Scotland May poise to fire Brexit start gun next week
the Prime Minister may formally trigger Brexit as early as Tuesday after European leader say they be make preparation for an announcement . minister be increasingly confident that Theresa May ' s Article @card@ Bill could clear both the Commons and the Lords on Monday . the swift passage of the legislation would clear the way for Mrs May to trigger Brexit negotiation in the commons the follow day . minister be privately press Mrs May to ` ` get on with Brexit ' ' and trigger Article @card@ ` ` as soon as possible ' ' , the Daily Telegraph understand . the announcement would help Mrs may move the debate away from Philip Hammond ' S budget . Downing Street have say that Article @card@ will be trigger by the end of the month but refuse to commit to a date . Donald Tusk , the head of the European Council , say that EU leader be prepare to respond within @card@ hour of Mrs May trigger Brexit . Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , confirm that if Mrs May invoke Article @card@ next week , an ` ` extraordinary meeting ' ' of the remain @card@ member of the EU would be hold on April @card@ . the government have suffer defeat in the House of Lords on two amendment to the Article @card@ Bill . one of them guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK , while the other say that Parliament should be give a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final deal . the government will oppose both amendment in the Commons on Monday , and could face a rebellion by up to @card@ Tory MP . however , Tory whip be increasingly confident that they can win over many of the rebel by give assurance on the timetable of the deal . the legislation will then pass to the Lords , where Labour source indicate that the party ' S peer be prepare to give way gracefully .
future of British fish for British fisherfolk ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - your headline , ` ` Britain to ditch its ' unfair ' fishing quota after Brexit ' ' ( report , October @card@ ) , may give the impression that there will be no catch control in UK water follow Brexit . Brexit give us the chance to put measure in place within our 200-mile exclusive economic zone that will make both fish-stock conservation and sustainable harvesting possible . these will , of course , include catch quota . in a paper by the Scottish Fishermen ' s Federation on Brexit , we insist that fishery regulation should incorporate a commitment to sustainable harvesting . however , instead of the ` ` one policy fit all ' ' approach of the Common Fisheries Policy , we now have a chance to manage our own fishery . Brexit bring a sea of opportunity for coastal and island community , and will turn us into a world-class seafood harvest and export country . Bertie Armstrong Chief Executive , Scottish Fishermen ' S Federation Aberdeen Sir - Charles Moore ( Comment , October @card@ ) be so right . surround by political system in crisis , we do not need to find a role in the world . we need to be ourselves - to find our strength in the maturity of our constitution , our liberal tradition , our cultural depth and global engagement . win the Brexit vote be the first battle in a long war to achieve this . recover national self-confidence may take time , but it be well this way - and more in our tradition of consensual change . Jonathan Campbell-James Dubai , United Arab Emirates Sir - while Jean-Claude Juncker stand at the helm of the Titanic and call for ` ` full steam ahead ' ' through the iceberg-strewn sea of the North Atlantic , Donald Tusk tune his violin for another evening with the quartet . the Greeks and Italian be continue the party down in steerage , and the Germans and the French be enjoy champagne and oyster in first class . Britain , meanwhile , have find the lifeboat , work out that the Union can just about fit in - and , despite the shouting , be still try to persuade Scotland to put on some warm clothes and a lifebelt . it ' s cold out there . David Chamberlain Leicester
how they compare on the big issue body : single Market and Customs Union continue payment to Brussel for access to the Single Market after a transition period , and have say the UK will be ` ` perfectly OK ' ' if it leave the EU without a deal . the Foreign Secretary have say that stay in the Single Market and Customs Union would make a ` ` complete mockery ' ' of Brexit . he oppose ? the Prime Minister have say that Britain ` ` can not possibly ' ' remain in the Single Market and Customs Union after Brexit . she have say she want to ` ` trade with and operate within ' ' the Single Market , and have also say that the UK could leave the EU without a deal , warn Brussel that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' . the Chancellor have commit to leave the Single Market and Customs Union but have warn that job and the economy must come first . he have say it would be ` ` madness ' ' not to seek the ` ` close possible ' ' arrangement with the EU after Brexit , and that leave without a deal would be a ` ` bad outcome for Britain ' ' . transition period ? the Foreign Secretary have call for the UK to leave the EU with ` ` speed and efficiency ' ' , with source suggest that he favour a six-month transition period . for around two to three year in order to avoid a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' for business . the Prime Minister have repeatedly say that there will need to be an ` ` implementation period ' ' after Brexit but have decline , so far , to say how long it should last . the Chancellor have previously say that he want a transition period last much as ( Euro ) 100bn . Brexit divorce bill ? the Chancellor have say the UK would ` ` honour ' ' its obligation but reject claim that it would pay as ? Mr Johnson have be forthright on the divorce bill , say the EU can ` ` go whistle ' ' if it think it will get anything like the ( Euro ) 100bn some official be demand . he have suggest the EU should , in fact , be pay the UK money after Brexit . the Prime Minister have be tightlipped over the UK ' s Brexit divorce bill , say it be a matter for negotiation . minister have suggest she may offer to pay a significant bill in a bid to break a deadlock in negotiation . when ask earlier this year , he say : ` ` I do n't recognise this number , I genuinely do n't recognise it . ' ' Trade deal ` ` EEA-light ' ' free trade deal , ahead of a landmark speech in Florence on Friday . Mr Hammond be say to be in favour of a Swiss-style ` ` EEA-light ' ' deal , which would see the UK shadow the EU ' s regulatory structure and transpose European Court of Justice ruling . this approach be see as the good way to ensure ` ` frictionless ' ' free trade . the Foreign Secretary be say to be oppose to a future trade deal base on membership of the European Economic Area , believe it would tie the UK ' S hand . he favour a model base on Canada ' s trade deal to ensure the UK have the freedom to negotiate deal with non-EU country . the Chancellor and other pro-European minister be reportedly attempt to persuade Mrs May of the need for an n , Allies ve , be ke , my i ? Michael Gove , Priti Patel , Liam Fox , Andrea Leadsom ? Amber Rudd , David Gauke , Liz Truss , Jeremy Hunt , Damian Hinds ? Damian Green , David Davis , Michael Fallon , Greg Clark , Chris Grayling , David Lidington , Brandon Lewis , be
Scotland Indyref2 issue be detract from the potential loss of Scottish job
the serious concern about the impact of Brexit voice by Scotland ' s financial enterprise be easily the most significant thus far express . and although couch in careful diplomatic language , there be little doubt that the main fear be that thousand of job could be lose in this country if important business function be transfer abroad . as submit to Holyrood ' s Europe committee , the document from Scottish Financial Enterprise insist that many of its member have draw up contingency plan to deal with the effect of Britain leave the EU . their submission home in on worry that the SFE ' s member - who include most of Scotland ' s financial institution - have about whether Brexit can be fully achieve within the propose two-year period . but most significantly it make plain the fact that most company be determine not to lose valuable EU market . they give no detail about their plan but MSPs will be leave in no doubt about how seriously SFE regard the threat Brexit could pose to the @card@ job that be directly or indirectly employ in Scotland ' s financial service sector . give the determination of the Scottish-based institution , include the major bank and investment house , to maintain their access to EU market , the fear be that significant part of their business might be transfer to other European centre . although the SFE paper be a shot across the bow for those , such as David Davis , who be in charge of the UK ' s Brexit negotiation and who have be criticise over their tactic by EU official , it be also bind to cause major reverberation at Holyrood . the SFE submission will provide important ammunition for First Minister Nicola Sturgeon in her onslaught against Theresa May ' s government over Brexit . however , it also prove how wrong she be to announce she be plan a new independence vote in the immediate aftermath of the shock result in last year ' s EU referendum . critic insist that she would have have a big impact as Scotland ' s political leader - give that the Scot vote by a large majority for Remain - if she ' d seek agreement with the leader of the other political party on a joint approach . after all , they vote Remain and all want Scotland and Britain to remain in the single market . but whilst they think Brexit be bad for Scotland , they reckon leave the UK would be a catastrophe . thus , the Tory , Labour and Liberal Democrat leader could n't countenance such a deal whilst the SNP leader appear hell-bent on subject Scotland to another vote on break up Britain . that remain the case even though La Sturgeon have acknowledge , to some degree , the message of the serious SNP revers in the general election and put a new independence vote on a back burner . but as far as the other leader be concern the threat of indyref2 , while distant , be still there and so their message remain : no deal . it ' S not possible to know if Nicola Sturgeon be aware of how handy her maintenance of the independence threat be for her opponent , especially Ruth Davidson . as long as it ' S there the Tory leader can just keep attack her over this long-term SNP objective and can avoid express a definite view about how the Brexit talk be be handle by her Conservative colleague in London . that at least have be the situation so far . but give that any new vote on independence appear such a far-off prospect and with Brexit and the tortuous negotiation to take the UK out of the EU right in our face , be there really any point in unionist continue to indyref drum to all else ? financial absolutely that our politician on their now . Brexit and job loss in most business and present Scotland ' s well bang the indyre the exclusion of Scottish Fina Enterprise be abs right to demand domestic politi concentrate o worry now the possible j some of our m important bus present a real a danger to Scotla be . im This be the immediate concern . Brexit and possible job loss ... present a real and present danger to Scotland ' S well be
cabinet and Eurosceptic MP at odd over open border extension
Theresa May be face a backlash from Eurosceptic MP after her Cabinet agree that freedom of movement could continue for up to two year after Brexit . the government be ready to keep Britain ' S border open during a post-Brexit transition period , which will prevent the ` ` cliffedge ' ' exit in March @card@ that business leader have warn against . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be understand to have win the argument within the Cabinet for a transition arrangement with the EU until a freetrade agreement be reach . Cabinet Brexiteers include Liam Fox and Michael Gove have confirm they be in agreement . however , hardline Eurosceptic MP react furiously last night at report that continue free movement could last between two and four year as part of a post-Brexit deal . Andrew Rosindell , the Tory MP for Romford , say : ` ` the British people vote for Brexit and they expect Brexit to happen , in full , on time . ' ' Peter Bone , the MP for Wellingbrough , add : ` ` free movement as it be now will not be acceptable after we leave the EU , that ' S nonsense and it ' s not what people vote for . ' ' Mr Gove , the Environment Secretary , say yesterday that decision on an ` ` implementation period ' ' would be make ` ` in the good interest of our economy ' ' . Mr Fox also say he be prepare to wait ` ` another couple of year ' ' . their comment indicate a widening of Cabinet support for a transitional deal between the UK leave the EU in March @card@ and a new trading arrangement . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pension secretary , say : ` ` whilst there may be a need for transitional or interim arrangement , these can never be settle until there be an agreement between the Commission and the United Kingdom . ' ' meanwhile it be report that Mr Hammond tell the board of the US investment bank Goldman Sachs that he be push for a lengthy transition period . the Chancellor reportedly make a presentation to the bank ' s board on June @card@ . a spokesman for the Chancellor could not confirm he be at the meeting or what he say , add : ` ` he meet with key people in the financial world all the time . ' ' a Downing Street source say : ` ` it have long be the government ' s position that there will be an implementation period . the length of the implementation period will be part of the negotiation . ' ' the Prime Minister stress her backing for an implementation period when talk with business leader at a Downing Street forum on Brexit this week . Jean-Claude Juncker ' s chief of staffand a key player in the Brexit negotiation have be promote by the European Commission . Martin Selmayr ' S grade be increase from AD14 to AD15 , the second high , the Politico website report . that mean Mr Selmayr receive up to £192,000 a year before tax . ' free movement as it be now will not be accptable after we leave the EU ... that ' s not what people vote for '
Corbyn and Clegg accuse of plot to derail Brexit ; Future of Europe ; Former Liberal Democrat leader reject suggestion that he backtrack on his word over EU vote
the Liberal Democrats and Labour have be accuse of plan to block Brexit by either water down or overturn the European Union referendum vote if the government lose in the Supreme Court . Nick Clegg , the former Liberal Democrat leader , yesterday say his party be prepare to vote against trigger Brexit negotiation unless it be give guarantee on single market access and a second referendum . he issue the warning after Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , say that he would seek to amend any bill on the Article @card@ process to withdraw from the EU in order to guarantee worker ' right . minister be already prepare for the bad and be consider plan to clear all other parliamentary business and hold all-night sitting in a push to pass the legislation . the Bill would be just @card@ word long and as tightly draft as possible to discourage further amendment . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have make clear that she will invoke Article @card@ by the end of March at the late . the Supreme Court will give its ruling in January , which would leave the government less than three month to get the legislation through both chamber . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pension secretary , accuse the liberal democrat of have be ` ` dishonest ' ' during the EU referendum campaign . he say : ` ` all this stuff about want Parliament to have a say be not that at all . it ' S about block Brexit . ` ` the Liberal Democrats have be dishonest until now ... and now they be reveal they want to stop Brexit . these people pose as democrat only as long as it suit . ` ` all I can say be , roll on the opportunity to clear these people out of Parliament once and for all . ' ' Mr Clegg say yesterday that there be limited ` ` circumstance ' ' in which he and his colleague would vote against Article @card@ . he say : ` ` if I get a second referendum and the government be quite clear it be go to seek to try and keep us in the single market , then we would vote for Article @card@ . ' ' during an interview with the Sunday politics programme on BBC one , Mr Clegg be also challenge over the fact he describe the EU referendum as a ` ` once in a generation vote ' ' during the campaign , but be now call for a second referendum . he dismiss suggestion that he have go back on his word as ` ` textual analysis ' ' . the Liberal Democrats be plan to exploit any parliamentary vote on Article @card@ to establish their credential as the ` ` anti-Brexit ' ' party after last week ' s by-election win in Richmond . Mr Corbyn , the Labour leader , be also prepare to table amendment to any Brexit legislation regard worker ' right , which could significantly slow it down . Ed Balls , the former shadow chancellor , say yesterday that such a move would be ` ` catastrophic ' ' for the party . one minister tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` Theresa May have be clear that she will invoke Article @card@ by the end of March . if it take long sitting , then so be it . we will get it through . ' ' the Prime Minister will today open talk about a new post-Brexit trade deal with the Gulf as she become the first woman to attend an annual meeting with the region ' S leader . Mrs May will attend a meeting of the Gulf co-operation council in Bahrain with the leader of Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , UAE , Bahrain and Oman . the government have identify £30 billion worth of trade opportunity over the next five year , but want to increase that significantly after Brexit . Article @card@ why the Supreme Court ' s judgment matter Q what be happen in the Supreme Court ? a The Government be appeal a ruling by the High Court which find that the Prime Minister can not trigger Article @card@ and begin Brexit negotiation without the support of Parliament . in November three high court judge be accuse of frustrate the will of more than 17million people after declare that Mrs May do not have the power to bypass MP by rely on Royal Prerogative to trigger Article @card@ . the ruling lead to a huge backlash from Eurosceptic MP . Today Jeremy Wright , the Attorney General , will restate the government ' s case in the High Court . Q be the government likely to win ? Ano . cabinet minister have tell the Daily Telegraph that they be resign to lose the case despite their decision to appeal . one say that the government ' S chance of win be ` ` @card@ ' ' , partly because it have already lose once . there be also concern about the impartiality of some of the judge reside over the case . Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury , president of the sup ] reme Court , make headline when it emerge his wife have call the referendum ` ` mad and bad ' ' on Twitter . Lady Hale , the court ' s deputy president , face criticism for a speech ahead of the case in which she question whether the new law alone be enough to start negotiation . Q when will we find out if the government have win or lose ? a The Supreme Court will return its judgment in January . minister be already draw up plan for a 16-word bill which they plan to push through the Commons . Theresa May have be very clear that she will trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . if the government lose , that will mean that the legislation will have to proceed far quicker than usual . minister be consider plan for all-night sitting and clear other business to push it through . ' the Liberal Democrats have be dishonest . all I can say be , roll on the opportunity to clear these people out of Parliament once and for all '
Scotland SNP adviser dismiss its Brexit stance ; Sturgeon tell the UK be far more important than the EU
SNP minister will today be challenge to set out exactly what they want from Brexit after two of Nicola Sturgeon ' s handpicked adviser dismiss her key demand that Scotland stay in the EU single market if the UK come out . the conservative say a Scottish government motion be debate in the Holyrood chamber this afternoon be ` ` meaningless ' ' as it call for clarity over whether the UK will retain ` ` membership ' ' of the single market . Murdo Fraser , a senior Tory MSP , say Ms Sturgeon ' s panel of expert adviser should have inform her that this be impossible unless a country be an EU member state . he say there be a series of other arrangement that would allow trade with the EU , include membership of the European Economic Area or a deal similar to Norway ' S , but the Scottish Government have say nothing about them in @card@ previous Holyrood debate about Brexit . the motion also call for Scotland ' s place in the EU single market to be ` ` fully protected ' ' even if the rest of the UK leave , but this have already be reject by a series of expert . Lord Kerr of Kinlochard , the Scottish cross-bench peer who write the EU ' s Article @card@ process for a member state to leave , and a member of Ms Sturgeon ' S panel , tell the BBC earlier this month that he do not think this be possible . Dr Fabian Zuleeg of the European Policy Centre , another member of the First Minister ' S Standing Council on Europe , have say it be ` ` highly unlikely ' ' that Scotland could remain in if the UK come out . Prof Michael Keating , director of Edinburgh University ' s Centre on Constitutional Change , have also dismiss the plan as ` ` impossible ' ' , warn it would mean create a ` ` hard ' ' border between Scotland and England . their intervention have increase concern that Ms Sturgeon be deliberately make unachievable demand of Theresa May during the Brexit negotiation in the knowledge they will be reject . the First Minister have warn she will stage another independence referendum if her demand be not meet . she and Mike Russell , her Brexit Minister , will attend a meeting of her expert panel tomorrow . but Labour point out the UK continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ single market be more than four time as important as the EU version to Scottish company and it be ` ` illogical ' ' for the SNP to argue that Brexit justify break up the former . speak ahead of the debate , Mr Fraser say : ` ` I agree that we wish to continue to trade with the EU after Brexit . but we be still no clearer as to what exactly the Scottish Government be ask for . ` ` this be the eleventh debate the Scottish Government have hold on the consequence of Brexit , with increasingly little new to say on the subject . ' ' he argue that Ms Sturgeon can not demand clarity of Mrs May ' s government when she can not provide it herself . Jackie Baillie , Scottish Labour ' s economy spokesman , say : ` ` the SNP ' s own figure confirm that remain part of the UK single market be more important for Scotland ' s economy than even be in the EU . ` ` it be illogical for the SNP to spend so much energy make the case for the EU single market yet at the same time campaigning to leave the much more valuable UK single market . ' ' but Bruce Crawford , an SNP MSP , say : ` ` Every area of Scotland vote to remain in the EU and today ' S debate be an opportunity for the Tories and all other party to reject a hard Brexit and stand up for Scotland . ` ` at this crucial stage while the UK Government be still work out its negotiate position , this be the time to make Scotland ' S voice hear and challenge head on those who want to lead us out of the single market with all the cost to Scottish job and the economy . ' ' a Scottish government spokesman add : ` ` the Standing Council on Europe deliberately include member with a range of view and perspective , all of which contribute to the Scottish Government ' S thinking and we will set out the government ' S proposal on protect Scotland from a hard Brexit in the come week . ' '
No10 panic as leave surge ; Boris attack after Downing Street be warn of likely Brexit ; Vote leave : pm use Queen ' s birthday honour to curry favour ; top entrepreneur back out with warning over EU red tape
down Street be ` ` panic ' ' over the EU referendum amid grow internal sign that support for the leave campaign be surge . private datum and internal polling which show that after two week of build momentum there have be huge swing to the Brexit campaign have prompt grow alarm in the Remain camp , source have say . it have lead to a marked change in strategy , with the campaign to keep Britain in the EU orchestrate a series of highly personal attack on Boris Johnson , a leader of the leave campaign . David Cameron ' S team have adopt a ` ` take out Boris strategy ' ' by allow a Tory Cabinet minister to claim Mr Johnson only back Brexit in order to further his ambition to be prime minister and associate him with Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader . in a sign the market believe a Brexit be more likely , the FTSE @card@ yesterday suffer its big one-day fall since the beginning of the campaign , decrease by @card@ per cent . the pound also drop sharply as a poll give leave a 10-point lead , with @card@ per cent of voter now back a Brexit . with less than a fortnight to go until polling day , the campaign yesterday become increasingly fever . in other development : ? the Queen be drag into the row as the Prime Minister be accuse of use the birthday honour list to reward nearly two dozen backer of the Remain campaign . Sir James Dyson disclose in a Telegraph interview that he be join the Brexit campaign , describe Remain ' s warning about trade as ` ` cobbler ' ' . Labour ' s EU campaign be in chaos as senior figure admit many of their supporter be now back Brexit after Jeremy Corbyn ' s failure to make the case vociferously for Remain . Justice Secretary Michael Gove ' s leave campaign warn that Britain will need seven new prison by @card@ if immigration be not control . Wolfgang Schäuble , Germany ' s fi-nance minister , have rule out Britain join the single market after a Brexit , declare that ` ` out be out ' ' for the UK . British victim of Libyan-sponsored IRA terrorism be be block from receive million of pound in compensation because of human right law , the government have admit . this weekend there will be an outpouring of patriotic sentiment as the nation celebrate the Queen ' S 90th and the Duke of Edinburgh ' s 95th birthday and the beginning of the home nation ' campaign in the European football championship , which insider believe will help the leave campaign . government insider have say the Remain campaign be ` ` fall apart ' ' after a series of salvo by Mr Johnson and Mr Gove . Mr Cameron be appear on the BBC tomorrow in what be be see as an attempt to relaunch the campaign . despite the Prime Minister claim he do not want the referendum campaign to descend into a series of ` ` blue-on-blue ' ' attack between conservative , the Remain campaign be now seek to undermine Eurosceptic Tory , it be understand . during a televised debate on Thursday Amber Rudd , the Energy Secretary , make personal attack on Mr Johnson , accuse him of join the Brexit campaign to further his own career . she say of Mr Johnson : ` ` he ' s the life and soul of the party but he ' S not the man you want drive you home at the end of the evening . ' ' the Remain campaign release a poster feature a mock-up of Mr Johnson , Mr Gove and Mr Farage , at a casino table with the slogan : ` ` do n't let them gamble with your future . ' ' source in the leave camp say their rival be resort to ` ` playground jibe ' ' in a sign ` ` they be rattled , have no discipline , no idea and no hope ' ' . during a town hall event for Facebook , Mr Cameron be ask if he feel ` ` sorry ' ' for the attack on Mr Johnson . he say the debate be ` ` lively affair and that ' s the way it be ' ' . however , Mr Cameron do suggest that he still intend to offer Mr Johnson a Cabinet position after the referendum . the leave campaign say @card@ prominent Remain supporter be name in the birthday honour list , include Richard Reed , deputy chairman of Britain Stronger in Europe , who receive a CBE . other include John Armitage , of the hedge fund Egerton Capital , who give £15,000 to the Remain campaign and be make a CBE . award also go to Remain donor and people who put their name to joint letter warn of the danger of EU withdrawal . Labour MP Gisela Stuart , the Vote leave chairman , denounce the award as a ` ` shabby stitch-up ' ' and accuse Mr Cameron of stoop to ` ` a new low ' ' in his drive to secure a Remain vote . government source reject the charge , say that the honour be decide by independent committee and include at least three prominent supporter of the leave campaign . in a special supplement in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Mr Johnson and Mr Cameron set out the argument for and against the EU . Mr Cameron say : ` ` for me , remain in the EU be the big , bold , British decision . ' ' Mr Johnson write : ` ` this be the time to restore health to our democracy , to go global , and to believe in Britain . it ' S win-win . ' ' Queen ' S birthday : Pages @card@ EU report : page @card@ Nigel Farage and Editorial Comment : page @card@
Brexit fear can be overdo , but there be real risk , too ; as the referendum deadline near , prepare for increase volatility -and opportunity - in the market questor
the risk that Britain will vote to leave the European Union have create turmoil for London-listed share . however , the recent market movement could also create opportunity . Brexit risk and reward @card@ there be no time like the present to prepare for the potential exit of Britain from the EU . the referendum on membership may not be due to take place until June @card@ , but currency and stock market have already begin to price in the risk of an exit . at the moment the bookie be offer odd of Britain vote to leave at about @card@ imply roughly a 25pc chance of an exit , although there be plenty of time left for that to change . the purchasing power of the pound be one of the clear indicator for the strength of the UK economy . the potential impact of the UK souring relation with its large trading partner can be see in the global currency market . the pound have fall by 4.7pc against the euro and 4pc against the US dollar since the start of the year . these move be merely an hors d'oeuvre to the 20pc slump in sterling predict by some expert if the UK do vote to leave . property panic @card@ share in the UK property sector have be in the eye of the storm over Brexit fear . property in the UK be not only a place to live and work , it have also become a store of wealth for the world ' s rich . London property have become the ultimate ` ` safe haven ' ' asset for everyone from oligarch to gulf state billionaire . that position be now under serious threat as asset value face a double whammy of currency devaluation and fall price . share in London-listed real estate trust and housebuilders have be in the vanguard of a selloff . the share of London-focused commercial property giant British Land and Land Securities have fall 14pc and 11pc respectively , while those with a focus on West London retail and office space , such as Derwent , Great Portland and Shaftesbury have slip 17pc , 14pc and 5pc lower respectively . the sharp move down have lead to £4bn be wipe off FTSE @card@ real estate investment trust since the start of the year . this be not solely down to fear over Brexit . the global economy have also begin to slow . low oil price be weigh on emerge market that rely heavily on revenue from sell commodity , and estimate for global growth have be revise down by the International Monetary Fund and credit rating agency Fitch . that say , when investor make decision about where to store their cash , they want a stable political and economic backdrop , something that would go out of the window in a Brexit scenario . the great British residential property price boom be also show sign of stall . share in Londonfocused housebuilder Berkeley Group have lead the selloff , fall 18pc this year , while the UK ' s large housebuilder persimmon be down 1pc and Taylor Wimpey down 13pc . fear overplay @card@ market tend to overdo it on both the upside and the downside . in this particular case Sebastian Jory from broker Liberum think that the Brexit fear have be overplay thus far . a vote for Brexit will clearly hit property price , and London , with its focus on financial service , will suffer . however , as Mr Jory point out , there should be a consistent ` ` UK discount ' ' for any risk of Brexit across all cyclical sector . that appear not to be the case . ` ` put simply , it appear that real estate be price a significantly bad economic outcome for the UK than other sector , ' ' Mr Jory say . he compare the performance of UK stock against their US and European counterpart since the start of the year , and the finding from the analysis suggest that the sell-off of real estate and housebuilder share may have be overdo . bank expose @card@ the other side to this argument be that the UK banking sector may not be adequately price in the full risk of leave the EU . the UK banking industry be reliant on the cordial trading relation with one of its big partner . be this to be lose it would come as a further blow to a sector already reel from a liquidity squeeze . Analysis show that while UK banking stock have indeed fall since the start of the year , they have not fall by as much as their European and US counterpart - the suggestion be they could be expose to further fall as the referendum vote near . beware nervous bystander @card@ Mr Jory also highlight the risk to London-listed stock from US investor become more fearful . ` ` we think that sell of UK stock by US holder might get more indiscriminate as the referendum near , if the ' out ' vote remain a conceivable outcome , ' ' he say . a Liberum screen across the FTSE @card@ show the UK stock with a high concentration of US investor . pharmaceutical group Shire at 62pc be the most expose , while gold miner Randgold Resources have 60pc , utility group SSE 56pc , luxury good group Burberry 54pc , and B & Q owner Kingfisher 53pc . in the FTSE @card@ , which contain the UK ' s mid-sized corporate , aerospace group Meggitt be 64pc us hold , discount retailer Poundland 61pc , Paddy Power Betfair 55pc , pharmaceutical group Indivior 55pc , and Domino ' S Pizza 55pc .
milk price rise likely without a Brexit deal , say dairy farmer
the cost of a pint of milk could rise unless Brexit negotiation settle a trade and labour deal , the UK ' s dairy farmer have warn . the industry - which employ more than @card@ people - say Britain leave the EU without strike a deal and have to resort to World Trade Organisation tariff would be ` ` the bad outcome ' ' . call Brexit a ` ` monumental and game-changing challenge ' ' , Paul Vernon , chairman of trade body Dairy UK , say the industry have ` ` tremendous potential for export and product development ' ' if a deal can be reach . without such an arrangement , he warn of ` ` far-reaching consequence ' ' for the sector , which generate an annual turnover of £28bn . ` ` the stake could not be high and there be a fine balance between create a climate where we can seize the opportunity that Brexit may present and be leave with seriously detrimental trading condition , ' ' Mr Vernon add . in a ` ` white paper ' ' on the sector , Dairy UK say it want continued free trade between Britain and the EU , say tariff would damage export and reduce demand . other demand include an ` ` unhurried ' ' transition to whatever arrangement be put in place as a result of leave the EU , to allow the sector to ` ` adapt and take advantage of Brexit ' ' . a further concern be that without continued access to both skilled and unskilled labour , cost could spiral , hit margin and potentially push up price . the white paper also reveal that despite the uncertainty cause by impending Brexit , investment by company in the sector stand at a rate of more than £100m a year . it also find that spending be rise on the full range of dairy product : milk , cream , cheese , yogurt , butter and organic produce . despite a grow range of alternative , 87pc of consumer drink cow ' S milk and 94pc of adult buy cheese , accord to the research . 87pc the percentage of consumer who drink cow ' S milk , despite a grow range of alternative , Dairy UK research find
MP must be allow to improve the Brexit Bill - but not thwart it ; Labour have move beyond fair scrutiny into actively weaken our country ' s negotiate position
shortly after the General Election , I fear the new makeup of Parliament would prove toxic for Brexit . the government , I think , would n't be able to pass law either to implement Brexit sensibly or prepare for a ` ` no deal ' ' collapse in talk . the EU , see our dilemma , would offer Britain a dreadful , take-it-or-leave-it deal as the only alternative to crash out . I ' m not quite as pessimistic as I be , but last week the government run into the first roadblock that I be worry about . it be force to postpone its most significant piece of legislation so far , the EU Withdrawal Bill , after MP table as many as @card@ amendment . the government now face a hard reality : how can it pass the law need to implement Brexit through a Parliament dead set against it ? to navigate its way through , it must engage not only in negotiation abroad but with its own MP . that must involve concession . there be plenty of reasonable concession it could make . the simple purpose of the bill be to transpose into UK law all of the EU rule we have be obey for @card@ year - and to do it quickly - so that we do n't face a legal vacuum in March @card@ . without it , MP would have to debate and vote upon some @card@ measure in the next @card@ month - clearly impossible . however , in order to achieve its aim , the Bill have to do some rather unpalatable thing . it give the government all sort of unusual power , like the ability to rewrite huge swathe of regulation without parliamentary scrutiny . doubtless many of these power will be need because of the unpredictability of Britain ' s talk with the EU . our government can not negotiate certain important matter , like whether and how to cooperate on drug regulation for example , if Parliament have preemptively nail down an answer . it need legal room for manoeuvre . at the same time , there be reason to be very careful when hand the government what be effectively , in the word of Tory MP and former attorney general Dominic Grieve , ` ` a blank cheque ' ' . Power can not be trust to police itself . acknowledge this do not amount to betray Brexit . in judge Parliament ' S behaviour , therefore , it be very important to distinguish between those MP and amendment whose aim really be to sabotage Brexit and those that be simply do what Parliament be mean to do : scour the bill for risk , excessive power-grabs , contradiction and legal ambiguity . though I do n't agree with all of his suggest change to the bill , it seem that Mr Grieve ' S activity fit into the latter category . among the worry he and other have express be that the government be give itself more power than necessary while remove people ' S right to challenge that power . for example , the Bill hand minister the power to amend legislation derive from EU law without any scrutiny from MP . that might make sense when adjust supervisory process for bank , but a lot of other law be be sweep up in the same category . one example be the @card@ Equality Act , which outlaw discrimination in the workplace . this be a controversial area in which to let a government rewrite the law without oversight . then there be the ambiguity . for example , the Government say it intend to transfer various EU legal right and obligation into British law . one example be the EU state aid regime , which stop state from bail out industry on a whim . the EU test for whether state aid be allow be whether or not it distort trade and competition ` ` between member state ' ' . it be impossible to translate this straightforwardly into UK law , yet the current bill seem to attempt exactly that . by what method remain unclear . just consider the problem arise from such legal ambiguity . the first danger be that post-Brexit Britain face a gamut of lawsuit from company or individual argue over what exactly the law mean . but there be another , political danger that should concentrate Tory mind in particular . imagine that Jeremy Corbyn be to win the next election and find himself preside over this legal morass . various protection , like state aid rule , that have for year insure against a return to untrammelled socialist excess might disappear just at the moment that voter hand power to a genuine Marxist . only yesterday , Mr Corbyn be boast that he be , as Phillip Hammond warn , an ` ` existential threat ' ' to Britain ' s economic model . should we really , for the sake of Brexit fervour , remove various safety feature design to check government power just as Mr Corbyn get close to it himself ? but , while many MP , include Mr Grieve , think Parliament should get a final vote on the Brexit deal , Labour ' S policy go further . Shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer have make it clear any deal Britain negotiate with the EU will always in his view be preferable to no deal . Labour will never , he say , vote to endorse a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit . there be two problem with this . the first , obvious one be that it send the message that the EU can dictate whatever term it like , because our Parliament will swallow anything rather than let the government walk away from the table . this be deeply unhelpful . the second problem be that Labour seem to assume that if Parliament reject ` ` no deal ' ' it will effectively stop Brexit . in fact , since Article @card@ have already be trigger , we have no idea what such a vote would do , but it would likely add to the legal chaos and ensue economic shock cause by crash out . in reality , Labour ' S position be entirely self-serving . it be use parliamentary procedure to state , pre-emptively : ` ` do n't blame me . ' ' the party vote to trigger Article @card@ and have be ambiguous about Brexit , but at the end of the process , it want a chance to disown the whole thing . this would be legitimate party politics but for one shameful fact : it actively damage Britain ' s negotiate position just when we need to show strength . Brexit be a task of great complexity . there be bind to be correction and amendment need along the way . MP should not be pillory for do their job . but those MP who use their leverage to send political message that damage Britain ' s negotiate position should think long and hard about whose interest they be serve . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland break in trade talk deadlock still month away , warn EU
the European Union yesterday warn Britain it be still ` ` month ' ' away from be able to open Brexit trade negotiation as it emerge major division remain between the UK and EU over the so-called Brexit bill . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , insist that Britain would have to pay its full share of spending earmark for the EU after Brexit , as the bloc ' s own auditor criticise the EU for run up spending commitment of some £210billion - - an ` ` all time high ' ' . at the end of four day of talk in Brussels , Mr Barnier say : ` ` we have have a constructive week , yes , but we be not yet there , ' ' he say , later add : ` ` it will take week , maybe even month before we be able to say there have be sufficient progress . ' ' both side say they have make progress on citizen ' right and the northern Irish border , but Mr Barnier say the EU still want the European Court of Justice to play ` ` an indispensable role ' ' in ensure the EU citizen ' right guarantee in the agreement be observe . ` ` this be a stumbling block for the EU , ' ' he say . last night Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator , claim that a majority of people in the UK no longer want to leave the EU . he say : ` ` while this [ back Brexit ] be true for most British politician , and for most English newspaper , this be not the case for what seem to be today a majority of British citizen . ' ' he joke that Mrs May choose to make her keynote speech in Florence , a city renown for ` ` back-stabbing and betrayal ' ' , because it feel familiar for her . meanwhile , back at Westminster , the Delegated Powers Committee in the Lords issue a damn report on the government ' s Brexit legislation , the EU Withdrawal Bill , warn that power grant to minister to change legislation be ` ` wholly unacceptable ' ' .
May dismiss ' pay to play ' access to European market
Theresa May have insist that Britain will not make substantial payment to the EU for market access after Brexit as she appear to contradict Philip Hammond . the Chancellor be ask during a trip to Berlin whether the UK would be prepare to pay for access to the EU market for City firm . he reply : ` ` we will talk about all of these thing . ' ' however , Downing Street say yesterday that the Prime Minister be clear that ` ` we will not be pay for access ' ' and insist that the Chancellor ` ` think he be respond to a general point ' ' . it come after report that Germany be prepare to demand ` ` substantial ' ' payment to EU budget in exchange for market access as part of any trade deal after Brexit . the suggestion that the UK may need to ` ` pay to play ' ' in Europe after Brexit be likely to anger Eurosceptics , who have repeatedly warn that such payment would be unacceptable . Mrs May promise last year in a Lancaster House speech that the ` ` day of Britain make vast contribution to the European Union every year will end ' ' after Brexit . the Prime Minister and Mr Hammond yesterday meet senior executive from some of the world ' S lead financial institution to discuss Brexit . Mr Hammond describe the UK ' s financial service sector as an ` ` enabler of the real economy across Europe ' ' and warn that attack on the City after Brexit risk ` ` undermine Europe ' S economy ' ' .
settle the Brexit bill deadlock or we will ' shake the tree ' , warn EU ; pressure mount on May as Wall Street banker threaten to pull job out of the City
the EU will look to use the Brexit deadlock and rise uncertainty in the business world to ` ` shake the tree ' ' and force lucrative company to relocate to Europe if Downing Street fail to make a move soon to settle the socalled ` ` Brexit bill ' ' , the Daily Telegraph have learn . the hard-nosed EU stance come as ambassador meet in Brussels yesterday for discussion about the shape of a possible Brexit transition and deal . the European Parliament warn that there be still ` ` major issue ' ' stop a deal on citizen ' right , contradict Theresa May ' s assertion that the two side be within ` ` touching distance ' ' of a deal on the issue . the parliament reject British plan to require the 3.2million EU citizen already in Britain to register after Brexit , subject them to blanket criminal record check and charge the cost of a British passport - £72.50 - to obtain ` ` settled status ' ' document . the ambassador ' meeting before today ' s Brexit negotiation be design to begin ` ` scoping out ' ' option for the next phase of talk , accord to a seven-page discussion document see by the Telegraph , but also to put pressure on the Prime Minister to make commitment on the ( Euro ) 60billion ( £53billion ) Brexit bill . ` ` the plain fact be that , as Mr Barnier repeatedly say , ' the clock be tick ' , and time be not on the British side , ' ' say an EU source with knowledge of the plan for discussion . ` ` the long the UK wait , the more the pressure will build , the more we shake the tree . ' ' EU official tell Reuters that failure to reach an agreement on the principle behind the bill before December could lead to delay the opening of trade talk until March , heap more pressure on the government to secure a transition deal early in @card@ . ` ` some believe that the bad it get for the British , the good for us ... that maybe we could delay it all until , for instance , March , increase the uncertainty and trigger the contingency plan in the corporate sector , ' ' the official tell the agency . pressure to make progress be grow , amid report that Wall Street banker have warn Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , on a visit to London that they be prepare to move thousand of job from the city as confidence wane in Mrs May ' s ability to cut a deal . Independent analyst warn that time be run out for a deal by December . Mujtaba Rahman , the head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group , a risk consultancy , warn client that the UK would need to make a move by ` ` the end of the month ' ' . the hardening tone reflect mount EU frustration with Mrs May ' s refusal to elaborate on the pledge make in her Florence speech , that the UK would ` ` honour the commitment ' ' make during the UK ' S 43-year EU membership . ` ` essentially , nothing be happen on the ground . we be not lack public announcement , but progress in Brussels , ' ' say a second EU source . Mrs May indicate that the UK would pay some ( Euro ) 20billion ( £18billion ) for a transition deal in @card@ and @card@ , which would fill the immediate hole leave in the EU budget by Brexit , but the EU say it want an additional ( Euro ) 30billion . the UK dispute the EU ' S arithmetic but could agree ( Euro ) 50billion if the EU offer the UK a ` ` deep and special ' ' trade partnership , but official say Mrs May be in ` ` no mood ' ' to make concession . empire building Balkans could enter EU after Brexit Brexit be a chance for the EU to welcome western Balkan country into the bloc , the prime minister of Bulgaria say yesterday at the European Commission headquarters in Brussels . Boyko Borissov call for the inclusion of Macedonia , Montenegro , Albania , Serbia , Kosovo , and Bosnia-Herzegovina . Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the European Commission , say he think Serbia and Montenegro would be member ` ` before @card@ ' ' . by James Crisp
Scotland SNP Economy Minister attack bank for not threaten to leave UK after Brexit
the SNP ' S Economy Minister yesterday deliver an extraordinary attack on the banking sector for ` ` not threatening to leave ' ' the UK after Brexit . Keith Brown accuse the financial service industry of ` ` not get on side of the public ' ' by fail to exert pressure on the UK government with threat to move their operation abroad after Brexit . speak at a fringe meeting at the SNP conference in Glasgow , Mr Brown say the major bank and financial institution have not shy away from go public with their concern during @card@ ' s independence battle and ask : ` ` why be the sector so quiet ? ' ' but the Conservatives accuse him of try to ` ` bully job creator into threaten to leave ' ' and point out the nationalist could not even say what currency would be use in a separate Scotland during the referendum . they also attack SNP MEPs Ian Hudghton and Alyn Smith for vote in the European Parliament against the EU start trade talk with the UK . Kirstene Hair , the Tory MP for Angus , say the Oct @card@ vote show ` ` their party be hell bend on disrupt Brexit and cause chaos for UK negotiator . ' ' Mr Brown ' S intervention come a day after Howard Davies , chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland Group , say detail of a post-Brexit transitional deal with the EU need to be outline in the next five month to stop more financial service job leave London . RBS and Standard Life , which be both base in Edinburgh , warn in @card@ that independence would pose a serious risk to their business . Barclays and Lloyds Banking Group also warn of the economic risk , while Deutsche Bank say it would be a historic mistake . Mr Brown be appear at a fringe meeting with Chris Cummings from the Investment Association , the trade body that represent UK investment manager . refer to Mr Cummings , the Economy Minister say : ` ` he and his colleague in the financial sector be not threaten to leave and my issue be , why be that the case ? ` ` we be use to have people threaten to leave Scotland when face with constitutional change . why be the sector so quiet ? ' ' he argue that ` ` more robust intervention ' ' could have force the UK Government to listen to the sector ' S concern over Brexit and claim the major bank be grow ` ` increasingly frustrated ' ' about be ignore . Mr Brown acknowledge the industry be warn the UK Government Brexit will hit job number but conclude : ` ` it ' S not be public in the way it be during the independence referendum . ' ' ` ` by not be public , you ' re not get on side the public who then put pressure on the UK government . ' ' Dean Lockhart , the Scottish Tories ' shadow economy minister , say : ` ` these be extraordinary comment by Keith Brown and they call into question his understanding of Scottish business . his job be to back Scotland ' S economy - not to bully job creator into threaten to leave . ` ` Financial firm go public on the danger of separation because independence would have wreck Scotland ' S economy . Mr Brown ' S rant show he be clearly more concerned with his obsession with independence than he be with build Scotland ' S economy . ' '
the good company embrace change
I ' ve long have a problem with publicly own company do politics . they can and should do policy , of course : they certainly owe it to their shareholder to try to influence the law and tax that affect them directly . they be also perfectly entitle to fight for capitalism in a broad sense : without that , they would n't exist . but there be a line that should n't be cross . they should n't explicitly back a political party or a particular side in a referendum . that should be the preserve of private individual and private company . PLCs should try to make the good of democratic decision , and they should accept and embrace big social trend . it be genuine progress , for example , that big business increasingly embrace modern society as it be currently be , and be desperate to hire a diverse workforce . major election and referendum often reflect another kind of social change ; that too need to be absorb by the business community . which bring us to Brexit : the job of PLCs be to try to mould the outcome in a way that be good for them , or for the economy as a whole , not to seek to reverse it . some bank have a real challenge on their hand , because of the EU ' s protectionist attitude to the selling of financial service : but they should seek way around it , and replacement trade arrangement , not campaign against Brexit per se . it be fair for company who believe that their business have be damage by a side-effect of Brexit to say so ( for example , the partly irrational slump in sterling have damage retailer that import the kind of product it be n't feasible to produce in the UK ) . but other that have n't really be affect should n't use the referendum as an excuse for poor management or bad luck . conversely , firm that have do well from what have already happen as a result of Brexit should be free to say so . export volume of manufactured good have be booming , thanks to the weak pound : there be a @card@ percentage point rise in the three-month year-on-year rolling average growth rate between July @card@ and March @card@ follow the EU referendum vote , accord to the Office for National Statistics . the reality be that the good company be those that always embrace change . they realise that it be pointless and stupid to fight against the tide of history and do their good to make the most of it . one of the good response to Brexit to date from a major business - and one that certainly meet my criterion of what a firm should say when confront with major political change - come from Burberry this week . Christopher Bailey , chief creative officer , say as part of the company ' s late result presentation that the potential for post-Brexit Britain be ` ` enormous ' ' . he point out , quite sensibly , that his company be ` ` absolutely committed ' ' to keep its manufacturing in the UK . even well , he argue that ` ` Britishness resonate globally ' ' and that his business now have a huge opportunity to grow . this be the sort of upbeat talk that real leader understand to be necessary in time such as these . he be absolutely right - just as he be right to warn that restriction to immigration should n't become so severe as to make it too hard to operate a dynamic business from London . his intervention be pitch exactly right , and it be worth remember that Bailey , like many other big business leader , back Remain . so this be my new litmus test : I respect business that embrace the upside of Brexit and that seek to mitigate the downsides in a constructive , sensible manner that be respectful of the UK ' s democratic choice . I respect those that come up with plan to make Brexit work as well as possible , in the short as well as long term . I do n't respect those that seek to bully or blackmail the UK into reverse our choice . and , guess what - I bet that upbeat , optimistic firm such as Burberry will do much good than those that still refuse to accept the new political reality . ' I respect those that come up with plan to make Brexit work as well as possible '
Hammond : I ' ll prove Britain can flourish in custom union
Philip Hammond be prepare to challenge Liam Fox to prove that Britain ' s trade deal after Brexit will compensate for the loss it face from leave the EU ' S custom union . Treasury official have draw up an analysis which question whether Britain will be able to line up free trade arrangement with non-EU country that outweigh the cost of leave the custom union . the Chancellor want Britain to retain associate membership of the custom union during an ` ` implementation period ' ' after Brexit to ensure it can continue to enjoy ` ` frictionless ' ' border arrangement . however , Dr Fox , the International Development Secretary , say Britain need to leave the custom union so it can exploit the trading opportunity provide by Brexit . the custom union enable tarifffree trade between member of the EU while also reduce administrative and financial barrier such as custom check and charge . but it also mean Britain can not strike its own free-trade deal with non-EU country . Mr Hammond say last month that develop new custom arrangement after Brexit would be difficult . he say : ` ` to do this in the context of our wide objective will be challenging . it will almost certainly involve the deployment of new technology . ' ' Mr Hammond have vow to put business first in Brexit talk , and say that immigration would not be ` ` shut down ' ' but rather ` ` managed ' ' after Brexit . he say : ` ` we recognise that this be a negotiation , and our negotiate counterpart will have their own priority . when the British people vote last June , they do not vote to become poor , or less secure . ' '
Scotland Sturgeon : pm plan economic ' race to the bottom '
Nicola Sturgeon yesterday claim that Theresa May ' s plan for a clean break with the EU will mean a ` ` low tax , de-regulated race to the bottom ' ' as she intensify her effort to use Brexit to push for Scottish independence . the First Minister say it appear Brexit would mean the UK strip away worker ' right to help deliver a low-cost environment for business and argue this economic model raise a ` ` fundamental question ' ' about ` ` what kind of country do we want to be ' ' . her late warning follow report that the Prime Minister will use a major speech tomorrow to state that she intend to take Britain out of the single market and custom union so the UK can control its border and negotiate its own trade deal . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , suggest yesterday that he could cut tax to encourage company to move to the UK if the EU retaliate by limit access to the single market . but the ` ` clean break ' ' strategy threaten to inflict major political damage on Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , who have repeatedly state that maintain free trade with the EU in the Brexit deal be more important than limit immigration . Mike Russell , the SNP ' S Brexit Minister , yesterday tweet an extract of an interview Ms Davidson give last July in which she say she want to stay in the single market even if that mean keep free movement of labour . he say that he hope Tory MSPs would support this stance in a Holyrood debate tomorrow after which they will vote on a Scottish government motion back the SNP ' s plan for Scotland to stay in the EU single market even if the rest of the UK come out . but critic have warn that Ms Sturgeon ' S highly complicate proposal to create a separate business regime north of the Border would create a hard economic border with England . the Spanish government have also appear to deliver a fatal blow to the plan by state there would be one Brexit deal for the whole of the UK and no special arrangement for Scotland . react to medium report yesterday outline the Brexit model Mrs May intend to pursue , Ms Sturgeon tweet : ` ` look like Brexit will mean low tax , de-regulated race to the bottom , with worker ' right , environmental protection etc under threat . ' ' she add : ` ` if that be the case , it raise a more fundamental question - not just be we in/out the EU , but what kind of country do we want to be ? ' ' Alex Rowley , Scottish Labour ' s deputy leader , describe the report as ` ` worrying ' ' and argue it be in Scotland ' s good interest to have access to the single market . the conservative reject Ms Sturgeon ' S argument and the attack on Ms Davidson , argue the First Minister should instead focus on work with the UK Government to get the good Brexit deal . John Lamont , the party ' s chief whip , say : ` ` this be just the late insight into Nicola Sturgeon try to further her separation goal by toy with the Brexit argument . ' '
after woo the Leavers , Mrs May must offer a Brexit for Remainers ; the PM have prove she want to take us out of the EU . now she should reach out to those who disagree
there be nothing , it seem , that Theresa May do not want to make work for ` ` everyone ' ' rather than the ` ` privileged few ' ' . this have be her trademark phrase , bolt on to everything from the economy to democracy . it be , of course , meaningless - unless she can point us to a prime minister who promise to govern for the benefit of the few . in her New year message , Mrs May go a step further and promise a Brexit that work for everyone , even for those who vote to remain in the European Union . quite a pledge , but she want this to be the year of the olive branch . it do n't last for long . within a few sentence she have slip back to the old sectarian language hail Brexit voter as the overlook and downtrodden - stand in contrast , one assume , to the wealthy and aloof Remainers . the Prime Minister should be forgive for make such point : she back the lose side in the referendum and often seem to feel ( wrongly ) guilty about it . Britain remain sore about the referendum . the poll suggest a nation still evenly split . remnant of both camp be still fight hard , but there ' s a case to be make for peace . and she be the woman to make it . Mrs May be in an enviable position of be a Remainer who be trust , completely , by Brexiteers . her muchmocked soundbite , ` ` Brexit mean Brexit , ' ' be her way of say that she could be trust . there would be no sneaky attempt to be a member in all but name : no free movement of people , no more diktat from European judge and the Article @card@ notice serve to the EU by April Fool ' S day . at time , she have sound more strident than any of her colleague , talk about the referendum as if it be a victory of the mass and an overdue defeat for the ` ` citizen of the world ' ' . this be the paradox . have Michael Gove or Boris Johnson win the Tory party leadership , they ' d have do far more to reassure Remain voter that Brexit be not a nativist coup . they ' d have spend week on a love-bombing mission to Europe , offer new scholarship to British university and new , generous form of defence and economic cooperation . Daniel Hannan , a leader Leaver , tell the European Parliament ( in French ) that the referendum be a vote against the EU ' S bureaucracy , not against Europe . the leave campaign offer a liberal and globally mind version of Brexit , one they would have fight hard to project and protect . instead , it be Mrs May who take the crown and she jump the other way , sound mean than the most flintyhearted Brexiteer . even Ukip be appall to see her use the three million EU national live in Britain as bargaining chip , but at least , now , there be no Brexiteer who doubt her intention . she spend the second half of last year establish herself as the Brexit Boadicea , who enjoy flay her enemy . if leave campaigner have a problem with her nowadays , it be that she can take thing a little too far . her credential be such that she can now sound more conciliatory and the opportunity to do so will come in her speech about Europe later this month . the idea of a Brexit that work for Remainers be not so preposterous , if you consider the argument that animate the campaign and the overlap between www.them.No one be very enthusiastic about the EU itself , which be why Remainers struggle to make a positive case for stay in . they instead seek to frame the referendum as be about something more : a choice between a Britain that be open or closed , tolerant or bigoted , internationalist or nativist . it be a powerful argument , and remain so now . Mrs May can adopt this language , and speak about an open , tolerant global Britain - one that have just vote to lift its sight to more distant horizon . a country that cherish immigrant and need more , albeit under a fair , accountable admission system . that she look forward to an end to Australian and Indian immigrant be discriminate against simply because they be not European . at the Davos economic forum later this month she can boast that , at a time when protectionism be on the rise , Britain stand ready to champion free trade . she be not use to make such argument , but this be how Brexit be successfully sell to an outward-looking nation . if she be to change her mind and allow all EU migrant to stay in Britain , for example , poll suggest she would be thank by four fifth of the public and three quarter of leave voter . the harsh kind of Brexit that she occasionally seem to champion , one that do n't much care about uncertainty cast over Polish NHS nurse and their child in British school , would never have win the referendum . a more emollient tone would also help prepare the ground for what critic would call a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , which be look increasingly likely . Sir Ivan Rogers , our now-departed ambassador to the EU , be probably right to say that most European diplomat think there ' s no chance of her agree a deal by the next election . the EU ' s chief objective be its own survival , and it can scarcely afford to let Britain walk away from the club without any real punishment . Mrs May will be negotiate with a wounded beast , one whose leader face their own Eurosceptic challenger at home . the bad thing get on the continent , the less the chance of the EU agree a sensible compromise with Britain . Mrs May seem to sense this , and have start to talk about how no deal be good than a bad deal . she might soon start to make the case for pull out of talk and fall back on what might be call ` ` global free trade ' ' : the basic rule of the World Trade Organisation . this be the basis for our trade with the United States , our big export market , so it ' S hardly a disaster . it would leave her free to cut deal with any country in the world , on her own term . but politically , she would need to make this sound like a positive choice , not the result of failure in Brussels . all tell , the Prime Minister have choose the right moment to stop talk as if she be somehow elect to govern for the @card@ per cent and reach out to Remainers , too . whether at home or abroad , she will soon need every friend she can get . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland @card@ Tory rebel ready to support Corbyn on Brexit ; Labour leader ' s motion to force publication of May ' S plan ' supportable ' , say ex-Conservative minister
up To @card@ pro-European Conservative MP be prepare to rebel against the government and back a move by Labour to force it to publish its plan for leave the European Union , a former minister have say . Labour will tomorrow table a motion in the Commons to attempt to force Theresa May to publish the plan before Brexit negotiation be formally trigger in March . Downing Street source make clear the government will not support the motion . Mrs May yesterday accuse the Liberal Democrats and Labour of ` ` frustrate the will of the people ' ' by plot to delay or overturn Brexit . Nick Clegg , the former Liberal Democrat leader , say at the weekend that his party be prepare to vote against trigger Brexit negotiation unless it be give guarantee on Single Market access and a second referendum . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , have say that he will seek to amend any bill on the Article @card@ process to withdraw from the European union in order to guarantee worker ' S right . the Prime Minister ' S spokesman say yesterday : ` ` while other be seem to make clear that they want to frustrate the will of the British people by slow down the process of leave and try to tie the government ' s hand in the negotiation , the government be get on with respect what the British people decide and make a success of Brexit ' ' the motion , table by Mr Corbyn , demand that the government set out its broad aim for Brexit and appear carefully craft to attract as much Conservative support as possible . it acknowledge that there ` ` should be no disclosure of material that could be reasonably judge to damage the UK in any negotiation ' ' . Anna Soubry , a former employment minister , tell BBC Radio @card@ ' s world at one : ` ` I have read the motion . I ca n't see anything in it that I do n't approve of and could n't support . ` ` I have never vote against my government , I have always be very loyal , but this transcend party politics . ' ' she suggest that up to @card@ Conservative MP could back the motion unless the government publish its own alternative . Pro-European source in the Tory party suggest the number be likely to be close to @card@ , which be still significantly more than the government ' S majority . EU citizen live in the UK will need ` ` some sort of documentation ' ' to prove their status , the Home Secretary have announce . Amber Rudd say that people already live here will have to prove they have a right to stay as part of plan to help employer understand who can legally work in Britain , but MP have warn the process could cost £100 million .
EU negotiator question Brexit Secretary ' s ' lack of involvement ' ; Brussels be tell to ' get serious ' after Juncker ' S comment on ' stability and accountability ' of Davis
David Davis ' S relationship with Brussels reach a new low yesterday when EU negotiator question whether he be he be sufficiently ` ` stable , accountable and available ' ' during Brexit talk . Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , say Mr Davis ' s ` ` apparent lack of involvement ' ' risk ` ` jeopardise the success of the negotiation ' ' . supporter of Mr Davis hit back at the ` ` bar room insult ' ' and suggest that Mr Juncker be more interested in a ` ` public slagging match ' ' than reach a pragmatic solution on Brexit . it come as senior EU figure suggest trade talk can not now begin until at least December , rather than October , as be previously suggest . a debate over the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill get under way in Parliament yesterday but it be overshadow by the comment make by Mr Juncker and Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , in a briefing to all @card@ EU commissioner . minute of the meeting on July @card@ , publish for the first time , disclose that Mr Barnier ` ` express his concern about the question of the stability and accountability of the UK negotiator and his apparent lack of involvement , which risk jeopardise the success of the negotiation ' ' . Mr Davis do not respond to the comment , which the Brexit department say be ` ` out of date ' ' . but Charlie Elphicke , the Tory MP , say : ` ` it ' s clear the British government seize the initiative in the negotiation be cause frustration in Brussels . ` ` these bar room insult show how weak and defensive they have become . the clock be tick - there be less than @card@ day to go . they need to get serious about the negotiation . ' ' at a press conference in Brussels , Mr Barnier insist he have a ` ` cordial ' ' and ` ` professional ' ' relationship with Mr Davis . however , he be combative in his comment about the future of the border between the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland as he present several new Brexit position paper . he heap pressure on Britain to ensure Brexit do not jeopardise the good Friday Agreement , Common Travel Area and ` ` invisible border ' ' between the Republic and Northern Ireland . Mr Barnier say British hope of a bespoke custom deal on the Irish border that could be replicate for all UK-EU trade be doom to failure . ` ` the UK position paper worry me . ' ' he say . ` ` the UK want to use Ireland as a kind of test case for a future UK-EU custom relationship . this will not happen . ' ' the late round of negotiation break up last week with a stalemate over the size of any Brexit ` ` divorce bill ' ' Britain must pay the EU and progress still need on citizen ' right and the Irish border issue . the EU have say it will only begin trade talk when it be satisfy that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make - a decision that be go to be address in October . the European Parliament president Antonio Tajani say he would advise the European council to delay its assessment until December , while former Council president Herman van Rompuy say the chance of move on to the second phase in October be ` ` in the neighbourhood of zero ' ' . editorial comment : page @card@ pressure on Corbyn MP push for policy of free movement Labour MP be attempt to force Jeremy Corbyn to accept permanent freedom of movement as party policy , as around two dozen consider rebel against his Brexit plan . a pro-Remain group be seek a debate at Labour ' s annual conference , which could force Mr Corbyn to pledge to allow free movement of EU national after Brexit by stay in the single market . Labour have commit to keep free movement for an interim period but have stop short of promise to do so permanently . all Labour MP have be tell to vote against the EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill and the programme motion that allocate time to the debate next week . but at least half a dozen have say they will vote for the Bill , while as many as two dozen other be consider abstain over fear about immigration policy .
beneficial trade deal can continue after Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - of all the country in the European Union , the Netherlands be one of the most friendly towards Britain . I be therefore dismay to hear their finance minister , Jeroen Dijsselbloem , declare on Tuesday ' s Newsnight that Brexit represent a ` ` lose-lose situation ' ' for both Britain and Europe . of course , Brexit mean Brexit , and we shall surrender our seat in the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission - but there be really no reason why our existing trading arrangement should not survive to the benefit of both party . Mr Dijsselbloem appear to be say that , unless we accept the free movement of people within the EU , both party will suffer negative economic consequence . he do not seem to take into account that , once out of the EU , it would be deeply unfair for us to discriminate against citizen from the rest of the world in favour of EU citizen . Tim Spurrier Brooke , Norfolk Sir - your front-page article ( November @card@ ) quote the German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , as say that make an exception for Britain to the rule of freedom of movement in the wake of Brexit would ` ` endanger principle of the whole internal market in the EU , because everyone else will then want these exception ' ' . I always think that do ` ` what everyone want ' ' be a basic principle of democracy . Geoffrey Leeming Holyhead , Anglesey Sir - it might be easy to settle on what ` ` Brexit ' ' mean if we start give it its full name - Britain ' s exit from the European Union . to define that , it be first necessary to understand what be mean by the ` ` European Union ' ' . be it to be a Europe of Free States , as advocate by Marine Le Pen of France ' S National Front - or be it to be the United States of Europe , as advocate by Brussels ? the former be close to what Britain first sign up to ; the latter be a different world . Philip Styles Cheddar , Somerset
Remainers be just be disingenuous ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : so much of the argument against Brexit be disingenuous . critic claim that they be motivate by one thing when their thinking be plainly inform by another . they all ignore the will of the people . the only way they will get away with it be if the government let them . consider the Scottish National Party , which have announce that legislation will be publish next week threaten another independence referendum if Scotland and the UK do not remain within the single market . the EU be not really the issue here : Nicola Sturgeon be buckle to pressure from within her own party . never mind that if Scotland vote for independence then it would find itself outside both the EU and the UK . never mind , either , that poll show Scot do n't even want a referendum . Mrs Sturgeon have a base to satisfy . then there be Unilever , which claim a fall pound necessitate a rise in its price - include Marmite . outraged MP hit back by argue that all the ingredient for Marmite be find within the UK . Unilever appear to have back down , which suggest it be not Brexit that be responsible for any potential price rise , but the desire of a company to increase profit . an intensely political multinational , we note , that speak out against Brexit during the referendum . so , of course , do a lot of MP - and now they insist that Parliament must be in the drive seat for Brexit . the hypocrisy of some of them be breathtaking . for year they sit by as the EU undermine Parliament ' S sovereignty . now they want to assert it . some Tories take this position be motivate by principle - but it be hard to forget that some of them be sack minister and might be describe as ` ` disgruntled former employee ' ' . on the Labour side , people who violently oppose Brexit now pay lip service to it while desperately fight for way to stymie it . they need to agree on a coherent strategy . Ed Miliband , who lose the @card@ election on a manifesto that oppose a referendum , say that Britain must remain within the single market but rethink freedom of movement . Jeremy Corbyn have say that integral aspect of the single market must go but that unlimited immigration must continue . Mr Cobyn be never a fan of the European project : he feel he must play the Europhile to appease his increasingly metropolitan party . but the Labour side be pack with other who have a fanatical commitment to the EU . their goal be obvious : to prevent Brexit through parliamentary debate and delay . some , such as David Lammy MP , have have the decency to be honest about their intention . ` ` Our sovereign Parliament need to now vote on whether we should exit the EU , ' ' he say after the referendum . ` ` we can stop this madness and bring this nightmare to an end . ' ' most voter do not consider Brexit madness . they accept that negotiation will be tough , they understand that thing might get difficult . but they can also see that those Remainers make a fuss about parliamentary sovereignty be , in some case , bitter loser try to undo the referendum . what they want to see be Theresa May take control of the political situation . there have be a lack of clarity about her objective ; some of the talk about business policy post-Brexit have be ambiguous , even unfriendly . this be unnecessary . Britain have a bright , free-trading future . the government need to be more specific about its global ambition and get on with the job . it must resist the antidemocratic scheme of Remainers in denial .
Brexit ' would deliver a ' great ' blow to eurozone economy ' ; up to @card@ pc of eurozone GDP would be wipe off in @card@ month should Britain leave , economist claim
the eurozone would suffer a substantial economic blow if Britain vote to leave the European Union , economist have warn . up to 0.3pc of eurozone GDP will be wipe off the single currency ' S @card@ economy within @card@ month , Dutch bank ING have calculate , note that any prolonged political fallout from a Brexit could cause even ` ` great and longer lasting ' ' damage to the bloc . Ireland would see the big economic contraction in the event of a Brexit , with cumulative growth down by as much as 1.1pc in the two year period follow this summer ' S referendum , say ING . the adverse impact on Ireland be almost as much as that estimate for the UK economy which could shrink by 1.2pc until @card@ . Malta , the Netherlands , Belgium and Luxembourg would also suffer a substantial hit with growth low by between 1pc and 0.7pc . Germany , the eurozone ' s large economy , be in line to suffer a 0.5pc GDP contraction , with France at 0.4pc and Italy the least affect at 0.3pc . fall export , weak investment and a shift in the direction of EU economic policy away from free market reform , would all combine to create a sizeable adverse shock to the continent , say Peter Vanden Houte and Carsten Brzeski , economist at ING . in the short term , a sharp depreciation in the pound - which could fall as low as ( Euro ) @card@ against the euro - would crimp eurozone export to the UK , with small trading nation such as Ireland , Belgium and the Netherlands suffer the big loss to trade . a weak pound would also see profit of European company fall when convert into euros and leave eurozone business possibly face high trade tariff if bilateral trade deal with the UK be not conclude within the two-year time frame award by Brussels after a ' leave ' vote , they say . the Dutch bank ' S calculation be more severe than rival estimation of the economic consequence of a Brexit for Europe . Germany ' S Bertelsmann Foundation forecast a Brexit would only lower eurozone GDP by as much as 0.36pc up over the next @card@ year . but highlight the political turmoil unleash on the EU after the summer referendum , the report say a messy exit for the UK mean the risk of a ` ` broad fragmentation of the European Union have therefore increase , with potential negative economic consequence in the long run ' ' . ` ` by agree to a ' deal ' the rest of Europe have make itself vulnerable to copycat : other country may also ask for exception and national special treatment , ' ' say Mr Vanden Houte . Ing ' S warning come as Swiss asset manager Unigestion say a Brexit would prove ` ` more detrimental for the European Union and the eurozone than for the UK ' ' . Brexit would be the ` ` first actual step back in the European construction process that start in @card@ ' ' , say the Geneva-based fund which manage £16.3bn in asset . ` ` if there be one consequence investor should anticipate out of the Brexit situation , it would be renew question of the viability of the European construction as it sit today ' ' , say Unigestion .
without a free trade vision , we may lose our Brexit opportunity
proverb @card@ in the King James Bible state , ` ` where there be no vision the people perish ' ' . in a contemporary context the verse make me think ` ` where there be no vision Brexit perish ' ' . the Prime Minister ' s Florence and conference speech be n't about the ` ` vision thing ' ' - a vision of Britain ' s place in the world , a new , outward-looking , dynamic economy , eager to exploit post-EU freedom to become the ultimate offshore economy , very free , very big and very wealthy . but that ' s the vision that need to be sell . instead of be iffy about abandon the EU regulatory state , the Prime Minister and Chancellor should embrace the offshore potential exhibit by small economy such as Singapore and Hong Kong . per capita nominal GDP ( in US dollar ) in Singapore be 33pc high than in the UK . we should abandon the EU regulatory state and embrace economic freedom with alacrity . turn away from interventionism and towards economic freedom be much more than abandon statism at home . it be also about abandon protectionism abroad . it be about the destruction of the protectionist fortress that be the EU Common External tariff , and its replacement with classical free trade and zero-tariff and non-tariff barrier on import from every country in the world . this be the true Holy Grail of Brexit : zero-tariff and non-tariff barrier on import from everywhere . unfortunately , HM Treasury see the Holy Grail as precisely the opposite - zero-tariff and non-tariff barrier on our export to the EU . if the Prime Minister be to project a vision of opportunity post Brexit , she need to abandon the Treasury world view with alacrity as well . wed to its gravity model and ridiculous projection of what Brexit would do to the economy in the short and long term , HM Treasury have box itself into a corner and ca n't get out.Unfortunately it mean the post-Brexit vision be box into a corner as well . the electorate be desperate for a positive vision of Brexit . it have vote to leave the EU and now want its political leader to promise the world and deliver it . somebody need to brief the Prime Minister on the remarkable opportunity that have land on her doorstep , which she seem unaware of . First be the historic opportunity to implement classical free trade . the Prime Minister have the opportunity to go down in history as the First Lord of the Treasury who deliver the Holy Grail . in his biography of Sir Robert Peel , the Prime Minister who lead the 19th century abolition of the Corn Laws , Douglas Hurd state : ` ` he do not invent the doctrine of free trade . but Sir Robert be in undisputed charge of the crucial country at the crucial moment . ' ' Second be the political opportunity.The treasury perspective on Brexit be producer drive , whereas classical free trade be drive by the consumer and the gain they will receive from trading at low world price - a difference that could be 10pc to 20pc . the gain to consumer from classical free trade be huge . the Prime Minister have an unprecedented opportunity to be on the side of the little guy and show why free market competition be good for everyone . classical free trade will lower price and boost the spending power of consumer in the short term and raise long-term productivity and income . third , classical free trade provide a deliverable opportunity . if the government promise it they can deliver it . it ' s a decision entirely within the control of the government . it do n't have to be negotiate with the EU , all it require be lodge a tariff schedule full of zero with the WTO . fourth , Brexit provide an opportunity for moral leadership . classical free trade be a truly selfless policy . it ' s a world apart from selfish protectionism or even self-interested trade negotiation . it could be our great export to the world . classical free trade be also an enlightened policy because at its heart lie the counter intuitive truth that by move to trade at world price , powerful positive economic force be unleash . this be the economic opportunity from Brexit . the economic opportunity come in two part . First be the static effect , whereby low import price free up the spending power of consumer to purchase other good and service . the full effect of tariff and non-tariff barrier impose by the EU have be estimate to raise import price 10pc to 20pc compare with world price . this be a huge potential boost to the discretionary spending power of consumer . second be the dynamic effect . this be the spur of great competition on UK producer , which raise productivity and make both producer and consumer well off in the long run . then there be the entrepreneurial opportunity . Brexit provide the opportunity to systematically take down the regulatory state and its impact on product and labour market . it ' s an opportunity to implement common sense regulation alongside common sense value . however the entrepreneurial opportunity should not end there . the government should seize the moment and announce a breathtaking shift in tax policy to boost the UK ' S competitiveness . the obvious example would be to say corporation tax would be reduce to 10pc by @card@ . there ' S also the opportunity to use classical free trade to boost the City . the big advocate of free trade would be home to the big financial centre . talk about great brand and alignment in a 21st century network world . this be an opportunity that would grow and grow as the EU pursue its desire for a financial transaction tax . finally , post Brexit the UK could get its geopolitical relationship with the EU and the rest of the world right . the analogy here for the EU be that we all have great friend , but if we marry them that relationship could end in divorce . one can get too close with certain friend and that undermine instead of strengthen the relationship . with regard to the rest of the world , opportunity for free trade agreement abound , but there be also the opportunity to develop deep trading relationship with the Anglosphere - the US , Canada , Australia and New Zealand . these economy already account for 33pc of global GDP with the UK . the fall in the price of food as a result of the abolition of the Corn Laws unleash a tremendous rise in production from factory aid by the new rail economy . this can be surpass in the 21st century by free trade and the new network economy . in the word of the Foreign Secretary , we need to ` ` let the lion roar ' ' . Graeme Leach be founder and chief economist of consultancy Macronomics ' classical free trade be a truly selfless policy and could be Britain ' s great export to the world '
Boris warn May Brexit transition can not exceed @card@ year ; MP tell May to walk away from EU talk by Christmas if there be no sign of trade deal
Boris Johnson say the Brexit transition must last ` ` not a second more ' ' than two year as he lay out a series of challenge to Theresa May on the eve of the Conservative party conference . the Foreign Secretary insist there can be ` ` no monkey around ' ' over the date the implementation phase end , and also say Britain must not accept any new EU rule or European Court of Justice ruling after March @card@ . but Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader who will be among the first speaker when the conference begin tomorrow , attack Mr Johnson by say that ` ` serious people ' ' need to be in charge of Brexit . Ms Davidson , who along with Mr Johnson be one of the favourite to succeed Mrs May as Tory leader , say that ` ` overoptimism ' ' about the future of Britain outside the EU ` ` sell people short ' ' - a direct reference to Mr Johnson ' S 4,000-word Brexit essay in the Daily Telegraph a fortnight ago . the party conference in Manchester be see by many as a make-or-break moment for Mrs May ' S hope of lead the conservative for year to come , and likely to be dominate by Brexit and the leadership question . Mrs May be under pressure on multiple front , and have be tell by Tory MP she must walk away from EU talk at Christmas if Brussels fail to start negotiate a trade deal by then . party grandee include former Brexit minister David Jones today insist the Prime Minister should give formal notice that the UK will leave without a deal if ` ` serious ' ' talk on a free trade deal have not begin by the end of the year . they say Britain have ` ` nothing to fear ' ' from a no-deal scenario and must not be ` ` hold to ransom ' ' by the EU . it come after Jean-Claude Juncker , the President of the European Commission , say ` ` miracle ' ' would be need for talk on a trade deal to begin by the end of October . Mrs May look humiliate yesterday when she attend an EU summit in Estonia and be keep as far away as possible from the German Chancellor Angela Merkel in official picture . at one point Mrs Merkel appear to be make a ` ` binoculars ' ' gesture towards Mrs May because she be so far away from her .
Labour plot to derail the Great repeal Bill ; Watson say Labour be party of ' soft Brexit ' as it demand series of change to Government ' S plan
labour will next week unveil plan to block Theresa May ' s great repeal Bill after Tom Watson say they be now the party of ` ` soft Brexit ' ' . the party ' s deputy leader say Labour will support Britain stay part of the custom union and single market during any transition , and hint it may support indefinite membership . Labour will seek to derail the bill by demand a series of change to win its support for the plan , which will be bring before MP later this month . the party be expect to set out condition on worker ' right , how much power government minister will have to change EU law once they be on the UK statute book and how the transition process will work after Britain leave in @card@ . it will not support the bill as it have be propose by the government , source say , make it difficult for Mrs May to get it through the commons if any of her own MP rebel . the plot have lead to fear that Labour be seek to block Brexit or delay the process and force the UK to accept concession hand down by the EU . Mr Watson brand Labour the party of soft Brexit - a step further than previous public statement make by Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary . he tell BBC Newsnight : ` ` you have see Keir Starmer ' S statement , we think that being part of the custom union and the single market be important in those transitional time because that be the way you protect job and the economy , and it might be a permanent outcome of the negotiation , but we have get to see how those negotiation go . ' ' Sir Keir say the UK should transitionally remain in the trade organisation for up to four year after formally leave the EU in @card@ . with such a tight majority Theresa May will need the support of all her MP , include those who oppose Brexit , to get the legislation through . but strong opposition on Labour bench could make it difficult for the Prime Minister and Mr Watson ' s claim that the UK could remain in the single market and custom union ` ` permanently ' ' have lead to fear that the party could try to block Brexit altogether . the Great repeal Bill be design to copy and paste EU law into British law to provide continuity . the rule can then be amend or scrap at a late date . but a Labour source warn the party have concern about how much power will be leave in the hand of Mrs May and her minister . if the bill fail to make its way through Parliament , the government will be unable to transpose EU law onto the UK statute book and minister argue this could lead to the UK crash out of the union without enough control over the process . Labour have be criticise for shift its position on Brexit after Jeremy Corbyn previously take a much hard line on leave , call for Article @card@ to be trigger right away and claim the country can not stay inside the single market after leave . this be because of concern that freedom of movement would still apply in this case , one of the driver of the Brexit vote . however , Sir Keir have soften the party ' S position and Labour now support a transitional period , although Mr Watson ' S remark hint at an even more sceptical approach .
Scotland Sturgeon urge to use Brexit to win Scotland extra power ; First Minister urge to use Brexit to secure new settlement that Scot can unite around
a Leading constitutional expert have urge Nicola Sturgeon to put aside another independence referendum and use Brexit instead to work towards a ` ` confederal deal ' ' that would bring Holyrood wide-ranging new power . Prof Jim Gallagher say the vote to leave the EU be economically bad for Scotland but paradoxically might offer the country a chance to ` ` reset ' ' its relationship with the rest of the UK . he also warn that another independence vote could create deep division than those cause by the vote to leave the EU . he use a lecture at Glasgow University to suggest Holyrood should have new power over area such as agriculture , fishery and the environment , while operate independently of the UK but ` ` co-operate with it as equal ' ' . Prof Gallagher say Scotland have already go beyond federalism , and describe confederalism as a ` ` set of different country , different nation , of radically different size who have enter into a common relationship for a lot of very important thing , like run a currency , run an internal single market , share some welfare risk , share defence and so on ' ' . he also argue that Brexit could even pave the way for some control over migration be hand to minister in Scotland , Wales , Northern Ireland and even the London mayor . he claim it be ` ` entirely possible , and arguably desirable ' ' that politician in Edinburgh could ` ` manage the process of EU migration into their territory ' ' , while also admit it would be politically ` ` difficult ' ' . his comment come as the muchvaunted ` ` iron discipline ' ' of the SNP continue to crumble in advance of its conference in Glasgow this week . his word echo those of Alex Neil , a former SNP cabinet minister , who urge Ms Sturgeon in the Daily Telegraph last month to seek ` ` neo-independence ' ' for Scotland by abandon her referendum threat . other senior figure have warn against a rush to a snap second vote , include Kenny Macaskill , the former justice minister , who say yesterday that Ms Sturgeon ' S agenda have be mark ` ` more by timidity than radicalism ' ' . Prof Gallagher , professor of government at Glasgow University and a research fellow at Nuffield College , Oxford , say that if the government on both side of the border be imaginative they could reach a deal that would keep Scotland in ` ` a confederation with the rest of the UK ' ' while give it space to develop its own relationship with Europe . the former senior civil servant , who back the Better together campaign , continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ tell the BBC ' S Good Morning Scotland programme : ` ` there be a bundle of additional power head Holyrood ' S way ... that inevitably mean that Holyrood be go to be a more powerful institution . ` ` in a sense I be find consolation in Brexit . I would prefer Brexit do n't happen because Brexit be economically bad for Scotland and it be economically bad for the UK , but give that something call Brexit be go to happen there be still opportunity in it . ' ' he add : ` ` the SNP , of course they want independence , there be no secret about that . but they also want what be good for Scotland and one of the thing that be go to be good for Scotland I hope ... be that maybe we can stop be divide about the constitution and we can coalesce around a constitutional arrangement that most Scot would think give them most of what they want . ' ' Prof Gallagher warn there be no certainty about what an independent Scotland ' s relationship with the EU would be , while separation would raise ` ` unanswerable question ' ' , include those over currency , the loss of oil revenue and the border with the rest of the UK . write in the Times , Mr Macaskill , who step down as an MSP in May , call on the First Minister to focus more on domestic policy . he urge her to take action on health , education and local government instead of just ` ` manage decline ' ' . Jackson Carlaw , the Scottish Conservative deputy leader , say the comment be another reminder to the First Minister that her priority should be the ` ` day job ' ' . he add : ` ` while radical element of the SNP membership want to prioritise another separation vote , the First Minister would do well to ignore this . ' '
Scotland ' we must look beyond Europe ' ; PM set out Brexit blueprint to make Britain ' truly global ' ? there will be no border deal to keep UK in single market ; ' we ' ll decide ourselves how we control immigration '
Britain must look beyond Europe for economic success , the Prime Minister have say as she suggest there would be no deal on immigration to keep the UK in the single market . set out her first detailed blueprint for Brexit Theresa May say that the UK would become ` ` truly global ' ' as she list eight nation include China , India and Singapore prepare to sign major free trade deal with the UK . address the Conservative Party conference yesterday for the first time since become Prime Minister , Mrs May make it clear that border control be a red line in the Brexit negotiation , say that ` ` we be not leave the European union only to give up control of immigration again ' ' . Mrs May say that after Brexit the UK will be ` ` a fully independent , sovereign country ' ' that will no longer be in the ` ` jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice ' ' , suggest that Britain be prepare to leave the single market . the Prime Minister also affirm that Scotland will leave the EU with the rest of the UK after Nicola Sturgeon ' s Brexit minister rehash her disputed claim she can block the process . Mrs May tell the conference there would be ` ` no opt-out from Brexit ' ' and she would ` ` never allow divisive nationalist to undermine the precious union between the four nation of our United Kingdom . ' ' she say her government would negotiate its departure from the EU ` ` as one United Kingdom and we will leave the European union as one United Kingdom ' ' . in an angry response , the First Minister accuse Mrs May of ` ` go out of her way to say Scotland ' S voice and interest do n't matter . strange approach from someone who want to keep UK together . ' ' address the conference in Birmingham , Mrs May say Tory MP and peer try to stop Britain from leave the EU be ` ` insult the intelligence of the British people ' ' and ` ` subvert democracy ' ' . it come after she say that Britain will leave the EU by @card@ after she announce that she will trigger Article @card@ - the formal process to exit the bloc - by March next year . ` ` Brexit should not just prompt us to think about our new relationship with the European Union , ' ' Mrs May say . ` ` it should make us think about our role in the wide world . ` ` it should make us think of ' Global Britain ' , a country with the self-confidence and the freedom to look beyond the continent of Europe and to the economic and diplomatic opportunity of the wide world . because we know that the referendum be not a vote to turn in ourselves , to cut ourselves off from the world . it be a vote for Britain to stand tall , to believe in ourselves , to continued on Page @card@ report : page @card@ Dominic Raab : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ forge an ambitious and optimistic new role in the world . ' ' she add : ` ` Countries include Canada , China , India , Mexico , Singapore and South Korea have already tell us they would welcome talk on future free trade agreement . and we have already agree to start scoping discussion on trade agreement with Australia and New Zealand . a truly global Britain be possible , and it be in sight . ' ' take the unusual step for a Tory leader of address the annual Conservative conference on its opening day , Mrs May confirm plan for a Great repeal Bill to overturn the @card@ act that take the UK into what be then the European Economic Community . she reject the argument of a choice between ` ` hard Brexit ' ' - in which the nation regain control over immigration but lose full access to the European single market - and ` ` soft Brexit ' ' , with access to the single market but free movement for EU worker . to rapturous applause from her audience , Mrs May say : ` ` I know some people ask about the ' trade-off ' between control immigration and trading with Europe . but that be the wrong way of look at thing . ` ` we have vote to leave the European union and become a fully independent , sovereign country . we will do what independent , sovereign country do . we will decide for ourselves how we control immigration . and we will be free to pass our own law . ' ' EU leader have repeatedly say that Britain will get no access to the single market unless it continue with freedom of movement rule , allow all EU citizen to live and work in the UK . speak after Mrs May , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say that ` ` in an age of anxiety and uncertainty it be surely obvious that the value of global Britain be need more than ever ' ' . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary say that Mrs May would prove Brexit opponent wrong in the same way as Margaret Thatcher defy her critic to become Britain ' s longest-serving prime minister . ` ` back in @card@ , [ Mrs Thatcher ' s ] government have to confront some huge challenge , ' ' he say . ` ` and today , just as then , we be at a turn point in our nation ' S story . just as then , people have vote to chart a new course for our country - to transform Britain . ` ` and just as then , there be no shortage of doom-mongers tell Britain that it ca n't be do . lady and gentleman , Britain show them it could be do . we prove them wrong then , and with your help , Britain will prove them wrong again . ' ' ' in an age of anxiety and uncertainty it be surely obvious that the value of global Britain be need more than ever '
Scotland Sturgeon warn of lose decade after Brexit
Nicola Sturgeon yesterday argue that Scot could avoid Britain ' s ` ` lost decade ' ' while it face the consequence of Brexit by opt for independence . the First Minister tell MSPs that the UK be face @card@ year of turmoil that will inflict ` ` deep and severe ' ' damage and this should make Scot ` ` sit up ' ' . give evidence to Holyrood ' s Europe committee , follow new figure show a sharp drop in Scottish unemployment and a record increase in employment , she reject claim this show the impact of the June @card@ Brexit vote have be exaggerate . instead she suggest that a second independence referendum should be stage if there be a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit that hit the financial industry ' s EU passport , restrict free movement , damage university ' link with the continent and ` ` have exporter have to jump through all sort of hurdle in European market ' ' . Ms Sturgeon disclose that Mike Russell , her Brexit negotiation minister , will meet David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , on Thursday to discuss the process by which her government ' S priority will be incorporate in the UK ' s negotiate position with Europe . in an outspoken attack on Theresa May in particular , she argue it be untenable for the UK ' s stance to continue be shroud in a ` ` cloak of secrecy ' ' and say she be brace herself for a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit . but she do not address expert warning that this would mean a separate Scotland have to choose between membership of the EU or the UK single market . Scottish firm export more than four time as many good south of the border as to the rest of Europe . her appearance come ahead of the second anniversary on Sunday of the Nationalists ' defeat in the @card@ independence referendum , which the conservative plan to mark with a series of street event and a call for Ms Sturgeon to drop her demand for a rerun . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , say Ms Sturgeon have sign an agreement promise to respect the result but that pledge ` ` have now go up in smoke . ' ' she also point out that Alex Salmond have promise that the referendum would not be repeat for another generation , perhaps a lifetime . ` ` it be time to let the country move forward , ' ' she add . official figure publish yesterday show the unemployment rate fall by @card@ point between May and July to @card@ per cent , below the UK rate of @card@ per cent , while employment increase by @card@ over the quarter - the large rise on record . but the First Minister yesterday tell MSPs independence have to be an option on the table if Scotland ' s good interest be to be protect . she say : ` ` Brexit have n't start yet . we have n't even start this process yet and that potential for a lose decade for the UK should make us all sit up and take notice . ` ` and in Scotland it should make us think very carefully about whether there be good alternative to just accept that we have to be part of that . ' ' she say the protracted timescale be not yet ` ` fully appreciate ' ' by the public , as the two-year Article @card@ process only cover the UK leave the EU and not the lengthy negotiation over their new relationship .
free movement ' end on day of Brexit '
Theresa May have promise that freedom of movement for EU citizen come to Britain will end on the day Britain leave the EU in March @card@ . Brussels have insist free movement must continue to the last day of any transition period , mean EU citizen would be free to settle in Britain until at least the end of @card@ . but the Prime Minister make it clear that change the rule on migration as soon as Britain leave the EU be a must for her in negotiation over the transition period , which begin next week . speak in China on the first day of a three-day trade visit , she say people ` ` do not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU ' ' . she say that the issue of citizen ' right have be agree in December when the EU agree to move on to trade talk after ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be reach in phase one of talk . the government be yesterday force to accept that it would have to release a leak Brexit economic report in full , despite a warning from Mrs May that do so could undermine negotiation with Brussels . however Robin Walker , a Brexit minister , say that the gloomy report could be redact and that the study would only be make available to MP on a confidential basis . it come as Downing Street rebuke Philip Lee , a junior justice minister , for suggest that the study could put the legitimacy of Brexit in question . he say : ` ` if these figure turn out to be anywhere near right , there would be a serious question over whether a government could legitimately lead a country along a path that the evidence and rational consideration indicate would be damaging . ' ' a Downing Street spokesman say that Mr Lee have be tell by the Chief Whip to keep his view private in future . earlier this week , Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say Britain must accept free movement as part of a status quo implementation period . Eurosceptics rage against the EU ' S position , say Brussels want to delay Brexit . Mrs May say : ` ` when we agree the citizen ' right deal in December , we do so on the basis that people who have come to the UK when we be a member of the EU have certain expectation . ` ` they make a life choice and it be right that we make an agreement that ensure they could continue their life in the way they have want to . for those who come after March @card@ that will be different because they will be come to a UK that they know will be outside the EU . ' ' Brexiteers in the Conservative Party fear a transition deal that would turn Britain into a ` ` vassal state ' ' by force the UK to accept new EU rule and regulation with no power to block them . the Prime Minister say that business welcome the transition period because it give them stability at the point when Britain leave the EU . she also deny that British official be ` ` secretly ' ' negotiate for a threeyear implementation period , say : ` ` we be not talk about something that be go to go on and on . ' ' Mrs may yesterday repeatedly refuse to say she believe that Gavin Williamson , the Defence Secretary , have tell the truth about his departure from a previous job after an office fling . Mr Williamson have come under pressure to clarify his account of the end of his career at fireplace manufacturer Elgin & Hall after former colleague dispute his version of event . the minister tell a newspaper he decide he could no longer work at the company because it would mean he come into daily contact with the married woman with whom he have a romance while he , too , be marry . Allister Heath : page @card@ Nick Timothy : page @card@ ' the British people do not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU '
tax ' revenge ' on tycoon who bankroll Brexit ; HMRC under attack after demand up to £2m on entrepreneur ' EU campaign funding leave campaigner hit with ' political ' tax bill
donor who bankroll the Brexit campaign have accuse the taxman of a ` ` political attack ' ' after they be hit with six or even seven-figure tax demand on their contribution , the Daily Telegraph can disclose . among those targeted be Lord Edmiston , the Midlands entrepreneur , who donate £1million to Brexit campaign ; Peter Cruddas , the City mogul ; and Arron Banks , who make million from his insurance business . HM Revenue and Customs have issue letter in the last fortnight that could land them with tax bill of up to £2million . in what have be dub the ` ` revenge of the Establishment ' ' , the tax authority have seize upon a relatively obscure area of inheritance tax law which force people to pay tax upfront on large ` ` gift ' ' . donation make to political party , charity and other body be usually exempt , but HMRC have say that payment from individual to referendum campaign be taxable . at least one Remain donor have also be send a tax demand - although bank include Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan , which bankroll the Remain campaign , have not be embroil in the crackdown because they can not be make liable for inheritance tax . the demand will disproportionately hit donor who support leave because their various campaign be finance by entrepreneur rather than by mainstream publicly list company that tend to back Remain . the money be donate to leave campaign include the one front by Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary . yesterday Mr Johnson , on a visit to Russia , attack the Kremlin , claim it have unsuccessfully try to interfere in the EU Referendum , and also say he be win a Cabinet battle over a ` ` divergent ' ' Brexit . the three Brexit-supporting businessman last night tell the Telegraph that HMRC be act undemocratically . Philip Hammond , view with suspicion by many Brexit campaigner , may now come under pressure to intervene . HMRC , whose executive chairman be Ed Troup , a former special adviser to Kenneth Clarke , the Remain-supporting former chancellor , last night say the bill be not sanction at board level and be just part of the tax department ' s ` ` day-to-day work ' ' . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the Conservative MP , say the tax bill be hostile to democracy and show that the government be penalise those who challenge it . he say he would write to the Chancellor to complain and suggest that tax law be change . he say : ` ` any money rout through the establishment be tax-free and any money that challenge the establishment be tax - a double outrage because the government spend taxpayer ' money advocate its own view and be now penalise people who have the audacity to challenge it . ` ` it be fundamentally hostile to democracy and the law should be change urgently by amendment to the Finance Bill which be currently go through Parliament . ' ' Matthew Elliott , the former chief executive of Vote leave , say : ` ` it be outrageous that HMRC be target EU referendum donor in this way . ` ` this be the establishment have their revenge on good people who support democratic activity . the Treasury should intervene immediately and force HMRC to rescind the demand . ' ' Lord Edmiston give £850,000 to the official Vote leave campaign and £150,000 to the unofficial grassroots out campaign through his company im Group . he be face a bill of £200,000 . he tell the Telegraph : ` ` I just feel it be against democracy - if any time in the future there be an issue and someone be ask ' would you mind support this particular position ' , the revenue be go to jump on your back . ' ' Mr Cruddas say he would challenge HMRC . he donate £900,000 to the official Vote leave campaign and be face a tax bill of £180,000 . Mr Cruddas , who with his family pay £50million in tax last year , say the claim be ` ` outrageous ' ' and donor feel victimise for take on the government , which spend £9million on a pro-EU leaflet send to every home in Britain . he say : ` ` there be very strict law around donation . you have to be resident and on the electoral roll . so de facto we pay tax on that money . ` ` we put money up - and at the time we be take on the government that put up £9million of taxpayer ' money to present one side of the argument . what we do be to match that through leaflet . I think we be be victimise . my accountant have never see anything like it . ' ' Mr Banks , a former Ukip donor , be also face a demand . he could be expect to pay £2million in inheritance tax on his £8.1million donation to the unofficial Leave.EU campaign . he say the demand be the ` ` revenge of the Establishment ' ' . he add : ` ` after the campaign all the Remainers get gong and the Leavers get kick in the a -- - . that money be tax - why should it be tax a second time ? it be lunacy . it be a political attack . ' ' David Harding , who give £750,000 to the official Britain Stronger in Europe campaign , confirm his tax demand . he say : ` ` I be surprise . I assume it would have be treat like other political donation I make . ' ' by levy the charge , HMRC be think to have decide that those who donate be liable because give away such large sum will reduce the value of their estate when they die . individual can give away £325,000 in their lifetime without pay tax on it . above that , tax will apply . HMRC say that no campaign could be term ` ` a political party ' ' even though they be regulate by the Electoral Commission . a spokesman say : ` ` no special exemption be grant ahead of the referendum . the legislation be apply without regard to the policy of organisation , group or party . ' ' Attack on the Brexiteers the man hit with tax bill of £2million Arron Banks Co-founder of Leave.EU campaign and major UKIP donor . Southern Insurance , have interest in a diamond mine in South Africa CEO of rn Rock nce , erests mond n and a licence to mine in Lesotho . estimated wealth £100m-£250m . bank , EU be shop bankrupt country ' ' @card@ , say the E a ` ` closed sh for bankr countrie and ` ` be hold the UK back ' ' . Peter Cruddas Founder of online trader CMC Markets and one of the rich the City , worth £860m-£1.3bn . a London comprehensive man in , leave n -school with no qualification and work his way to the top . have donate of thousand of to the party effectively chief fundraiser . Lord Edmiston Became a millionaire through his car import and property firm , include International Motors . be 209th in a Sunday Times Rich List with a g onal fortune put at £440m . back the Tories and give them £2m . in a house of debate in @card@ he oppose gay marriage . retire from Lords in July @card@ .
May head to Brussel for talk to save Brexit ; MP take aback as the Prime Minister leave for meeting with EU leader today to break deadlock
Theresa May will travel to Brussels today for talk with EU leader amid report that she have personally urge Angela Merkel to end the Brexit stand-off . the meeting come day after Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the EU Commission , and Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , say talk about Britain leave the EU in March @card@ be deadlock . Mrs May be take Oliver Robbins , the civil servant lead the Brexit talk , with her for the dinner - the first since a frosty meal in Downing Street in April . Mr Juncker be report to have launch a scathing attack on Mrs May during the April dinner , say that Brexit ` ` can not be a success ' ' . Downing Street source insist today ' S meeting have ` ` be in the diary for week ' ' but the announcement cause surprise in Westminster , and come after last week ' S negotiation end with little movement . the visit come a day after Mrs May phone Mrs Merkel , the German Chancellor , to urge her to help end the Brexit stand-off at this week ' s EU summit in Brussels . France and Germany be understand to have push for change to a draft paper prepare for Thursday ' s summit to avoid give the impression that the EU will agree guideline on a transition period as soon as ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make in issue relate to the exit . No10 be keen to open the next stage of talk about Britain ' s relationship with the EU after Brexit . a colleague of Mrs May tell the Financial Times : ` ` we ' ve almost run out of thing to talk about . it come down to money : by discuss the transition deal at the same time , you create a broad framework for talk about the money . ' ' comment on the phone conversation with Mrs Merkel , a spokesman for Downing Street say : ` ` they look ahead to next week ' S council , agree on the importance of continued constructive progress in the negotiation . ' ' the news come amid concern a nodeal Brexit could place added strain of up to £500million a year on the NHS . a report back by the NHS Confederation suggest that ten of thousand of British pensioner live in Europe could return home if the government be unable to strike a deal with the EU to continue exist healthcare arrangement . under EU law , European citizen benefit from reciprocal right to healthcare when they be in any of the @card@ member state . Brussels and the UK be currently negotiate on what will happen to those right after Britain ' s withdrawal in March @card@ . the report , compile by the Brexit Health Alliance , warn that patient could suffer dramatically if reciprocal right to healthcare be scrap , because they could face huge medical bill if they fall ill while travel abroad , while the cost of travel insurance could prove prohibitive for people with exist condition . the £500million figure be base on analysis that estimate the cost of care for everyone who could return to the UK at £1billion a year , minus the £500million that would no longer have to be pay to European health system . it do not take into account any income that could be generate from EU citizen potentially have to pay for NHS care when they be in the UK .
Scotland Davis ' will retire and leave Brexit transition to Boris ' ; Conservative Party Conference
David Davis plan to retire in less than two year and leave Boris Johnson to steer the country through the Brexit transitional period , the Daily Telegraph can disclose . the Brexit Secretary tell friend that Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , ` ` need this to work more than I do ' ' because he plan to step aside in June @card@ , whereas Mr Barnier will still be in post . Mr Davis believe Brexit will be his ` ` last big job ' ' , friend tell this newspaper . it come as Mr Johnson warn that some EU leader believe Britain could still remain in the union , put the chance of an early deal on trade at risk . Mr Davis tell friend he plan to ` ` retire ' ' in @card@ when the UK have leave the union , spark fear that the move will trigger a reshuffle and a potential leadership challenge . but ally of Mr Davis have call on him to act as interim leader if Theresa May be force out after Britain leave , to act as a steady pair of hand while a new leadership candidate be find . the Brexit Secretary tell friend Mr Johnson should deal with the transitional period , which could open the way for the Foreign Secretary to make his own pitch to be Prime Minister . he also say Mr Johnson , who will address the Tory conference today , be ` ` back inside the tent ' ' and have be ` ` tie to the tent pole ' ' . yesterday Mr Johnson tell Tory activist that Brussels believe Britain will ` ` bottle it ' ' over Brexit . the Foreign Secretary say some EU leader believe Britain will lose its nerve and try to cancel Article @card@ . conference report : page @card@
Scotland we need a positive and inspiring vision to win over the nation
Brexit be suppose to be about parliamentary sovereignty . but the electorate have give us an inconvenient answer . they have return a hung Parliament . Theresa May be right to see through her duty to provide a stable government . it be therefore the job of all of us as democratically elect parliamentarian to try to represent the will of the people we serve . one thing be clear : we could n't reject the result of the EU referendum , and nor can we reject the result of a general election call explicitly to secure a mandate for Brexit . there be many reason for what go wrong : a woeful campaign , a shambolic manifesto process and the undemocratic concentration of power in the hand of a narrow inner circle . when a manifesto be produce without have even be see by minister ( or myself as chairman of the Prime Minister ' s backbench policy board ) it show a fatal contempt for parliamentary opinion . so the Prime Minister be right to move fast to acknowledge that , change her team and hopefully signal a step change in the way the government be run . the restoration of Cabinet Government , the appointment of Damian Green as First Secretary of State , and a parliamentary chief of staff be key first step . but we must go further than that . politics do n't stop on the day of the EU referendum . this new Conservative government need to look hard at what drive the Corbyn surge . and redouble our commitment to tackle the grievance it speak to . the British people have send some clear message . first , they do not trust any single party enough to give us the blank cheque on Brexit and austerity we ask for . after two successive Conservative prime minister have choose to outsource difficult decision and ` ` ask the people ' ' , the people be signal they ' d like us to sort it out . they want Parliament to do its job . they will not thank us for another election or referendum until thing be a lot clearer . second , the shift of Brexiteers to Corbyn ' S Labour Party with its strong message on the limit to austerity and the critique of ` ` crony capitalism ' ' ( win a number of former Brexit stronghold seat ) signal a key point . the Brexit vote be as much about a roar at a break model of growth , politics and public sector austerity as it be a principled view on our appropriate relationship with Europe . in this campaign we manage to alienate both business and frontline public servant . to make a success of Brexit , tackle our deficit and productivity we need to mobilise both . third , the Corbyn surge be fuel by a young millennial cohort and a massive vote by public service professional ( doctor , nurse , teacher , even the police ) feed up at the prospect of indefinite austerity . if we look like we be intent on balance the public finance on the back of public sector worker , we risk lose them for ever . we need to properly set out a positive ` ` offer ' ' for public service reform and leadership and for the under-30s which reflect their reality on lack of affordable housing , and our break public finance . as the parliamentary Conservative Party convene this week we need to show fast that we have listen to the British public , that democracy be alive and well , and that we trust the people and their elect representative . that be , after all , what Brexit be suppose to be about . so let ' s commit to an ` ` open Brexit ' ' base on much great parliamentary scrutiny , debate , and democratic mandate . the British people have tell us they want a new relationship with the EU , in which we be outside the existing political union , and control our immigration in our own national interest . but they have also tell us that they be alarm by the language of hard Brexit since the referendum , want a new approach to public service austerity , and a more inspiring economic vision for how this country get out of debt and create and spread opportunity . they do not vote for a Brexit which make us poor or less secure . fail to capture the mood of the nation and we risk gift the key of no @card@ to Jeremy Corbyn and his hard-left union baron . so we need a Queen ' s Speech which reflect what the electorate be try to tell us . a hardline Brexit coalition with the DUP risk send the wrong signal . let us show a commitment to redouble domestic reform and the big challenge such as social care , inter-generational fairness and mental health . then this new government can secure the mandate it deserve . George Freeman MP , be chairman of the Conservative Policy Forum . ' the Corbyn surge be fuel by a young cohort and public service worker feed up with austerity '
Anti-Brexit campaigner raise fund to support Remain MP ; Election @card@
Gina Miller , the businesswoman whose legal action force Theresa May to hold a parliamentary vote on Brexit , have launch a fundrais campaign to support pro-Remain MP in the general election . Ms Miller have ask for £40,000 in donation to prevent an ` ` extreme Brexit ' ' by secure the election of as many MP as possible who oppose it . within hour of the launch , it smash the original £10,000 target and Ms Miller increase her demand to £25,000 and then £40,000 after raise £33,000 in a day . the campaign will tour marginal seat and provide extra campaign staff for anti-brexit MP . on the gofundme website Ms Miller write : ` ` we need to prevent MP and the people be force into an extreme Brexit that be not in Britain ' s good interest . ' '
Whitehall need more optimism on Brexit ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : when Mervyn King speak about the economic future , it be generally a good idea to listen . the former governor of the Bank of England do not have a perfect record as an economic forecaster ( no one do ) , but he do have a near-unique experience of economic policy build up over more than @card@ year at the Bank . Lord King , a cross-bench peer align to no political party , say Britain should be more optimistic and ` ` self-confident ' ' about its prospect outside the European Union . Stephen Martin , the new head of the Institute of Directors , strike a similar note , argue that leave the EU will ` ` open our eye ' ' to the economic opportunity that lie outside Europe . Mr Martin , too , be politically non-partisan , interested only in what be good for British business . both man be right and politician should learn from them . many of those who lead this country , or simply aspire to , should be approach Brexit with a very different , more optimistic attitude . ask for more optimism about Brexit be not , as some of its opponent suggest , a way of continue the division of the referendum . as Theresa May prove , it be perfectly possible to have vote Remain in June and to argue today that Brexit can be good for Britain . Mrs May will soon give a major speech on Brexit which she say will offer a vision of the country Britain can become outside the EU . if it live up to her promise , Mrs May ' S speech will be exactly what the country need , but her most important audience may be among her own colleague and official . voter be largely positive about the future , believe in this country ' s ability to thrive . sadly , that belief be often lack in some minister and especially in the Civil Service . too many still regard the Brexit vote as an error and the exit that must follow as a problem to be manage and mitigate , not an opportunity to be seize . outside the EU , Britain will be able once again to decide its own law on everything from immigration to industrial strategy . we must surely also get more scope to build close trading relationship with dynamic economy around the world . these be the freedom that the British people choose for themselves and their country in the big vote in our history : the referendum vote to leave the EU be a huge collective act of optimism and belief that this country ' s good day be yet to come . Brexit be a good news story , and our leader should do more to tell it that way .
fresh legal Brexit challenge to keep UK in single market body : the government face a second legal challenge over Brexit this week as campaigner have instruct lawyer to begin fresh action over whether leave the EU mean automatic withdrawal from the single market . the British influence think tank want a judicial review of the government ' s legal position on membership of the wide European Economic Area ( EEA ) which form the internal trading bloc . the think-tank believe leave the EU do not mean quit the EEA which extend the single market ' s tariff-free trade in good to country such as Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein . a legal challenge could result in Parliament be give the final say on EEA membership . a spokesman say : ` ` there be no need for a hard Brexit and there be no mandate for a hard Brexit . ' ' the group say voter do not decide to leave the trading arrangement when they back Brexit in the referendum .
Scotland Non , non , non ! May baulk at call for Brexit talk in French
Theresa May last night slap down EU demand that Brexit negotiation be conduct in French as she rebuke European leader for a lack of maturity . the Prime Minister use her first European Council meeting to dismiss an attempt by Michel Barnier , the EU ' S top Brexit negotiator , to rule on the ` ` work language ' ' of the talk . she also suggest that ` ` immature ' ' EU premier be look for ` ` problem ' ' rather than ` ` opportunity ' ' during Brexit talk . Mrs May make clear that she intend to negotiate trade deal ahead of Britain ' s formal exit despite threat of legal action from Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission . Mr Barnier be yesterday report to have demand that EU and British official conduct all major Brexit talk in French , in what be see as an attempt to humiliate Mrs May at her first Brussels summit . Mrs May respond : ` ` we will conduct the negotiation in the way that mean we be go to get the right deal for Britain . ' ' aide make clear that she will refuse any attempt to use French during the negotiation . minute after Mrs May ' S response , Mr Barnier say that he have yet to decide in which language the negotiation would be conduct . he deny that he have ` ` express ' ' an opinion but say the language would be ` ` set ' ' at the start of exit talk . an EU spokesman stress this be not an official line . ` ` there be no language regime for the negotiation , ' ' she say . use French mark a shift away from standard practice among multinational team in Brussels , where French lose its status to English as the EU ' S main work language after northern and eastern state join over the past two decade . even official from the EU ' s founding power , France and Germany , communicate mainly in English . the demand send a signal to Mrs May that the EU plan to put its own interest first in negotiate the ` ` divorce ' ' talk which the Prime Minister have promise to launch by March . as an EU commissioner until @card@ , Mr Barnier , @card@ , have a difficult relationship with the UK government , as he seek to tighten regulation of Britain ' s dominant financial service industry . report : page @card@ Rosa Prince : page @card@
enemy of Brexit resemble Trump in refuse to abide by the result ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Donald Trump ' s bizarre refusal to commit himself to accept the result of the American presidential election have lead to a reaction of shock and horror among political commentator in Britain and in his homeland . his position be rightly condemn as an affront to the democratic process . however , many of these same commentator have revel in downgrade the validity of Britain ' s referendum to leave the EU , which produce a result they do not want . irony or hypocrisy ? clearly , the American goose have to be serve with a different sauce from that for the British gander.Eric Sneddon Marden , Kent Sir - Allister Heath ( Comment , October @card@ ) be right . some die-hard Remainers do not care how much economic damage their attempt to reverse the referendum outcome inflict . if anything , the more damage the good , as they blame every bit of bad news on Brexit . have win the referendum war , those of us who campaign for leave , it seem , must now win the Brexit peace.John May Arkesden , Essex Sir - I find it frustrating that commentator on Brexit have fall for the Remainer bluff that free trade between Britain and the EU will be impossible if we do n't accept free movement of people ( Letters , October @card@ ) . several country in Europe manage to conduct entirely tariff-free trade with the EU while not accept opendoor migration . thus , migrate to tariff-free and exclusive Monaco may sound attractive , but obtain residency permission will be unlikely unless you ' re Lewis Hamilton . Monaco ' s ` ` impossible ' ' situation , of have its cake and eat it , be share with country include the Channel Islands , the Isle of Man , Liechtenstein , San Marino , as well as giant Turkey . another @card@ country all round the world have brokered free-trade deal with the EU without sign up to open-door migration from the EU . Martin Burgess Beckenham , Kent Sir - we hear much about the downside of Brexit . but will the EU still be here to complete the final agreement with us ? Kevin Court Fetcham , Surrey Sir - the Prime Minister have just say she would like a smooth Brexit . hard , soft , now smooth . how many version be there to be ? just Brexit for me.Mary L Wylie Manaton , Devon Sir - you report that Prince Charles , the Lord of the Isles , ask staff at a whisky distillery on Harris why their glass be make in Poland . in international trade , by pay the Pole for their glass , we give them ready fund to buy our whisky . Dugald Barr London W8
university should be ashamed of their bias ; Academics ' hatred of Brexit be all too real . I have @card@ year ' experience of their love affair with the EU
Chris Heaton-Harris MP be in trouble for ask university for information about their European study course , in a letter widely interpret as imply massive anti-Brexit bias . if he have ask me , he could have save himself the bother . I ' ve @card@ year ' experience of university ' love affair with the EU . between @card@ and @card@ , I be Convenor of the ma in European study programme at the LSE . I be also co-chairman of its postgraduate European Studies research seminar and meet many academic who specialise in the EU . be they objective ? many held title such as Jean Monnet Professor or Jean Monnet Reader or Jean Monnet Lecturer , which imply that they be wholly or partly fund by Brussels . most work on the institution or policy of the EU or on how the process of integration develop . all take it for grant that European unification be a benevolent aim and that integration bring more peace , prosperity and democracy . by @card@ , I no longer believe this , and found the Anti-Federalist League in @card@ , which become Ukip in @card@ . my student become discontent and tell me I should no longer teach them European history ( I never lecture on the EU ) . the LSE support me , but I give up teach my course to go on sabbatical . my colleague , however , continue to support the EU . it take a long time before they admit that there be a democratic deficit or that the euro be not work . today , lead specialist take a more critical view , but they all hate Brexit . curiously , so , too , do most academic who be not specialist in the EU . during the referendum , the university be mobilise as never before behind government policy and claim that Brexit would lead to the withdrawal of all EU research fund and that foreign researcher would no longer come to Britain . there be no evidence for this . all EU Research Infrastructure Consortia be open to non-member state and member state on the same basis , with equal voting right . the like of CERN and the European Space Programme have nothing to do with the EU . in any case , the government have promise to make good any funding that might be lose . nor be there any evidence that academic have be put off come here . if they have , it can only have be on account of the anti-Brexit scare story spread by university themselves . Vice-chancellors and professor be still write ill-informed , if not mendacious , letter and article . there be no doubt that Brexit be deeply resent by British university , who see it simplistically as a rejection of international collaboration or even xenophobia . hence the letter to their foreign student assure them they be still love . the fact that institution dedicate to critical thought can take such a monolithic and unscientific view be bewilder . our academic nomenklatura and its apparatchik be behave like the staff of Soviet university , follow the party line even after the policy have fail . it get personal , too . on a recent visit to LSE , I be rebuke by a former pro-director with the word : ` ` you be the only person here who vote for Brexit . ' ' when I attend a leave party for a colleague , I be accost by a world-famous historian , who shout above everyone else in the room : ` ` -- -- off ! you found Ukip . you be responsible for this mess . so just -- -- off ! ' ' it take a quarter of an hour to calm him down . other there clearly agree with him , although most of my colleague have behave admirably . do this matter ? most student be intelligent enough to see the defect of the EU and will recognise propaganda when they be offer it . in any case , the majority of university course have nothing to do with the EU . as for grant and foreign staff , in the end university life will return to normal . Heaton-Harris could have find most of the information he seek online without upset our overpay and over-sensitive vice-chancellors . but his letter touch a nerve . university have a lot to live down . instead of act in a neutral manner during the referendum , they behave in the most grotesquely partisan fashion possible . let us hope that they have learn their lesson . they have tar their reputation for objectivity . Alan Sked be Emeritus Professor of International history at LSE FOLLOW Alan Sked on Twitter @ profsked ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
focus on prize of free trade , say employer ; CBI ' s Fairbairn call for new Brexit advisory taskforce
Britain and Brussels will both be good off if they stop wrangle over an enormous Brexit divorce bill and instead focus on the real prize - a trade deal to preserve the £600bn of trade which flow back and forth across the Channel each year . business group the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) want the negotiator to prioritise job and economic growth , and to avoid become bogged down in hostile rhetoric at the start of the Brexit talk . ` ` this be a message to all negotiator on this because it be as much a question for European economy as it be for ours , ' ' say Carolyn Fairbairn , the CBI ' s director general . ` ` the negotiation will have all sort of twist and turn , and the Bill be an early issue . but we should [ prioritise ] the big prize which be the long-term comprehensive free trade opportunity and to keep on work towards this . ' ' she say that ` ` move on from this divorce bill as quickly as possible ' ' be crucial if business be to get any certainty over the future of trade and regulation after Brexit . the late divorce bill demand have be put at ( Euro ) 100bn ( £85bn ) . the CBI want the government to transfer EU regulation into UK law en masse and to resist the temptation to fiddle with the rule on the way , so that business will face exactly the same continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ rule on exit day as they do now . only after that should the review of red tape take place over a long time period to avoid any unwelcome surprise . Ms Fairbairn want the government to set up a Brexit business taskforce to advise on the divorce process . ` ` we ' re head into a new phase in the Brexit negotiation where it be really about the heavy lifting of what a new deal might look like - there be a number of really complicated area which we really must n't underestimate , around custom , border , tariff , regulation , the @card@ EU regulator that will no longer have jurisdiction , ' ' she say . ` ` it be a time to have the bright and good from government and business work together so that we get it right . the principle be that we ' re all on the same side here , business want nothing more than to make a success of Brexit , and they have a lot of experience and sharp end , on-the-ground knowledge that should be bring to the table . ' ' the CBI also want domestic change to tax and rule to promote innovation and enterprise in the UK , boost the economy after Brexit . that should include a review of business rate as well as measure to reduce the overall tax burden on company , the CBI say . the call for a review of business rate be echo by a group of powerful trade body represent retailer , publican , small business and the property sector . in a joint letter to all three main political party , the Federation of small business , the British chamber of Commerce and the British Retail Consortium say how the next government tackle this issue will ` ` shape investment and growth in the UK economy for decade to come ' ' . meanwhile , energy giant SSE have also urge the government to reconsider the future of onshore wind power after scrap subsidy for turbine in @card@ . the company , itself a wind farm developer , say wind should be at the heart of the government ' s industrial strategy because it be now the cheap low-carbon source of electricity . ' we should [ prioritise ] the big prize which be the long-term comprehensive free trade opportunity '
the OBR and the Chancellor get it wrong , wrong , wrong and wrong
the Chancellor ' S Autumn Statement take its cue from the Office for Budget Responsibility ' s downward-biased forecast for Britain ' s Brexit economy . it and he fail to take account of the optimal policy for carry Brexit through . these be free trade with low consumer price and more competition , good ( home-based ) regulation and intelligent control of immigration to limit costly unskilled immigration . the OBR follow the Remain consensus argument that Brexit will reduce trade ; via fall sterling , reduce growth ; reduce immigration generally ; and cause damaging uncertainty . for the follow reason that consensus be wrong : @card@ the Brexit uncertainty effect be small - and also positive . as we have see already , the effect of any Brexit ` ` uncertainty ' ' have be minimal : in the second and third quarter when it be at its maximum , growth be strong at @card@ per cent and @card@ per cent . ` ` uncertainty ' ' simply consist of not yet be sure that we will have a clean Brexit ( with positive result for growth ) or a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit which be the status quo . so any uncertainty be about the extent of the upside . 2 the average fall in sterling against other major currency of about @card@ per cent be a huge monetary stimulus to the economy . it raise export , reduce import and so raise income ; this in turn stimulate employment and consumption . yes , price will rise but then so will wage in the tight labour market we now have . @card@ Brexit will increase trade not reduce it . how can opening the UK up to free trade with the whole world , include the EU , reduce trade ? Whitehall be unable to grasp the idea of such free trade , yet ordinary people do , even if they work within EU-protected sector such as manufacturing . for example , all car-making constituency vote leave , for the good reason that our car industry sell two third of its export outside the EU on world market . the long-term bonus for the UK economy from the opening up of our trade to the world would , I estimate , be around @card@ per cent on GDP , with an @card@ per cent fall in consumer price act like a big tax cut for UK household . @card@ unskilled EU immigration be a drain on our taxpayer and the economy . Remainers in Whitehall endlessly bang on about the gain from immigration ( which we all accept ) . they do not grasp that the economic problem of immigration consist exclusively of allow unskilled immigrant on low wage unfettered access to our welfare state , both for themselves and for any dependant they bring in . the well available Labour Force Survey datum suggest that each adult EU unskilled immigrant cost the UK taxpayer around £3,500 a year . this burden fall on the poor community where these immigrant live and where , to add insult to injury , they also drive down local wage . control unskilled immigration - while be as liberal as now on skilled immigration that more than pay its way - be the optimal policy . on these four point the OBR and Chancellor have get it wrong , wrong , wrong and wrong . we expect good in future . Patrick Minford be co-chairman of economist for Brexit
Scotland Blair ' s return to fight Brexit cheer Tory
tony Blair ' S plan to return to politics by spearhead an anti-Brexit group have be welcome by Eurosceptics who say it would increase public support for leave the EU . the former Labour prime minister be set up a new political institute that will seek to influence Britain ' S withdrawal , but Tory MP say the level of public anger direct at him would embolden the Brexit movement . last month Mr Blair tell Remain voter that ` ` we ' re the insurgent now ' ' and say Britain should keep its ` ` option open ' ' over hold a second referendum . Eurosceptic MP say it be a ` ` complete win ' ' to have a ` ` discredited establishment figure ' ' lead the campaign for a ` ` hokey cokey Brexit ' ' . a Whitehall source reveal Mr Blair have already hold meeting with George Osborne , the former chancellor , to discuss the ` ` political climate ' ' . a source close to Mr Blair tell the Sunday Times : ` ` he ' S not impress with Theresa May . he think she ' s a total lightweight . he think Jeremy Corbyn be a nutter and the Tories be screw up Brexit . he think there ' s a massive hole in British politics that he can fill . ' ' Owen Paterson , the former environment secretary , tell the Telegraph : ` ` this be glorious news , he be one of those discredited establishment figure who repel many people . ' ' Peter Lilley , the MP for Hitchin and Harpenden , say : ` ` he be in favour of a hokey cokey Brexit . one where you take your leave leg out , put your leave leg in , shake it all about and end up where you be when you start . ' ' John Redwood , MP for Wokingham , say : ` ` I think it ' s a complete win for my side ... I welcome him be an intervener in all the thing that we hold dear . it be a great help to us . ' '
Scotland a triumph for those who want a liberal withdrawal on cordial term ; Brexit turmoil ; Comment
let us toast the High Court with Kentish sparkling wine . its ruling on Article @card@ today be a service to the nation . the elemental purpose of Brexit be and have always be to restore the supremacy of Parliament - and to return legal authority to British court - not to introduce a lawless dictatorship of plebiscite . it be up to Parliament - act under the Burkean principle of Bristol - to discern the will of the nation and to discern the broad collective interest , impose its constitutional authority as it see fit . assume that this ruling be uphold by the UK Supreme Court the government have effectively lose its power to impose its own Brexit predilection . this be a triumph for those who want a liberal withdrawal from the EU on cordial term , and place the high value on the cohesion of the UK ' S four constituent nation . Theresa May will now have to reckon with a Scottish political veto through the arithmetic of the House of Commons , and listen even more attentively to Northern Ireland MP . or put another way , she can now use this pressure to rein in the hothead in her own www.party.No party or grouping have ownership of this process , or a monopoly on how to interpret the vote . the British signal many different thing on June @card@ . there be not a single word on the ballot sheet about immigration , despite a reductionist attempt by some in the leave camp to make it seem so . Remainers and moderate Brexiteers together form a large majority of citizen . they be in implicit alliance over nature of Brexit , if they could only stop argue . the EU treaty be like no ordinary treaty , and the referendum be not an election where the winner take all . the government have no electoral mandate to impose a particular form of Brexit - be it hard , clean , diamantine , or whatever you care to call it - against the collective will of Parliament , if that be what it intend to do . the window be open for a more equal debate about the access to the EU single market and passporting for the City , and this new possibility have be instantly reflect in the value of sterling , back up to a one-month high of $ @card@ against the dollar . my own loose preference be for some variant of the European Economic Area as a transition arrangement for the next decade , a phase withdrawal that allow Britain to negotiate trade deal gradually with the rest of the world . the EEA allow an emergency brake on migrant and even , in theory , a quota system , but the issue of free movement be in any case a shift debate since France and Germany themselves face populist dissent . there may well be good arrangement than the EEA , but at least we can now have the discussion rather than be steamrol toward a hard Brexit by a self-appointed vanguard in one part of the Conservative Party . but Remainers have to make a choice . if they still think they can reverse Brexit altogether the situation will become extremely unpleasant . it will grate on fellow citizen . Brexit mean Brexit . let us argue
Scotland No10 panic as leave surge ; Boris attack after Downing Street be warn of likely Brexit ? top entrepreneur back out with warning over EU red tape ? vote leave : pm use Queen ' s birthday honour to curry favour body : by Peter Dominiczak , Christopher Hope , Ben Riley-Smith and Kate McCann Downing Street be ` ` panic ' ' over the EU referendum amid grow internal sign that support for the leave campaign be surge . private datum and internal polling which show that after two week of build momentum there have be huge swing to the Brexit campaign have prompt grow alarm in the Remain camp , source have say . it have lead to a marked change in strategy , with the campaign to keep Britain in the EU orchestrate a series of highly personal attack on Boris Johnson , a leader of the leave campaign . David Cameron ' S team have adopt a ` ` take out Boris strategy ' ' by allow a Tory Cabinet minister to claim Mr Johnson only back a Brexit in order to further his ambition to be prime minister and associate him with Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader . in a sign the market believe a Brexit be more likely , the FTSE @card@ yesterday suffer its big one-day fall since the beginning of the campaign , fall by @card@ per cent . the pound also drop sharply as a poll give leave a 10-point lead , with @card@ per cent of voter now back a Brexit . with less than a fortnight to go until polling day , the campaign yesterday become increasingly fever . in other development : ? the Queen be drag into the row as the Prime Minister be accuse of use the birthday honour list to reward nearly two dozen backer of the Remain campaign . Sir James Dyson disclose in a Telegraph interview that he be join the Brexit campaign , describe Remain ' s warning about trade as ` ` cobbler ' ' . telegraph ? Labour ' s EU campaign be in chaos as senior figure admit many of their supporter be now back a Brexit after Jeremy Corbyn ' S failure vociferously to make the case for Remain . ? Justice Secretary Michael Gove ' s leave campaign warn that Britain will need seven new prison by @card@ if immigration be not control . the for GROV ? Wolfgang Schäuble , Germany ' s fi-nance minister , have rule out Britain join the single market after a Brexit , declare that ` ` out be out ' ' for the UK . pa ? British victim of Libyan-sponsored IRA terrorism be be block from receive million of pound in compensation because of human right law , the government have admit . this weekend there will be an outpouring of patriotic sentiment as the nation celebrate the Queen ' S 90th and the Duke of Edinburgh ' s 95th birthday and the beginning of England ' s campaign in the European football championship , which insider believe will help the leave campaign . government insider have say the Remain campaign have be ` ` fall apart ' ' after a series of salvo by Mr Johnson and Mr Gove . Mr Cameron be appear on the BBC tomorrow in what be be see as an attempt to relaunch the campaign . despite the Prime Minister claim that he do not want to see the referendum campaign descend into a series of ` ` blue-on-blue ' ' attack between conservative , the Remain campaign be now seek to undermine the Tory , it be understand . during a televised debate on Thursday Amber Rudd , the Energy Secretary , make personal attack on Mr Johnson , accuse him of join the Brexit campaign to further his own career . she say of Mr Johnson : ` ` he ' s the life and soul of the party but he ' S not the man you want drive you home at the end of the evening . ' ' the Remain campaign release a poster feature a mock-up of Mr Johnson , Mr Gove and Mr Farage , at a casino table with the slogan : ` ` do n't let them gamble with your future . ' ' source in the leave camp say their rival be resort to ` ` playground jibe ' ' in a sign ` ` they be rattled , have no discipline , no idea and no hope ' ' . during a town hall event for Facebook , Mr Cameron be ask if he feel ` ` sorry ' ' for the attack on Mr Johnson . he say the debate be ` ` lively affair and that ' s the way it be ' ' . however , Mr Cameron do suggest that he still intend to offer Mr Johnson a Cabinet position after the referendum . the leave campaign say @card@ prominent Remain supporter be name in the birthday honour list , include Richard Reed , deputy chairman of Britain Stronger in Europe , who receive a CBE . other include John Armitage , of the hedge fund Egerton Capital , who give £15,000 to the Remain campaign and be make a CBE . award also go to Remain donor and people who put their name to joint letter warn of the danger of EU withdrawal . Labour MP Gisela Stuart , the Vote leave chairman , denounce the award as a ` ` shabby stitch-up ' ' and accuse Mr Cameron of stoop to ` ` a new low ' ' in his drive to secure a Remain vote . government source reject the charge , say that the honour be decide by independent committee and include at least three prominent supporter of the leave campaign . in a special supplement in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Mr Johnson and Mr Cameron set out the argument for and against the EU . Mr Cameron say : ` ` for me , remain in the EU be the big , bold , British decision . ' ' Mr Johnson write : ` ` this be the time to restore health to our democracy , to go global , and to believe in Britain . it ' S win-win . ' ' Queen ' S birthday : Pages @card@ EU report : page @card@ Nigel Farage and Editorial Comment : page @card@
confidence delicate as boss see more risk than opportunity
confidence among Britain ' S business appear brittle as fear about trade and economic growth have escalate in a trio of survey . Brexit have be identify as the big concern among those in control of company finance and be likely to lead to more subdued spending by business , accord to a Deloitte survey . a total of @card@ chief financial officer , include @card@ at major listed company , tell Deloitte in its late survey that Brexit be their most prominent concern , rate it at @card@ out of @card@ in the final quarter of @card@ - up from @card@ in the previous quarter . what be more , nearly three quarter ( 73pc ) say they expect the overall business environment to worsen after Brexit , up from 60pc in the third quarter . this prompt 39pc ( up from 30pc ) to claim they expect the amount they spend on invest in their business to drop . Ian Stewart , chief economist at Deloitte , say CFO be ` ` more focus on control cost than at any time in the past eight year ' ' . the manufacturer ' organisation EEF and global insurer AIG also find some grow pessimism in their @card@ outlook survey of @card@ senior company executive in the manufacturing and engineering sector . half of respondent claim they see more risk to their business than opportunity in @card@ , virtually double the number who think the opposite . Brexit also exacerbate several of the manufacturing sector ' S concern . EEF and AIG ask respondent whether their worry be relate or unrelated to the UK leave the EU . it find fear about rise input cost , economic volatility , a rise exodus of EU worker and major customer leave the UK be all link to Brexit . Lloyds Bank ' s business in Britain report also identify some unease from the business community . the bank find a steep drop in the number of business who feel their interest would be protect post-Brexit in its survey of more than @card@ predominantly small and medium-sized company . the survey be conduct before Prime Minister Theresa May secure an agreement to move on to the second phase of Brexit talk .
European official deride UK ' s negotiate effort ; Road to Brexit ; ' Unimpressive ' Johnson and ' poor quality ' of UK politician criticise in leak private report
the government ' s performance in the Brexit negotiation have be brand chaotic and incoherent , accord to a leak paper set out the private view of European official . an internal Irish government document reveal top EU figure describe Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , as ` ` unimpressive ' ' . the confidential document , obtain by Ireland ' s RTE news , also show official bemoan the ` ` political confusion ' ' in the UK and ` ` the quality of politician in Westminster ' ' . it be base on a collection of political report from Irish embassy across Europe between Nov @card@ and @card@ . the paper claim that the Czech deputy minister for foreign affair , Jakub Durr , tell official he ` ` feel sorry for British ambassador around the EU try to communicate a coherent message when there be political confusion at home ' ' . it also note that Brexit be barely mention during a meeting between David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and French minister for defence and foreign affair - something which be view as a waste opportunity . in another meeting , a minister in the Czech government describe Mr Johnson as ` ` unimpressive ' ' but note that at least he have ` ` avoid any gaffe ' ' during a visit in September . Ian Forrester , the British judge in the European Court of Justice , be report to have bemoan ` ` the quality of politician in Westminster ' ' during a meeting in Luxembourg . he be also say to have question whether the British public would view Brexit as ` ` a great mistake ' ' when they realise what leave the EU entail . Senior government official in Latvia say UK minister have make ` ` a poor impression on their round of capital and Latvia be pessimistic with regard to reach an agreement in December ' ' . they add that ` ` the big problem be the chaotic political situation in the UK government ' ' . the Department of Foreign Affairs in Dublin decline to comment on the leak report . Downing Street defend the UK ' s preparation for Brexit and insist there be a ` ` good and constructive ' ' relationship between London and Dublin . the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman say : ` ` I do n't comment on leak document . the government be work hard on preparation for Brexit . ' ' he add : ` ` there be a good and constructive work relationship with the Prime Minister and the Taoiseach . ' ' there have be progress in talk on the issue with Ireland - particularly the common travel area - but there be ` ` more work to be do , everybody accept that ' ' , the spokesman say . ` ` equally , I think everybody be commit to ensure a frictionless border . ' ' in recent week the intractable issue of how to preserve an open border in Northern Ireland , while make good on Theresa May ' s pledge to leave the EU custom union and single market , have be force back onto the agenda by strong Irish diplomacy . Dublin be seek ` ` written assurance ' ' that the UK will not allow Northern Ireland to diverge too far from the EU rule and regulation in order to preserve an open border between North and South . ' he feel sorry for British ambassador try for a coherent message with so much confusion at home '
Scotland Hammond rebuke Johnson , warn no one be ' unsackable ' ; Tories in Manchester ; Conservative Party Conference
Philip Hammond deliver a clear rebuke to Boris Johnson for ` ` downplay ' ' the complexity of Brexit as he continue his feud with the Foreign Secretary yesterday . the Chancellor say ` ` focus ' ' and ` ` unity ' ' would be need if Britain be to come out of the Brexit negotiation with a good deal . and he warn that the Foreign Secretary that no minister be ` ` unsackable ' ' . meanwhile , Sir Michael Fallon , the Defence Secretary , espouse the virtue of ` ` discipline and loyalty ' ' in a sideways reference to Mr Johnson on a day when he from his Cabinet Mr Hammond , before ` ` Mr Johnson ' S conferencwill remain the EU ' ' following stress the and cautious ' ' Mr Johnson article in the Telegraph and the month to set Brexit ` ` red and to demand his Cabinet colleague start show more optimism face mount criticism inet colleague.s . ond , speak a day benson make his own speech , say Britain ` ` closely link with low Brexit , and need for a ` ` careful ` ` negotiation . on use arti-Daily Telehe Sun last t out his line ' ' nd that t colted to opti-Brexit ' ' . on believe uld be pree the EU withal , and have o many of his re downplayfits of leave about Mr Johnson Britain should prepare to leave without a deal , suggest too colleague be downplay the benefit the EU . mond take the proach in his ng : ` ` if we get Britain will ht future be-But to get to be clear-eyed hallenges along Mr Hammond opposite approach speech , say : this right - have a bright beyond Brexit ' ' . it , we must about the challenge our way . not downplay the difficulderestimate the complexiwill be one of the most task ever undertake by a ` ` we must difficulty nor underestimate complexity . this will challenge peacetime government but with focus and determination and unity , we will succeed . ' ' Mr Johnson ' s conference speech today will be arguably the most anticipate of the conference in Manchester . the reception it get could make or break his ambition of one day lead his party , and if he be see as be disloyal it could also increase call from some of his Cabinet colleague for Theresa May to sack him . Mr Hammond do not name Mr Johnson in his speech , but in another barb clearly aim at him , he say the government must ` ` pick our way carefully and cautiously across the difficult terrain of EU negotiation , to ensure we arrive in good order on the fertile plain at the other side ' ' , add that ` ` focus , determination and unity ' ' would be need to succeed . in a series of medium interview early have say sackable ' ' ' , after to answer Sunday about Secretary lier in the day , Mr Hammond hthat Mr Johnson be ` ` sackablthe Prime Minister refuse swer a question on Sundawhether the Foreign Sewas sackable . Mr Johnson ' S make it Davis , the to negotiate Brussels . he also suggest M son ' S disloyalty be maharder for David Da Brexit Secretary , tiate in Brussel he say : ` ` T we can show the strong negotiatin tion w Europ ion w his would stronger when it that he have a unite net behind him . ' ' the more unity , strong our negotiate position with the European Union would be . hand be be clear united Cabinet ask abou Johnson ' s clai the Brexit tr period should year and not a more ' ' , he shru would describe a rhetorical flour Mr Hammon gested that Mrs M give Britain ` ` ity ' ' over the le the Brexit transit riod by say it wo about Mr claim that transition be ` ` two second shrug : ` ` I that as flourish . ' ' Hammond suggest May have flexibility - ' ' length of transition period - would last ` ` around ' ' two year . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , say the transition period could last ` ` a few month either side ' ' of two year . the Daily Telegraph understand that several Cabinet minister believe a period of two and a half year would be acceptable . Sir Michael Fallon be also scathing when ask about Mr Johnson ' s chance of become the next Tory leader . speak on Chopper ' S Brexit Podcast , Sir Michael say his advice to his squabbling colleague be to ` ` have a look at the military . people admire our military the world over ... why ? because of ... those virtue of discipline and loyalty ' ' . he say a poll that show @card@ per cent of Tory member want Mr Johnson as the next leader ` ` do n't seem extremely high ' ' . speak on the same programme , the former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith say Mrs May need to show by the end of the conference that she could ` ` lead a unite party , or we will not succeed ' ' . Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , say Mr Johnson ` ` have to go ' ' unless he could demonstrate his loyalty within day . speak at a Conservative conference fringe event , Mr Green refuse to rule out pay for single market access after the Brexit transition period - which would cross one of Mr Johnson ' s red line . he say : ` ` I ' m not rule anything in or out that will be in the detail of the negotiation because David Davis have get a difficult job and he be eminently suit to do it . ` ` I ' m not go to do anything that make his job more difficult . ' ' Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , issue a further jibe at Mr Johnson at a conference fringe event , insist he would not be wade into the ` ` unfortunately public debate ' ' about the nature of a transitional deal . William Hague : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ business : Page @card@ ' Brexit will be one of the most challenging task undertake by a peacetime government '
us will always stand by UK , pledge new ambassador
whatever happen in the Brexit negotiation , America will stand by Britain , the new US ambassador to the UK have say , Woody Johnson last night use his first speech as ambassador to emphasise the long-standing tie between Britain and the US , say they would not be harm by Brexit . ` ` Britain ' s decision to leave the European Union take your country into new territory - but you be not head there on your own , ' ' he say . ` ` the United States be commit to stand with the UK through Brexit . ` ` Our position on Brexit be clear . we want a strong and prosperous UK to remain a leader in Europe , and we want both the UK and the EU to remain strong leader globally . ' ' speaking in Middle Temple Hall in London at the annual lecture of the Pilgrims of Great Britain , an Anglo-American friendship society , the 70-year-old billionaire owner of the New York Jets American football team say the UK would always have a ` ` strong and reliable trade partner ' ' in the US , despite Brexit . ` ` it be in everyone ' s interest that Brexit be transparent , smooth , and orderly , ' ' he say . ` ` but whatever the outcome of the negotiation between the UK and the EU , Britain should know you will have a strong and reliable trade and investment partner in America . ' ' Mr Johnson , heir to the Johnson & Johnson pharmaceutical empire , tell how his grandfather choose the UK to establish the company ' s first overseas subsidiary more than @card@ year ago . the lure remain ` ` just as true today , ' ' he say . ` ` Our country be among each other ' s large inward investor . Americans and Brits hold roughly one trillion dollar of investment and employ approximately one million people in each other ' S country - job that have increase prosperity and opportunity in all four country of the United Kingdom and in every American state , ' ' he say . seem to reference Barack Obama ' s warning that the UK would be ` ` at the back of the queue ' ' for trade deal after Brexit , Mr Johnson say : ` ` as far as the president be concern , the United Kingdom , our most enduring ally , be always at the head of the line . ' ' Mr Johnson use his speech to reassure his audience that they would warm to the new president . ` ` many of you do not know the president , ' ' he say . ` ` I have know him for over @card@ year . our son be bear three day apart in the same hospital . our relationship be long-standing , personal and close . and I can promise you , when you get to know him , you ' ll like him . ' ' Hillary Clinton be ` ` convinced ' ' that associate of the Donald Trump campaign collude with Russia to beat her in the US presidential election last year . in her most outspoken allegation so far , she say she be in ` ` no doubt ' ' that people connect to her rival help Russia to interfere . Mrs Clinton be speak as she promote her 495-page book about the campaign call what happen . in it , she call Mr Trump ` ` hateful and flagrantly sexist ' ' , and a ` ` fraud and liar ' ' who make her skin crawl .
even Remainers ca n't want Britain on the rack ; Europhiles appear to hope we fail in negotiation , but it be in the national interest to get the good Brexit deal
it ' s decision time : do you stand with Britain or with the EU ? the referendum be over . Brexit be happen . withdrawal negotiation be about to begin . however you vote last year , you ought to want your country to get the good deal possible . if you do n't - if you actually want Britain to suffer - then I do n't know what to say to you . except perhaps this : kick the Europhilia , my friend . put Britain first . when I be boy , I use to hear it say : ` ` my country , right or wrong . ' ' that ' s daft , of course . if you think your country be do wrong then you have a patriotic duty to correct it - and I cast no aspersion upon those who honestly believe that stay in the EU be the right thing for Britain . but there be people who seem to feel that they have no country at all or that the EU can do no wrong . exhibit a : those who say Britain have a big bill come . we will have to part with some cash , very probably , but it ' s odd how some salivate as they throw out high and high number as if to suggest that we should stop Brexit right now because it ' s go to cost too much . the Financial Times , whose editor be award the Légion d'Honneur for service to the EU debate , say it could be ( Euro ) 100billion ( £84million ) . this be nothing more than conjecture . the European Commission ' s own lawyer have concede that such a bill would be legally impossible to enforce . exhibit B : those who believe everything the EU say . why be Jean-Claude Juncker ' s account of a meal with Theresa May report uncritically ? of course he say Brexit ` ` can not be a success ' ' and that the Prime Minister be delude - that ' s his negotiate stance . Juncker hate Brexit , probably hate us for vote for it , and would like us to limp off humiliate and impoverish to deter anyone else from try the same . it be precisely to avoid such an outcome that the UK Government be take such a tough stance itself . we be threaten to walk away with no deal in the hope that , in order to persuade us otherwise , the other side will offer us the good deal . this position be frame to serve the national interest . more journalist should honestly explain it . exhibit C : those who yearn for failure . this be palpable when Emmanuel Macron win the French presidency . joy that Marine Le Pen be defeat be entirely justify . her victory would have be a victory for a nationalism from the margin of politics , unleash something dark across the continent . not so welcome be the suggestion by certain Remainers that Le Pen and Brexit be analogous ( they be certainly not ) and Macron ' S win be a popular endorsement of the EU ( it be a protest vote against the protest vote ) . macron , say the militant Remainers with an unsettling thrill , once call Brexit a ` ` crime ' ' . well , here come the thumbscrew and the cat o'nine tail . Let ' s tie Britain down and get on with these negotiation ! why would any Briton want to see their country stretch on the rack ? the id of the Euromasochist contain many part . pride : they insist for decade that Brexit would never happen and then it do . a sense of loss : this be suppose to be their country , until the voter steal it from them . superiority : I ' m not sure I can take one more article allege that Brexiteers be educationally subnormal . metropolitanism : civilisation be a vegan café staff by cheap Pole . and identity with otherness : Europe be good than Britain simply because it be not Britain . I have no doubt that if Brussels be to send in the tank to put down Brexit , AC Grayling , the Europhiles ' s barmy philosopher , would be on the street of Westminster hand out flower to the occupying force , thank them for liberate us from ourselves . the voter look upon all this with incomprehension . we vote for Brexit , do n't we ? and now it ' S happening , should n't we try to make it work ? out on the campaign trail , Tim Farron , who have try to turn the Lib Dems into the official party of Remain , be challenge along those line by one Malcolm Baker . Mr Baker accuse him of talk down the country : ` ` I ' m proud that we ' ll be come out of Europe , ' ' he say , ` ` and not have people tell us we have to pay £100billion . if that ' s your policy I hope you get six seat . ' ' one suspect that Mr Farron secretly regard six seat as a heady ambition . Mr Baker add that he be a lifelong Labour supporter but that he ' d be back the Tory this time - and it ' S easy to see why . Theresa May be far ahead in the poll not only because Jeremy Corbyn be inept and Farron be anonymous . it ' S because this be a khaki election . the issue be our imminent war with the EU negotiating team , and the public be rally around the only mainstream party that appear to be on Britain ' S side . I ' ll be accuse of jingoism , but use the language of national interest be reasonable when the national interest be at stake . the interest of the country be Brexit and its failure would be a national humiliation . nobody should wish that on their great enemy , let alone their fellow Briton . follow Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Sturgeon ' s Brexit bombshell that crush May ' s big announcement ; Brexit : article @card@ ; no @card@ accuse Scottish First Minister of ' playing politics ' after revelation hijack Article @card@ plan
as late as Sunday afternoon , Theresa May have Tuesday , March @card@ pencil in her diary as a potential date for formally trigger Brexit . confident that she have see off a Tory rebellion on the Article @card@ bill , she know that it would clear Parliament by the end of yesterday , remove the last obstacle in her way . Whitehall department have be tell to prepare for the big announcement to come this week . Buckingham Palace be tell that the bill would be send for royal assent among today ' s paperwork in the Queen ' s daily red box . minister hope that the Article @card@ announcement would finally shift the agenda away from last week ' S fumble Budget . then along come Nicola Sturgeon . on Sunday evening , the Scottish National Party secretly brief journalist that the First Minister would be hold an @card@ press conference the next morning at her official residence , Bute House . the Daily Telegraph , have discover that Ms Sturgeon would be set out plan for a second independence referendum if Scotland do not get a special deal on Brexit , call Downing Street to find out what they know . ominously for the Prime Minister , the call from the Telegraph be the first No10 have hear of it . have be keep in the dark about the timing of the Article @card@ announcement , Ms Sturgeon have decide to seize the initiative and hijack the Brexit timetable with a political bombshell . despite be arm with the knowledge that Ms Sturgeon be about to make her move , Downing Street appear to freeze : television and radio broadcast yesterday morning continue to run report that Brexit be go to be trigger this week , unchallenged by No10 . in the daily briefing for lobby journalist at 11am yesterday , the Prime Minister ' S spokesman shun the opportunity to rule out an early announcement on Article @card@ . an hour later , the picture be very different . Ms Sturgeon have steal the agenda with spectacular aplomb by announce that she would set the wheel in motion for a second Scottish independence referendum next week . her intention , she say , be for the referendum to take place between autumn @card@ and spring @card@ - before Britain exit the EU . as Westminster come to a halt to stare at television screen show the press conference from Edinburgh , she say : ` ` I will now take the step neces-sary to make sure that Scotland will have a choice at the end of this process . ` ` a choice of whether to follow the UK to a hard Brexit - or to become an independent country , able to secure a real partnership of equal with the rest of the UK and our own relationship with Europe ... next week I will seek the authority of the Scottish Parliament to agree with the UK Government the detail of a section @card@ order - the procedure that will enable the Scottish Parliament to legislate for an independence referendum . ` ` if Scotland be to have a real choice - when the term of Brexit be know , but before it be too late to choose our own course - then that choice must be offer between the autumn of next year , @card@ , and the spring of @card@ . ' ' back in Downing Street , the battle to wrestle back the narrative be about to begin . before head off to a Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey , Mrs May invite the BBC into the Cabinet room to film her slapping down the First Minister . her message to Ms Sturgeon be that ` ` Politics be not a game , ' ' add that ` ` the majority of the Scottish people do n't want a second independence referendum so instead of play politics with the future of our country the Scottish government should focus on deliver good government and service for the people of Scotland ' ' . the official government response say that ` ` another referendum would be divisive and cause huge economic uncertainty at the bad possible time ' ' . but Ms Sturgeon ' S intervention appear to have rattle the Prime Minister . by 3.30pm Downing Street be brief journalist that the Article @card@ announcement would not be happen until the final week of March - the first time No10 have rule out trigger Brexit this week . March @card@ be now the most likely date for the announcement . have Mrs may be bounce into pause Brexit by Ms Sturgeon ' s surprise announcement ? source close to the Prime Minister insist that she have always intend to wait until the end of March , though no explanation be offer as to why that be a more suitable date than March @card@ . it also fail to explain why No10 have , for day , do nothing to disabuse the medium and the rest of Whitehall of the notion that Brexit would be trigger this week . prime ministerial aide be adamant that Ms Sturgeon have not influence the decision to postpone Article @card@ , and insist that the First Minister would not pressure Mrs May into reconsider Ms Sturgeon ' S demand . critic of Mrs May , however , say that she be not good at think on her foot , and like to have plenty of time to consider her response to event . one person who certainly have not be brief on when Article @card@ would be trigger be Nicola Sturgeon . the entire reason for her surprise press conference be that she be expect the Article @card@ announcement ` ` very possibly as early as tomorrow ' ' , and hence feel the need to issue her ultimatum before Mrs May send her all-important letter to Brussels . it be a last-ditch attempt to force the Prime Minister to plead for the special deal for Scotland that Ms Sturgeon have be try to secure , in which Scotland would remain part of the single market while the rest of Britain drop out . ` ` I do n't know whether Article @card@ be go to be trigger tomorrow , or Wednesday , or next week or the week after that , ' ' say Ms Sturgeon . perhaps if Downing Street have let her in on the secret , the Prime Minister would be have a rather easy week . ' I will now take the step necessary to make sure that Scotland will have a choice at the end of this process '
Europe will be the loser if Britain punish for leave , warn Le Pen
impose a punitive divorce settlement on Britain in the forthcoming Brexit negotiation would be proof that Europe can only advance by ` ` threat , intimidation and blackmail ' ' , the leader of France ' S Front National have warn . Marine Le Pen , the hard-right leader who be expect to reach the second round run-off in the French presidential election in May , say a punitive deal with Britain would bolster the position of populist force across Europe , not deter them . ` ` the way the EU have react to Brexit have put pay to the few in Europe who still believe that there be an ounce of democracy in this structure that be the EU . ` ` Europe would be show its true face , as it already have do so in Greece and try to do with Britain , ' ' she say when ask if Brussels take a hard line with the UK would play into the hand of her party . ` ` this EU do n't move forward by consent because it know its people no longer adhere to this political structure . it advance via threat , intimidation and blackmail . ' ' European federalist in Brussels , Paris and Berlin have argue that Britain will need to be leave conspicuously worse off after Brexit to clearly demonstrate to other EU member state the peril of leave the club . Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , repeatedly warn last year that Brexit would show ` ` it be much good to show solidarity than stand alone ' ' . meanwhile Donald Tusk , president of the European Council , say in a letter to leader last year that a Brexit deal must leave everyone in ` ` no doubt ' ' about the benefit of EU membership . however independent analyst have warn that an EU punishment strategy - design to face down the rise force of populism that threaten Europe ' s political establishment - might have precisely the opposite effect . refer to anti-establishment party across Europe , Vincenzo Scarpetta , a senior policy analyst with Open Europe say : ` ` they would be able to claim that the EU be an undemocratic club where a sovereign nation get punish for merely exercise a right enshrine in the treaty . ' ' Ms Le Pen ' S remark to the Anglo-American Press Association in Paris appear to confirm that risk - which be also advanced in private by British official and negotiator . ` ` it hardly make the EU look like a club you ' d want to be a member in if they try and shoot the first member who decide to leave of their own accord , ' ' say one senior British official . if elect , Ms Le Pen say she would give the EU six month to yield to a list of demand that would enable France to take back control of its border and economy , include embark in ` ` intelligent protectionism ' ' . if her demand be not meet , Ms Le Pen say she would advise the French people that it be time for France to leave the EU . poll show that Ms Le Pen remain very unlikely to win in May , when opponent from Left and Right be expect to unite to defeat her .
Scotland do n't defy the people , judge tell ; as historic legal challenge over Brexit begin , Attorney General warn Supreme Court not to ' stray into area of political judgment ' ; Government expect judgment in new year
the Attorney General will today warn Supreme Court judge not to defy the ` ` will of the electorate ' ' or ` ` stray into area of political judgment ' ' during a landmark Brexit legal challenge . Jeremy Wright be expect to say the judge should ` ` resist ' ' intervene in a matter of significant ` ` political sensitivity ' ' as they decide whether Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have the power to trigger Brexit negotiation without a vote by MP . he will say that people who vote for Britain to leave the European Union do so on the ` ` clear understanding ' ' that the government have the power to implement the vote without ` ` further approval of Parliament in yet further primary legislation ' ' . Mr Wright will present the government ' s case to @card@ Supreme Court judge as it begin an appeal against the High Court ruling which state that Mrs May must have a parliamentary vote before Article @card@ - the formal mechanism which begin the process of the UK leave the European Union - be trigger . in write submission to the court which set out the argument he will make today , Mr Wright urge the judiciary not to intervene in politics , say : ` ` the Court be be invite ... to stray into area of political judgment rather than legal adjudication . the Court should resist that invitation , particularly where the underlie issue be one of considerable political sensitivity . ' ' Today ' S case come amid grow suggestion that EU-supporting politician will attempt to use the result to force the government to reveal its Brexit plan or face the prospect of lose a vote on Article @card@ . the Liberal Democrats yesterday say that they would would vote to overturn the EU referendum result by voting against legislation to trigger Brexit in Parliament if the government lose the court case . minister privately concede that the government be likely to be defeat and warn that the Supreme Court will create a ` ` constitutional crisis ' ' when it return its ruling in January . write in today ' S Daily Telegraph Lord Howard of Lympne , the former Conservative leader , today warn that peer will provoke the big ` ` constitutional crisis ' ' for a century if they seek to block Brexit . he say : ` ` of course their lordship do not face the consequence of electoral wrath in the same way as MP . but that very fact make it inconceivable that the unelected Upper House would seek to thwart the clearly express will of the people . be they to do so , that would indeed bring about a constitutional crisis that would dwarf anything we have see for over @card@ year . ` ` so , whatever the decision of the Supreme Court , I do not think there be any serious risk that the government will not be able to achieve its objective of activate Article @card@ in the spring of next year . ' ' follow the original High Court case politician be criticise for question the motive of the judge who make the ruling . but tomorrow Mr Wright will appeal directly to the country ' s most senior member of the judiciary not to intervene in the government ' s delivery of Brexit . the Daily Telegraph understand that the government be also examine plan for Supreme Court judge to be force to make public more information about the political interest of both themselves and their family member . it come after Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury , President of the Supreme Court , face call to recuse himself from the case after it emerge that his wife have call the referendum ` ` mad continue on Page @card@ Michael Howard : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ and bad ' ' on Twitter . Lady Hale , the court ' s deputy president , also face criticism for a speech ahead of the Brexit case where she question whether a new law alone be enough to start Brexit negotiation . the government ' S appeal will be hear over four day and will be televise in full . however , no judgment be expect until the new year . Mr Wright will open the hearing by highlight the fact that more than @card@ million people vote for Britain to leave the European union on the understanding that the government would then use its power to implement the vote . in a write submission to the court , he add : ` ` the premise of the @card@ [ referendum ] act be the continued existence of the government ' s prerogative power to act on the international plane - include , specifically , to give Article @card@ notice as the first step to implement a ` ` leave ' ' vote . ` ` that be the clear understanding of all concerned and the basis on which people vote in the referendum . ' ' Mrs May have vow to invoke Article @card@ by the end of March even if the judge rule against the government . the Daily Telegraph understand that minister be examine plan for all night sitting and clear business from both house to push the legislation through if they lose the case .
Brexit minister reject leave camp ' s promise to spend £350m on NHS ; Europe @card@ ; I make no such pledge , declare David Davis , as gulf widen between him and Boris Johnson
David Davis , the minister task with negotiate Brexit , yesterday distance himself from Boris Johnson and the leave campaign ' s pledge to spend £350 million more on the NHS after exit the EU . in further sign of difference between the pair , Mr Davis pointedly refuse to endorse the slogan , which have appear on the side of the official leave campaign ' S bus . instead Mr Davis , who vote for Brexit , tell a committee of MP that he ` ` make no such pledge ' ' - an implicit criticism of those senior Tories who endorse the promise . it be another indication that the promise to spend more on healthcare after leave the EU , make by some Eurosceptics before the vote , will not be take as bind by Theresa May ' S government . the comment come as the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator threaten the UK with be strip of single market ` ` access ' ' unless it accept unlimited migration from the continent . Guy Verhofstadt tweet that Britain must ` ` accept the free movement of citizen ' ' to maintain its current access and also demand that Brexit be wrap up by @card@ . Mr Davis , who will face Mr Verhofs-tadt across the negotiate table , refuse to address the comment directly but appear to jokingly refer to his opposite number as ` ` Satan ' ' in his response . an aide later say Mr Davis ' s throwaway comment refer to the MP ask the question and not Mr Verhofstadt . the exchange come as Mr Davis , whose official title be the Secretary of State for Exiting the EU , appear before the foreign affair select committee . ask about the £350 million NHS pledge , Mr Davis say : ` ` I make no such pledge . some do and if you want them to argue the case you should invite the people here who make that argument . you will find in no speech of mine any reference to that . ' ' he also accuse an influential group of Lords of ignore the view of the British people over their ` ` extraordinary ' ' demand for Parliament to vote on start Brexit negotiation . Mr Davis say those push for a vote be try to ` ` gainsay the view of the British people ' ' and mock the idea that voter think the EU referendum be only ` ` advisory ' ' . a committee of Lords on Tuesday say it would be ` ` constitutionally inappropriate ' ' and set a ` ` disturbing precedent ' ' if Mrs May do not get the approval of both house of Parliament before trigger Article @card@ , the formal mechanism for begin talk . the committee say MP and peer must ` ` play a central role ' ' in the decision to launch negotiation , either by pass an Act of Parliament or approve resolution table in both Commons and Lords . however Mr Davis rule out hold a vote , warn that allow MP to theoretically block the start of negotiation ` ` could put Parliament in opposition to the people ' ' . he say : ` ` the government in its manifesto say it would respect the result of this referendum this be not advisory . the British people do not think they be be ask their opinion . the previous prime minister do n't resign because he do n't like the opinion . so I think we ' ve get to take this seriously . ' ' Mr Davis add : ` ` it be for Parliament by all mean to debate the condition of departure , but it be not for Parliament to gainsay the view of the British people . full stop . ' ' in a separate development , Ken Clarke , the pro-EU former Tory cabinet minister , be find to have write to constituent tell them that ` ` the referendum be not binding ' ' . accord to the Guardian , Mr Clarke bemoan the fact that most politician ` ` pay lip service to the supposedly democratic nature of the exercise ' ' . Mr Clarke reportedly say : ` ` none of the Brexiteers at the moment have any clear idea of what they want to do next by way of actual change to our economy , trade , migration and other arrangement with the EU . a flood of legislation and regulation will probably have to be put before Parliament over the next few year . ' '
call me America ' S Mr Brexit , say Trump
Donald Trump appear to predict yesterday that he would become know as ` ` Mr Brexit ' ' after turn US politics on its head with his tumultuous presidential campaign . the Republican candidate make the suggestion in a post on Twitter which read simply : ` ` they will soon be call me Mr BREXIT ! ' ' Neither Mr Trump nor Hope Hicks , his spokesman , be immediately able to provide any clarification . ` ` his tweet speak for themselves , ' ' she say . Mr Trump use the sobriquet in a TV interview the previous day , describe himself as a ` ` political phenomenon ' ' . in reply to an interviewer who say : ` ` the country ' S changing . the world be change . we see Brexit and now we ' re see it in the United States ' ' , Mr Trump say : ` ` well I think I will be call Mr Brexit . ' ' Mr Trump may have be refer to the result of the Brexit referendum , which come as a surprise to many . however , he have trail rival Hillary Clinton in every national poll over the past three week . his current deficit be five percentage point , accord to a Reuters poll release on Wednesday and the margin be large in many of the key swing state . Kellyanne Conway , name Mr Trump ' s new campaign manager in a sudden staffing shake-up , yesterday say the gap be a good thing . ` ` I think it help us to be a little bit behind , and we be , ' ' she tell CNN . ` ` it light a fire under us and remind us what we need to do to get this do . ' '
Annus horribilis ? @card@ have be a success , say a defiant May
Theresa May have deny that she have endure a ` ` horrible ' ' year as she renew her pledge to fight the next election as Tory leader . the Prime Minister say that she be ` ` in it for the long term ' ' . she add that while she will ` ` undoubtedly ' ' deliver Britain ' s exit from the European Union she do not want to be know only as ` ` Madame Brexit ' ' . speak during a trip to RAF Akrotiri , in Cyprus , Mrs May insist that her year have be a success despite a disastrous snap election , a botched coup and the resignation of three member of Cabinet . she say : ` ` I ' m here to do the job that I believe need to be do and that ' s what I ' m go to focus on . I ' m do the job that I believe be right for the British people . ' ' during a trip to Poland this week the Prime Minister be accidentally describe as ` ` Madame Brexit ' ' by a translator . Mrs May say : ` ` you might have notice I smile when I hear the translation of Mrs Brexit or Madame Brexit . look , I be go to deliver on Brexit . that be undoubtedly the case , but I be do other thing as well . if you look at the change we be make on skill , education and training for example . ' ' the Prime Minister say that Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant have be ` ` crushed ' ' in Iraq and Syria as she hail the armed force as ` ` simply the pride of our nation ' ' . she tell serviceman and woman : ` ` here in Cyprus you be at the epicentre of so much of our military activity in the region . it be you , your professionalism , your courage and your sacrifice that give mean to the pledge we make as a nation . ' '
Hammond take opportunity to seize control ; while the PM and Foreign Secretary be out of the country , the Chancellor push his vision for Brexit Analyis
if opportunity make a thief , Philip Hammond have certainly take the chance of Theresa May ' s three-week summer break to steal the Brexit agenda while he be in charge of the country . the Chancellor have present such a clear vision for a soft , ` ` job first ' ' Brexit - for which he now have support from virtually every Cabinet minister but Boris Johnson - it seem he will be able to present Mrs May with a fait accompli when she return from the Alps . Mr Hammond want a ` ` standstill ' ' transition when Britain leave the EU in March @card@ so that business retain full access to the single market and the custom union . he then want a transitional period to last for up to three year , far longer than supporter of a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit would like . and on the evidence of recent day , Mr Hammond will get his way . since the Prime Minister arrive in Lake Garda on Monday for the first part of her European tour , former leave campaigner include Michael Gove and Liam Fox have fall into line behind Mr Hammond ' s vision of a ` ` status quo ' ' transition follow by a lengthy implementation period . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , who say less than a fortnight ago that the implementation period should last just a few month , have now decide that a two-year transition phase would amount to no more than a ` ` round error ' ' . Mr Gove , the Environment Secretary , who earlier this month reportedly want to bring Brexit talk ` ` crash to a halt ' ' to ensure a hard Brexit , have now say that an implementation period will ensure that ` ` we continue to have not just access to labour but the economic stability and certainty that business request ' ' . he add : ` ` that be something around which the government and the Cabinet be unite . ' ' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , have say that a ` ` broad and simple ' ' deal be needed that avoid a ` ` cliff edge ' ' for business , which seem to put him in Mr Hammond ' S camp . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , say this week that EU citizen will be free to come to Britain to work and live after March @card@ as long as they register with the Home Office , mean freedom of movement will effectively continue . tellingly , Downing Street , which insist Mrs May remain very much in charge even while she be on holiday , have not push back against any of these view . where once it drip poisonous briefing against the Chancellor , Number @card@ now insist that Mr Hammond have the Prime Minister ' S support . one senior source yesterday say he ` ` speak for the government on many of these issue ' ' . Mrs May , of course , have be emasculate by the general election result . her intention be to get rid of Mr Hammond in a post-election reshuffle , but instead Mr Hammond ' S power appear to grow by the day . shear of her inner circle of Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill , the joint chief of staff on whom she rely so totally before the election , Mrs May can no longer impose her will on her minister , who take every opportunity to put forward their own view . perhaps more significant than the fact that Mrs May be in Italy ( where she be keep fully abreast of development ) be Boris Johnson ' s absence from the country . the Foreign Secretary , who have the most difficult relationship of any Cabinet minister with Mr Hammond , be in Australia on government business , sufficiently far away as to make it difficult for him to impose his own view on the debate . the Chancellor and the Foreign Secretary have not see eye to eye for year , but their relationship sour during the EU referendum campaign to the extent that they openly mock each other - something which Mr Hammond continue to do . until yesterday , Mr Johnson have not make any comment on what his Cabinet colleague have say in his absence , and when the Telegraph contact his spokesman yesterday , he initially make it clear that he would not be do so . hour later , however , the Treasury and the Foreign Office issue a joint statement to the Telegraph say : ` ` the Chancellor and Foreign Secretary be work together to take the UK out of the EU include out of the custom union , single market and European Court of Justice . ` ` they , along with the whole of government , be get on with this very important work . ' ' the brief statement hardly amount to a ring endorsement from Mr Johnson of the Chancellor ' S plan . both man , of course , be see as potential successor when Mrs May ' S premiership come to an end , and while Mr Hammond seem to be win the argument in the Cabinet , Mr Johnson be more popular with the party membership and will surely want to maintain a hard stance over Brexit in any future leadership bid . another potential leadership contender , Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservatives leader , yesterday describe the recent Cabinet row over Brexit and the leadership as a ` ` really unedify spectacle ' ' . she say : ` ` the rule should be to get behind the Prime Minister at this time of great national interest . a bit of sharp elbow around the top table do not help anybody . ' ' for now , however , Britain seem likely to accept the sort of lengttransitional deal favour by the EU . the arrangement put forward by Mr Hammond involve a ` ` swift , broad and simple ' ' deal , accord to one British official , iwhich company retaiaccess to the single market and custom unioand allow free movement to continue for a period , followeby a transition phase in which in retain union follow Britain gradually disentangle itself from EU rule and obligation . the UK-EU trade deal could be finalise during the transition phase , which Mr Hammond have say must be complete before the next election in @card@ . advantage Hammond how the Cabinet have swing behind the Chancellor on Brexit Sunday Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , say that have wait @card@ year for Brexit , ` ` @card@ month would be a round error ' ' . Monday Theresa May , the Prime Minister , go on holiday to Lake Garda in Italy . Tuesday Michael Gove , the Eurosceptic Environment Secretary , say he be ` ` pragmatic ' ' about the need for a three-year transition period during which free movement continue . Thursday Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , say there will be no ` ` cliff edge ' ' after Brexit and EU migrant will be able to continue to come to Britain during a transition period . yesterday Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , claim that ` ` literally nobody ' ' want to see a post-Brexit migration cliff edge . friend in high place where the key player stand Mr Hammond ' S key Cabinet supporter on a Brexit transitional deal include David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , who have previously indicate a transitional deal would not last long than two year , but appear to have soften his position . Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , be say to have change his mind on the issue after his return to government . Dr Liam Fox , International Trade Secretary , have previously warn that a transitional deal would delay the ability to strike new free trade deal but now accept Mr Hammond ' S position . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , be one of Mr Hammond ' s key supporter on a transitional deal ; she have repeatedly say that Britain need a ` ` soft landing ' ' . the one who may need convincing be Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , who have repeatedly clash with Mr Hammond over Brexit and say that the UK could walk away from talk without a deal .
Germany ' S king-makers demand a Brexit cabinet ; Resurgent Free Democrats urge Mrs Merkel and the EU not to punish the UK and to find a ` ` fair deal ' ' ; Merkel could replace EU apostle with pro-UK group
Germany ' S Free Democrats have demand a special ` ` Brexit cabinet ' ' in Berlin to safeguard the vital interest of the country , cite grow alarm among industrial and manufacturing company over the disastrous implication of a fail deal with the UK . the fast-rising party say it will push for an amicable compromise in Brexit talk if it join the ruling coalition this autumn - as now look fairly likely - warn that it would be a fatal error for Europe to humiliate Britain . ` ` we be hear an utter of concern from German company and trade union about what could happen if there be a crash-Brexit and no deal in place . criticism be grow , ' ' Michael Theurer MEP , the party ' S economics chief tell the Daily Telegraph . ` ` small enterprise be very concern . there be also a lot of German company that rely on financing from the City of London , and they be very happy with the service they get now . ' ' the sentiment be echo by the leader of the Free Democrats ( FDP ) , Christian Lindner , who have stress ever since the referendum that the EU should handle Brexit with extreme care . ` ` I warn against a humiliation of Great Britain . the country must continue to be a strong partner for the EU and within NATO , ' ' he say . the party would like what it call a ` ` fair deal ' ' along the line of the Norwegian formula that preserve mutual market access . Mr Theurer say the German government give the impression of coherence on Brexit but in reality its response have be ad hoc and shambolic . ` ` nobody be in charge . there be a lack of priority . we absolutely need close coordination with the economy minister take the lead , ' ' he say . the FDP have recover from electoral massacre four year ago . it have regroup under young leader , rise 9pc in the opinion poll with a push for tax cut and tough migration policy . the party have a good chance of regain its post-war role as the kingmaker of German politics in election this September , forge a coalition with chancellor Angela Merkel ' s Christian democrat . ` ` we be a very British-minded party in favour of free trade and market economics . our view be that we should get along with the British as well as possible . a successful Brexit be of fundamental importance to Germany , ' ' Mr Theurer say . the Free Democrats be closely align with the Mittelstand nexus of medium-sized machine-tool , engineering , and manufacturing firm - many of them family-owned - that feel neglect as Brexit talk go on far above their head in Brussels . Mario Ohoven , head of the Mittelstand federation ( BVMV ) , say his member account for half of Germany ' S ( Euro ) 86bn ( £77m ) of export to Britain , claim that @card@ German job be closely link to UK trade . ` ` we plead for a soft Brexit . that do n't mean Britain should be able to cherry pick but it be in everybody ' s interest to avoid tariff and trade barrier , ' ' he say . Chancellor Merkel be currently in a ` ` grand coalition ' ' with the Social Democrats ( SPD ) , now lead by Martin Schulz , the former president of the European Parliament . he be an apostle of the EU project and continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ back the hardest possible Brexit to show other that leave the EU come at a very high price . but Mr Schulz ' s brief surge in the poll have already fade . in May his party suffer what he admit be a ` ` crush defeat ' ' in its historic bastion of North Rhine-Westphalia . there would be major consequence if Mrs Merkel switch to a FDP coalition . the Free Democrats be viscerally oppose to any kind of fiscal union or debt-polling for the eurozone , and would demand a policy of zero-tolerance towards any fiscal slippage by Greece . the Free Democrats have a eurosceptic tinge and would not be friendly to a ` ` grand bargain ' ' between Germany and France aim at rebuild monetary union on fresh foundation , with joint Eurobond back by an economic government . however , Sophia Besch and Christian Odendahl , from the Centre for European Reform , say Brexiters be delude themselves if they think Berlin will yield much ground on point of principle in order to safeguard unfettered trade with Britain . ` ` Germany ' s major political party be various shade of pro-European . even German business value the integrity of the single market and the EU more than tariff-free access to the UK market , ' ' they say . ` ` Geopolitically , Germany consider Brexit an act of vandalism - and of selfharm . in Berlin ' S view , Britain have undermine its own value as a security partner , and must be prevent from further divide the EU . ` ` to get Germany on side , Britain need to make clear that London be willing to contribute to European stability . ' ' yet tension between economic selfinterest and German piety over European solidarity be ever present in EU affair . nothing quite so expose the hypocrisy as the Nord Stream gas pipeline , a sweetheart deal with the Kremlin at the strategic and economic expense of Poland and Eastern Europe . it would be highly corrosive if the small and weak EU state feel that they be be push around by a resurgent Franco-German axis . in this respect , British withdrawal set off an awkward dynamic for Europe that be more complex than it look . Germany be discover that shibboleth will not be enough as the Article @card@ deadline near . they have to play four-dimensional chess .
this indulgent Tory infighting risk turn Brexit into a national disaster ; Cabinet minister must stop put their own ambition and grudge before the national interest
human like to think we be good than animal . sometimes , though , observe beast can tell us a lot about human behaviour . when , for example , a pack of dog lose its leader , the hound often descend into a power struggle , snarl and scrap to test one another ' S strength . as it turn out , Cabinet minister be n't so different from dog . with Theresa May humble by the general election , the Cabinet be now in an open war with itself . it ' S not a pretty sight . minister be send out ` ` friend ' ' to brief against one another and accuse their colleague of skulduggery on Sunday chat show . the conflict supposedly revolve around enormous policy difference between great and powerful rival . the truth , though , be that the government ' s war faction be not as far apart as they look . their power struggle be about personality , not policy , and it be threaten to turn Brexit into a disaster . on the face of it , the ongoing disagreement about Brexit - soft or hard , fast or slow - look fundamental . the fight in Parliament , between die-hard Remainers and the rest , have an epic feel to it . but among minister there be , in fact , a broad consensus . hard-headed politician , Remain and leave , accept that Brexit must be implement and they mostly agree that it should be do sensibly , with a reasonable transition period . both side in this fight , from arch-Brexiteer David Davis to Remainerin-chief Philip Hammond , accept this reality . they both want the Brexit transition to be time-limited . they both want to negotiate a final deal with as low an exit fee as possible , conditional upon a free-trade agreement . they might disagree over the timeline and the trade-offs that Britain face , but these outcome will be determine by the negotiation in Brussels , not by theoretical argument in Cabinet . the government ' S division be spread , however . recently , a new fissure have open up on fiscal policy . the fight centre on whether to loosen the purse string for public sector pay . Mr Hammond , ever the fiscal hawk , say no . his rival , lead by Michael Gove , disagree . but the difference , as with Brexit , be n't as wide as it look . listen to the nuance on both side , and you ' ll hear the fiscal dove admit that they have little appetite for a massive spending splurge , while Mr Hammond admit there be certain recruitment problem in public service that must be address . in other word , the Cabinet policy split be not irresolvable . the more vicious row be about power and presentation : should the Tories adjust the pay cap quietly or ostentatiously ? and , crucially , who get to decide ? these fight , over Brexit and fiscal policy , need n't tear the government apart . unfortunately , with the premiership seemingly up for grab , ambitious minister smell an opportunity . they be exaggerate their difference to set out their stall and drum up support . meanwhile , on its two most important political battlefield , the government be adrift . the legislation need to implement Brexit face threat from all side , start with the repeal bill , which will shift all our current law on to British , rather than EU , foundation . even without a majority , an authoritative government might have railroad its bill through Parliament . instead , the Cabinet have declare open season on itself . MP be form themselves into raid party , ready to attack the legislation with all sort of amendment and obstruction . and this be only the first of many bill . if the situation in Parliament be bad , it be even bad in Brussels . a government without the command of its own Cabinet and MP be in no position to strike highly contentious political agreement abroad . the Whitehall machinery seem to be in disarray . its Brexit planning operation be so fragile that , accord to the chief of the National Audit Office , it ' S liable to ` ` fall apart like a chocolate orange ' ' . our new EU ambassador hardly seem to be involve , have not even move to Brussels for the job . and as their minister tussle , civil servant be lock in turf war or toil away on policy that might be abandon or alter as the government ' S strategy evolve . the chaos mean that our negotiate team can not guarantee that its promise or demand will not shift or fall apart later . this be poison for a negotiation , substantially raise the risk that the talk will fall apart . if so , the public wo n't easily forgive the conservative . it ' S one thing for Brexit negotiation to collapse over a fundamentally irresolvable disagreement . it be quite another for them to fail because the government be simply too incompetent and wrack with infighting . none of this be necessary or inevitable . it have come about because Cabinet minister be put their own ambition and grudge before the national interest . they should instead be play a long game . their electoral success be tie to that of Brexit , and that wo n't be determine by a quick , sharp skirmish . it be a long , protracted battle and , with the EU ' s own institution evolve , a shrewd , well-run British government may well have opportunity to further its interest in the year ahead . in order to get there , though , two thing need to happen . the first be that the conservative must fill their leadership vacuum . fight dog only quieten down once they establish definitively who be master and who be follower . likewise , the government will only regain stability through a leadership contest or a grand bargain between the major player that be support by MP . after that , whoever be in charge need to create a policy consensus by admit that it want a sensible transitional deal before it tackle longer-term matter , like develop our future immigration policy and build the infrastructure it require . this would enable MP of different stripe to rally behind a programme and create space for Parliament and the public to scrutinise the fine detail of policy , head off unnecessary row like Britain ' s Euratom withdrawal . the government be in a terrible mess of its own making . but it can be unmake . if it be n't , voter will deliver a harsh verdict at the next election - and the Conservatives will roundly deserve it . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
we will be bribe with our own cash
at time like this I turn to history for enlightenment . back in the year @card@ , there be five Roman emperor . the result be chaos for Rome . and thing be n't exactly hunky-dory for the emperor either . the first four lose their life . this year could turn out to be similarly chaotic - although hopefully it will only be political career that be lose . it be ironic that the Brexit negotiation start on June @card@ , the same day as the Queen ' s Speech in Parliament . if the government ' S programme be not pass , then there would surely have to be a change of prime minister , and possibly another general election . since the political future be so uncertain , large part of our economic future be uncertain too , include what sort of Brexit we will secure and , indeed , whether Brexit will happen at all . such uncertainty be debilitate for the economy . nevertheless , there be some reassuring precedent . ' it will be difficult to enact the measure necessary to in @card@ , the Labour Party under Harold make Brexit work ' Wilson win the general election with a majority of only four seat . this make govern extremely difficult . two year later , however , he secure a big majority . the economy perform reasonably well . in @card@ , Harold Wilson again win most seat but it be a hung parliament . in the second election in October he achieve a three seat majority . Labour cling on with support from the liberal until @card@ . this period be widely regard as one of the bad in live memory , with high inflation and serious industrial unrest . yet the economy grow at an average annual rate of 3pc . towards the end of John Major ' S government , the economy continue to grow strongly , even though he have lose his majority . more recently , the election of @card@ produce a hung parliament , lead to the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition , under which the economy recover and the budget deficit be considerably reduce . and the uncertainty cause by last year ' s Brexit vote do not impede Britain ' S growth . so the economy can be remarkably resilient in the face of political upset and uncertainty . nevertheless , it would not be surprising if some real investment in the economy be now put on hold or consumer decide to rein in their spending a bit . either would depress the economic growth rate . fortunately , there be an offset , namely the weakness of the pound , which should bolster Britain ' s net export . uncertainty may be a bad thing , but the way it be eventually resolve can also have adverse economic effect . if we land up with a Labour Government under Jeremy Corbyn then both government spending and tax would rise . this be exactly the opposite of what need to happen to make Brexit work well for Britain . even if current uncertainty be resolve by the continuation of Mrs May , or someone else , as the head of a Conservative minority government , Brexit will be messy . she call the election supposedly to strengthen her hand in the Brexit negotiation . presumably it follow that her , or her successor ' S , hand be now weak . moreover , whether the UK secure a deal or not , it will be difficult to enact the sort of radical measure that be necessary to make Brexit work . for the British people seem to be tire of austerity . they want improve public service and various other goody , to be pay for , of course , by someone else . the Labour manifesto offer exactly this , include the abolition of tuition fee , which go down well with many student . by contrast , the Conservative manifesto offer the opposite , include plan to end the triple lock on pension . whatever happen in the next few week , it be surely go to be difficult for the Conservative Party to face the electorate again with so few goody in the shop window . in view of this , the agenda that many of us have hope a Conservative government would pursue coincident with Brexit , namely continue pressure on public expenditure enable radical reduction in tax , no longer seem very plausible . I fear that we may be in an era when the political party compete to bribe us with our own money . that be exactly what Roman emperor use to do with the provision of bread and circus . Roger Bootle be chairman of Capital Economics . contact him at roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com ' it will be difficult to enact the measure necessary to make Brexit work '
now be not the time to discuss Scottish independence vote , May tell Sturgeon ; no negotiation as PM close down the First Minister at hotel meeting
it be her big chance to tackle the Prime Minister over Scottish independence , but Nicola Sturgeon be only ` ` briefly ' ' allow to mention a second referendum before she be shut down by Theresa May , it be claim last night . the Prime Minister be understand to have dictate term during their meeting in a Glasgow hotel , run down the clock by talk about Article @card@ and a police exercise before Ms Sturgeon try to grab her chance at the end of their talk . but source make it clear last night that there be no ` ` substantive ' ' discussion of a referendum because Mrs May have already reiterate her position that ` ` now be not the time ' ' . she instead tell the First Minister to forget all thought of a second Scottish referendum until voter have see how Brexit be work ` ` in the real world ' ' . however , the First Minister insist there be no ` ` rational ' ' case for an independence referendum be delay long than two year because the Prime Minister tell her both the UK ' s Brexit and EU trade deal will be know by then . speak after her meeting with Mrs May in a Glasgow hotel , Ms Sturgeon say she seek total clarity on the timing of both the Brexit and trade deal and the Prime Minister be not ` ` under any illusion ' ' about why she be ask . but source reject the First Minister ' s interpretation of the conversation , say that Scot should not be ask to make such a momentous decision until they have see how Brexit be work in practice . they make clear this would not have happen by the time Ms Sturgeon want to hold the referendum , between autumn @card@ and spring @card@ . Ms Sturgeon meet Mrs May on the eve of a vote in the Scottish Parliament , which be expect to give her the authority to ask the Prime Minister for the power to hold another referendum . source say the Prime Minister ' s discussion with Ms Sturgeon about the vote be extremely brief . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , be also expect to write to the Scottish government today with an official rejection of Ms Sturgeon ' S highly complex plan for Scotland to stay in the EU single market even if the rest of the UK come out . Mrs May meet Ms Sturgeon yesterday as part of her pledge to consult with the devolve administration ahead of the trigger of Article @card@ . the venue , Glasgow ' S Crowne Plaza hotel , be keep secret until after the discussion have complete . the First Minister describe the talk as ` ` cordial ' ' and say she have wish Mrs may well in the Brexit talk . however , she say the preparatory work necessary for an independence referendum would have to start ` ` quite quickly ' ' if it be to be hold within the next two year . she say Mrs May be ` ` absolutely adamant ' ' that both the term of the Brexit and trade deal would be know within two year . she add : ` ` I think it make it very difficult for the Prime Minister to maintain a rational opposition to a referendum in the timescale I have set out . ` ` I think base on the discussion today I would struggle to see what her rational opposition to it would be in the timescale we have be talk about . ' ' a Downing Street source say : ` ` we totally disagree with the First Minister ' s assessment [ on timing ] . it ' S not enough to take a decision base on the outline of a deal . people have to see how it be work in the real world . ' ' No10 later say there have be no ` ` substantive ' ' discussion about a referendum because the Prime Minister have already set out her position . instead , most of the meeting be understand to have be take up with a briefing from Mrs May on the process of trigger Article @card@ . a similar briefing be give to Carwyn Jones , the Welsh First Minister , last week . ' it ' S not enough to take a decision base on the outline of a deal '
Wetherspoon ' S boss criticise rival for gloom over Brexit
two of Britain ' s big pub company be at loggerhead over the impact of Brexit on the economy . Tim Martin , chief executive of J D Wetherspoon , be resolutely upbeat about the UK ' s impending departure from the EU , while rival Greene King be warn it have hit consumer confidence . Mr Martin , who be a vocal campaigner for Brexit , use his company ' s full-year result yesterday to criticise those who have warn about the consequence of leave the European union and to suggest that Britain do not need a trade deal with the EU . Greene King , meanwhile , strike a more cautious tone and insist there be already evidence that its customer have be rattle by the vote . ask why there be such a disparity between the two company ' attitude towards Brexit , Mr Martin suggest that the referendum result be an easy excuse for company who be perform poorly . ` ` the only thing bad than complain about the weather , ' ' he say , ` ` be complain about Brexit . ' ' he advise Greene King to undergo some self-examination . ` ` if the EU be keen for a trade deal , we should cooperate , but unelected apparatchik like President Juncker ca n't be control , which be one of the main reason we vote to leave , ' ' argue Mr Martin , who found Wetherspoons . ` ` common sense , therefore , suggest that the bad approach for the UK be to insist on the necessity of a ' deal ' - we do n't need one and the fact that EU country sell us twice as much as we sell them create a hugely powerful negotiate position . ' ' he say that ` ` the gloomy economic forecast for the immediate aftermath of the referendum have be prove to be false ' ' , with Wetherspoons , which have @card@ pub , report that sale have rise 4.1pc since the end of its financial year on July @card@ . full-year pre-tax profit climb 12.5pc to £66m after exceptional item on revenue that advance 5.4pc to £1.6bn . in contrast to Mr Martin ' S bullishness , Greene King , the brewer of Old Speckled hen and operator of @card@ site , say in a trading update that it be brace for more difficult time ahead as a result of the referendum . ` ` as expect , uncertainty surround the UK ' s future withdrawal from the European Union have translate into a softening of some economic indicator and a reduction in consumer confidence , ' ' the company , which be lead by chief executive Rooney Anand , say . ` ` while the broad implication remain unclear , a number of recent industry survey have flag risk to leisure spend and we be alert to a potentially tough trading environment ahead . ' ' Like-for-like sale growth at its 1,823-strong managed pub , restaurant and hotel business slow to 1.7pc in the first @card@ week to Sept @card@ , down from the 2.8pc it have report in June for the first eight week . at its lease and franchise division of @card@ , net income rise by a much strong 4.5pc on a like-forlike basis . the slow growth at Greene King ' S manage pub business , as well as its caution about the wide economic environment , send its share down 6.1pc to 789p . Wetherspoons share climb 2.4pc to 946½p after its annual result beat expectation .
Scotland Labour split as Corbyn shun single market ; Moderate MP furious after their leader say he will only seek ' access ' to Europe follow Brexit
Jeremy CORBYN have open a public split with his shadow chancellor John McDonnell by suggest he want Britain to leave the single market after Brexit . in comment that be meet with fury by many moderate Labour MP , the party leader say he will only seek ` ` access ' ' to the single market . Mr Corbyn ' S approach be in direct conflict with that of Mr McDonnell , who warn that pull out of the single market could cause ` ` substantial ' ' damage . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , yesterday refuse to say whether Britain will seek to retain its single market membership after Brexit , insist that she do not want to ` ` give away ' ' Britain ' s negotiate hand . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , say on Monday that it be ` ` improbable ' ' that Britain would remain in the single market after Brexit . but Mrs May tell MP in the Commons : ` ` we will not reveal our hand prematurely and we will not provide a run commentary on every twist and turn of the negotiation . ` ` and I say that because that be not the good way to conduct a strong and mature negotiation that will deliver the good deal for the people of this country . ' ' Mr Corbyn , who be criticise by his own Labour MP for fail to do more during the EU referendum campaign , say that he ` ` accept and respect ' ' the Brexit vote . however , he say that he be concern by state aid rule which prevent the government from intervene to save company and requirement which mean government have to ` ` liberalise and privatise public service ' ' . Mr Corbyn say : ` ` we will be press for full access to the European Single market for good and service as part of the negotiation . ` ` but there be directive and obligation link to the single market which we would not want to see as part of a post-Brexit relationship . ' ' in July , Mr McDonnell say : ` ` whatever emerge from negotiation , when the final proposal for Brexit be decide , we do not want to lose the benefit that membership of the European Union have bring . the damage that would be do to our economy by pull out of the single market at this time could be substantial . ' ' Chris Bryant , the former shadow leader of the Commons , say that Labour be in danger of become ` ` some wild woolly sandal-wearing protest movement ' ' . Pat McFadden , a Labour MP , say : ` ` the question of the single market matter to job , trade , investment and prosperity . ` ` we can not gamble our economic future on a Liam Fox world tour explore trade deal when country have already say that settle our relationship with the EU be the priority . ` ` any new deal will be more comprehensive if the UK have maximum access to European market , which mean membership of the single market . ' ' Owen Smith , Mr Corbyn ' s rival for the Labour leadership , say : ` ` Tens of thousand of Labour member and trade unionist will be worry to hear that Jeremy Corbyn appear to agree with David Davis that our membership of the single market be not worth fight for . ` ` I have be consistent in say that trade with Europe be in our national economic interest . it bring job , growth and investment . ` ` Jeremy seem happy to accept Brexit at any cost - even if that mean put British job and investment at risk . ` ` perhaps this explain why he fail to ask a single question of Theresa May at Prime Minister ' s question about Brexit and why he fail to campaign hard enough during the referendum . ' ' Juliet Samuel : page @card@
Brexit not to blame for ' shrinkflation ' ; thousand of product have be get small - and it be go on long before the EU referendum
supermarket item have be get small for at least five year , official datum show , as manufacturer be accuse of use Brexit as an excuse for short-change customer . statistic publish yesterday by the Office for National Statistics reveal that more than @card@ consumer product have shrink over the past five year , despite be sell at the same price . this so-called ` ` shrinkflation ' ' flation ' ' effect have hit good range from chocolate bar and toilet roll to coffee and fruit juice , with food product most heavily affect , it say . manufacturing giant include Premier Foods , which own brand such as Mr Kipling , Hovis and Bisto , have blame shrink product on Brexit fallout since the vote to leave the EU . the claim be that rise commodity price and the high cost of import ingredient , thanks to the weaken value of the pound , be force them to choose between put up price or shrink pack . but the ONS dismiss the referendum result as a reason for a perceive boom in post-Brexit shrinkflation , as the number of product affect annually have be relatively consistent since @card@ . ` ` Our analysis do n't show a noticeable change follow the referendum able Ch that would point to a Brexit effect , ' ' it say . it also cast doubt on whether the cost of raw material , on which manufacturer have often blame price hike , have actually increase . the European import price of sugar have be fall since the middle of @card@ , and reach a record low in March @card@ , it say . instead , expert say ` ` shrinkflation ' ' effect be a lasting impact of the recession as manufacturer avoid upset ` ` sensitive ' ' consumer choose to quietly shrink pack instead of charge more . Mark Jones , a food drink solicitor at Gordon firm , say : ` ` Shrinkflation bear out of the recession on ers ` ` price s by rink ing ood and ordons law flation ' be sion and have gather staggering pace since @card@ . the ONS ' S report confirm this . against the backdrop of a weak economy , commodity price have be rise over the last five year . ` ` the recession make people very price sensitive and you can see the evidence of that by look at the impressive growth of discount retailer in the last five www.years.No retail sector have faster . ' ' Inrecent month , consumer be anger by change to a number of popular product , include Toblerone , Doritos and Maltesers . Alex director service that m and fo Neill , which ? manage of home product and service , say : ` ` we have find many popular household food product have shrink over the year , often with the price stay the same or increase . ` ` Manufacturers and retailer should make any change to their product clear , otherwise they risk people feel cheated . ' ' meanwhile health campaigner say that although small pack be generally good for people ' S diet , shrinkflation could backfire as consumer cotton on to the practice . Graham MacGregor , chairman of Action on Sugar , say : ` ` when we be try to tackle obesity , and especially childhood obesity , reduce portion size be a really good strategy . ` ` I think the size of these product should be reduce , but these company should n't be charge the public the same amount of money for them . I think that could backfire if people end up feel deceive . ' ' Lattes , smoothie and juice carton will have their sugar content cut , or portion size will shrink , health official say . Public Health England ( PHE ) be to set new target to reduce the calorie in sweetened dairy drink , juice and smoothie , follow talk with manufacturer . it follow plan to cut sugar content in a range of product - include biscuit , cake and pudding - by @card@ per cent by @card@ . health official have yet to agree what the new drink target will be , with talk expect to continue over the summer . the new measure be aim at drink that be not cover by the sugar tax , which come in next year , with company pay up to 8p in duty on a can of fizzy drink . the small print how product have shrink @card@ Doritos sharing bag Reduced 10pc - 200g to 180g @card@ Coco Pops large box Reduced 10pc - 800g to 720g @card@ & @card@ Maltesers Reduced 23pc - 121g to 93g @card@ Toblerone 400g bar reduce 10pc 400g to 360g @card@ Andrex pack of four toilet roll reduced by 8pc - @card@ to @card@ sheet . @card@ Sensodyne Total Care Extra Fresh Toothpaste Decreased 25pc - 100ml to 75ml . @card@ Terry ' S Chocolate Orange Reduced 10pc - 175g to 157g @card@ Cadbury Creme Egg multipack Reduced 17pc - six egg to five @card@ Tetley Tea ' blend of both ' @card@ bag in box Reduced 6pc - @card@ . @card@ Aunt Bessie ' s Homestyle Chips Reduced 7pc - 750g to 700g @card@ Surf with Essential Oils washing powder Reduced 19pc - 2kg to 1.61kg @card@ Birds Eye Select vegetable bag Shrunk 8pc - 750g to 690g @card@ Domestos Spray Bleach Multipurpose Cleaner Reduced 7pc - 750ml to 700ml @card@ Hovis Best of both loaf Reduced 6pc - 800g to 750g @card@ John West tuna Reduced 14pc - 130g to 112g @card@ Quality Street tin Reduced 18pc - 1kg to 820g
Brexit deadlock as Brussels demand more ; Europe ' s chief negotiator warn of no deal on free trade without more detail on Britain ' s exit fee
negotiation between Britain and the European Union yesterday end in deadlock , with the two side deeply divide over the price of Brexit and the future role of the European Court of Justice in police the divorce deal . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , warn that unless Britain cave in to its demand to provide more information on the financial settlement , there could be no discussion of a UKEU free-trade agreement . at a joint press conference with David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , in Brussels , Mr Barnier raise the spectre of Britain crash out of the EU without a deal . ` ` we want an orderly withdrawal and an orderly withdrawal mean account must be settle , ' ' he say . ` ` clarification of the UK position be indispensable for us to negotiate and for us to make progress . ' ' a free-trade agreement could grant tariff-free access to the single market after Brexit , while allow Britain to put curb on immigration from the EU . neither side be prepare officially to talk figure for the Brexit bill yet , but the EU be think to favour a ( Euro ) 100billion payment . Mr Davis say the UK would meet its financial obligation but that the EU also have obligation to Britain . during four day of highly complex talk , British official refuse to provide the EU with detail of which of the EU ' s financial demand it would meet until the EU provide legal ` ` chapter and verse ' ' on its demand . at the press conference , Mr Barnier say the EU have provide ` ` detailed legal analysis of these commitment ' ' , but British official dispute this . the two side be now effectively deadlock . it emerge yesterday that Mr Barnier have tell the House of Lords EU Select Committee there would be ` ` an explosion ' ' of outrage across Europe if Britain refuse to honour its commitments.The second major obstacle to progress be which court would have jurisdiction over the right of EU citizen . Mr Barnier insist yesterday that the European Court of Justice must have jurisdiction over any agreement on EU citizen ' right after Brexit . that would mean judge in Luxembourg continue to have influence in Britain , which be unacceptable to Britain . ask by the Daily Telegraph to name another country that accept foreign jurisdiction on its territory , Mr Barnier be unable to answer . ` ` this be not a political point , it be a legal one , ' ' he say , ` ` only the court can interpret EU law . for us it be court case law that must continue and the court that must continue to rule over this process . ' ' Britain argue that citizen ' right would be enshrine in the Brexit withdrawal agreement . that would be ` ` binding ' ' in international law and could not be change after Brexit by MP in Westminster . the EU insist that unless ` ` sufficient progress ' ' be make on the bill , Ireland and citizen ' right , it will not begin discussion on Britain ' s future relationship with the EU , include trade talk .
if you think @card@ be a year of revolution , just wait for @card@ ; British voter be get angry over Brexit - if Theresa May betray us , there will be an earthquake
as this year of political revolution draw to a close , the prospect of the European union as @card@ approach could hardly be bleak . there be no doubt that Brexit be the bad thing ever to happen in the history of the Union . but right across the continent , further political opposition be on the march . it be quite astonishing that in Italy the Five Star Movement , lead by popular stand-up comedian Beppe Grillo , be now constantly above @card@ per cent in the poll . in France , Marine Le Pen look set to win the first round of the French presidential election and , while she be not favourite to win the decisive second round , event of @card@ show that it would be foolish to say that it be entirely impossible . even in Holland , the controversial Geert Wilders lead the poll with an election due in the spring of next year . the great threat to the EU economically would be a further run on the Italian bank , and some clever financial mind think that Chancellor Angela Merkel may yet have to bail out Deutsche Bank ahead of the German election next autumn . in many way , the comment that Donald Trump make to me when I first meet him - that Brexit be a smart thing to do - look correct . we may well have just escape from a building that be catch on fire . despite all of this , though , the process of Brexit would appear not to be go anywhere at all . increasingly , I be begin to feel that Prime Minister Theresa May ' s reassuring early word about ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' in July this year be not amount to very much in the way of action . the contradiction that we hear from Cabinet minister every single week make this government look rudderless . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , have apparently be brief foreign ambassador that he personally be in favour of the European free movement that he campaign against at the referendum . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , openly question whether we will leave the Single Market . even David Davis , the hardline Brexit Secretary , have appear to suggest that we may have to continue pay membership fee for access to the Single Market . it seem to me that we be head towards a move to the Norwegianstyle compromise over Brexit . there be no doubt in my mind that a majority of MP in Parliament want us to remain in the European Economic Area , with all that it imply . I fully expect that the Supreme Court will uphold the previous judgment on Article @card@ , and now Jeremy Corbyn ' S Labour Party have make it clear that it want to try to use any parliamentary vote to bind the Prime Minister to keep us in the Single Market . a Norwegian-style outcome would not be what we vote for in the referendum on June @card@ , and I sense that among the @card@ million people who vote for Brexit , frustration be move towards anger . the one beneficiary of all of this will not be Lib Dem leader Tim Farron , despite his party ' s one-off victory in the Richmond by-election . it will be Paul Nuttall , who have take over from me at the helm of Ukip at a very fortuitous time . ever since the Dane be force by Brussels to reverse their referendum decision on the Maastricht Treaty nearly @card@ year ago , the European political elite have think they would always be able to overcome any setback that voter have the temerity to inflict on their beloved project of integration . to date , they have be successful , with a referendum in Ireland on the Nice Treaty be reverse and referendum decision in France and the Netherlands wilfully ignore . earlier this year , the Dutch vote against an EU Association Agreement with Ukraine but have be tell that their wish will be disregard . here at home , in the past few week , we have see an attempt to change the term of what we vote for . we keep be tell , day in , day out , that we do not vote to leave the Single Market and that the British people do n't know what they be vote for . and yet , if you look at what every single lead campaigner of both the leave and Remain camp say , it could not have be clear that a vote to leave include the Single Market . in the face of grow pressure against Brexit from the Labour Party , the Liberal Democrats , the Scottish Nationalists and a grow number of Tory , I believe that the Prime Minister be fail in her duty . we have see this before . as home secretary , she would repeatedly talk tough on immigration , only to preside over huge number of people continue to come to the country . while I would n't expect her to completely reveal her hand , I would have expect some leadership on this issue . even when we do invoke Article @card@ we may find the go tough . as for the moment , there be many in Europe who appear to put their blind faith in this fail project above the argument of economic logic that they need us more than we need them . I think there will be grow call among Leavers for us to abandon the Article @card@ route altogether . after all , the number come into the UK from the EU continue to rise , as show in the migration figure release last week . we be still spend a net £30 million a day to stay part of the club . however loud the voice get to repeal the @card@ European Communities Act , this option will undoubtedly find little favour in Parliament . so for those of you who be now close to boil point , I be sorry to say you will have a long time to wait . if , as I now expect , we reach the spring of @card@ and find that our demand in the historic referendum have not be meet , then I think something quite dramatic could happen . however docile British voter may appear to be , I think that this issue be the one on which a really big change could happen and a major realignment of the British political system could occur . if people think that @card@ be a seismic year , I think @card@ will be even more dramatic . I could , of course , be entirely wrong on all of this and perhaps our Prime Minister will get a grip on her divided Cabinet colleague and , in the course of the next week , tell us clearly what she intend to do . but I be not hold my breath . follow Nigel Farage on Twitter @ Nigel_Farage ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Scotland Mundell rule out special deal for Scotland after Britain leave EU
Scotland will not get a ` ` special deal ' ' when the UK leave the EU but nor will any other part of the country , David Mundell say yesterday as Nicola Sturgeon provoke a row over the new Brexit hotline the Prime Minister have set up for her government . the Scottish Secretary tell MSPs there would be a ` ` single agreement for the whole of the United Kingdom ' ' add that the SNP ' s suggestion that particular area , such as the City of London , be get preferential treatment over Scotland be ` ` absolutely wrong ' ' . however , he say there could be ` ` differential ' ' arrangement within the UK deal for some sector , such as the financial service industry , which be vital for the Scottish and London economy . Mr Mundell also use an appearance before a Holyrood inquiry into Brexit to urge SNP minister to work with the UK Government and insist he would be present at a new Brexit committee when Scotland ' S interest be discuss . Ms Sturgeon complain that it take David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , @card@ hour to call back one of her minister after he use the new hotline for the first time on Tuesday . the First Minister tell MSPs : ` ` there be now a telephone line we can call , it ' S just currently not very hot . ' ' her claim be flatly deny by UK Government , which say the Scottish Government have ask for the call to take place on Wednesday . the Scottish Secretary ' s late intervention further undermine Ms Sturgeon ' s claim Scotland could stay in the single market even if the rest of the UK leave . Prof Michael Keating , one of the country ' s foremost constitutional expert , have tell the Daily Telegraph this be impossible . speak at Holyrood ' s Europe committee , Mr Mundell warn MSPs to be sceptical of report that particular sector would get special treatment . but he add : ` ` that do n't mean that within that agreement there ca n't be specific issue that would relate to Scotland , Wales or Northern Ireland . there wo n't be a Scotland-only agreement , or a Wales-only agreement , or a Northern Ireland-only agreement . ' ' Nissan yesterday announce it would build the new Qashqai in Sunderland thanks to UK Government ` ` support and assurance ' ' but Mr Mundell insist there be no plan for a special Brexit deal for the car or financial service industry . Mr Mundell say he would attend a new Brexit cabinet committee when it meet in early November to discuss access to the single market . he also say he could not ` ` envisage ' ' the introduction of border control in Scotland for ferry from the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland . Ms Sturgeon tell First Minister ' S question yesterday that Mike Russell , her Brexit Minister , have use the UK Government ' s Brexit hotline for the first time just before midday on Tuesday but have to wait until after 6pm on Wednesday for a response . a Department for Exiting the European Union spokesman say : ` ` this be not correct . the Scottish Government ask for a call to be arrange for [ Wednesday ] morning and the Secretary of State speak to Mike Russell later in the day , as soon as his diary allow . ' '
this be a woman ' S government , and will be all the more effective for it ; the supposedly soft work of social mobility matter more than the Brexit Boys ' macho posturing
for a woman whose very career put her commitment to equality for woman beyond question , Theresa May ' s Cabinet appointment raise some intriguing question about what actually matter in politics and who be responsible for the thing that matter . one thing that be clear be that David Cameron ' S chum do not matter much to Mrs www.May.No prime minister can avoid have enemy , but the lucky one get to choose their foe . Mrs May have choose the Cameroon , the gilded set that surround her predecessor . she reckon that George Osborne , Michael Gove and friend can make trouble for her , but not pose a mortal threat to her government . she ' S probably right , too . for all their talent , the Cameroon be few and have few loyal follower . never one for the mundane logistic of political organise , they cultivate no activist and instead of earn loyalty by show loyalty they buy it with job or the promise of job . no , Mrs May know that if anyone can cause her less trouble in the Conservative Party , it ' S the Brexit Boys . that ' S why a woman who have put so much effort into promote woman in politics have put three of the Conservatives ' mighty swordsman in charge of get us out . the most famous be the Foreign Secretary . Boris Johnson will play a part in seek the good exit deal - though uncharacteristically , perhaps , not the lead role . that part go to David Davis , the awfully title Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union . the third musketeer be Liam Fox , already talk up a storm as International Trade Secretary . Mr Davis ' s great liability in the job be that for all his reputation as a bruising operator at Westminster , he be regard as unserious and unreasonable by many of those he will have to negotiate with . his great asset , meanwhile , be that he be regard as unserious and unreasonable by many of those he will have to negotiate with . reasonable man strike reasonable deal . unreasonable one strike outrageous one . just ask Recep Tayyip Erdogan : the Turkish president jail journalist and kill Kurd , but the EU still do deal with him . remember that realpolitik when you hear patrician European insist the EU can not compromise on its value to strike a Brexit agreement . in politics , there ' s always a deal to be do . Westminster conspiracists suggest Mrs May be set the three big leaver up for a fall , hope they botch it . not so . she ' S not daft , the PM . she know she stand and fall with Brexit : any failure be www.hers.No , the reason Mrs May have give these three alpha male the job be to bind them to its result : whatever Brexit look like , it will be theirs . the Remain-voting PM will not be blame by Leavers for the way she carry out their instruction . it ' S already receive wisdom at Westminster that Mrs May have create her government as two distinct ministerial team with two distinct mission : a crack squad of Leave-voting He-Men to do the heavy lifting of Brexit , and a smile band of one nation moderate to do some nice stuff about social justice and fairness and unicorn - and never the twain shall meet . implicit in that be the assumption that Brexit be more important than social reform , though that actually reflect the amour-propre of the minister and the rather macho outlook of Westminster : diplomacy , defence , high politics and strategy , field still dominate by man , be accord great status than social policy , a ` ` soft ' ' field where woman be more at home . why have Mrs May , commit to promote woman , give the big , important job to man , and leave the woman to do the fluffy stuff of make Britain feel fair and more meritocratic , and conservative look like agent of that fairness and meritocracy ? in fact , the two team have the same goal : to assuage the anger express in the EU referendum . and the European task of Mr Davis , Dr Fox and Mr Johnson ( all of whom , incidentally , have important thing to say about social mobility ) be actually the less important of the two . for many of the @card@ per cent who choose Brexit , vote to leave be about a rational assessment of the EU and its effect on their life and their finance and their country . those be the voter Mr Davis and his new comrade must satisfy with the well possible Brexit . but here ' s an awkward fact that only a few politician have yet accept : for some voter , the sort of deal we strike with the EU do n't really matter . as Andy Haldane of the Bank of England ( a man surely too interesting to remain a central banker ) have note , many poor Briton have see no direct economic benefit from any of the solid GDP growth in the UK since the recession end : a large population and gain skew to the better-off mean that even as the cake get big , their slice stay the same . these angry ` ` leave behind ' ' voter , who swing the referendum result , be now the most powerful and unpredictable force in British politics . if anyone can deny the Tory a majority at the next election , it ' S them . and for people leave out of economic growth , who care what Brexit mean for GDP and productivity and trade ? that ' S why Mr Osborne ' s economic doom fail to move them before the vote , and that ' S why whether Mr Davis get Norway-minus , Canada-plus or Singapore-sigma be largely irrelevant to them . good Brexit or bad Brexit , neither will make as much difference to the life or outlook of the ` ` leave behind ' ' as policy that make it easy for their kid to get a good job and buy a house . the three Brexiteers will wave their sword and cry havoc and they ' ll get more attention as a result . but the work of Justine Greening will probably matter more to the life of voter who have no time for the game of politician . likewise , Westminster obsess over Nick Timothy , Mrs May ' s joint chief of staff , fête him as the most important man in the country - and all but ignore Fiona Hill , also chief of staff ( the first woman to hold the post ) and just as significant a figure in our national life . in politics as in life , the macho man will make the noise , but it ' ll be the woman - and perhaps a few man untroubled by the insecurity that be part and parcel of machismo - who get on with the stuff that really www.matters.Be in no doubt : this be a woman ' S government , and all the good for it . follow James Kirkup on Twitter @ JamesKirkup ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
' I need a knife in violent Brexit Britain ' Body : a French student who take a knife to a nightclub have walk free after magistrate accept he be scare living in Brexit-seeking Britain . Phillippe Roubert , @card@ , claim he need the knife to protect himself from ` ` violent ' ' street over fear ` ` foreigner ' ' be subject to attack . Exeter magistrate ' court take a lenient course of action after accept his fear in the aftermath of the Brexit vote be understandable . Roubert have try to take a butterfly blade into the Unit @card@ club in the city on Dec @card@ last year but be stop by door staff . he tell police he be scare by story of how dangerous the street of Britain could be and how Brexit have foster a climate of xenophobia . Deborah Minett , his solicitor , say story of violent Brexit Britain concern him and the ` ` knife offer him some reassurance on the back of some press reporting and view he hold wrongly ' ' . Roubert , who admit have a knife in a public place , be give a conditional discharge .
Canada or Switzerland ? the pro and con of two Brexit option Body : Boris Johnson say he will resign as foreign secretary over Brexit if Theresa May decide to signal her interest in a ` ` Swiss-style ' ' arrangement with the EU in her keynote speech on Friday in Florence . alongside Michael Gove , his fellow Cabinet Brexiter , Mr Johnson step up his argument with the Prime Minister , say he favour an EU deal along the line of Canada ' S . he make clear some of the thing he do not want Britain to drive for in his essay for the Daily Telegraph last Saturday , write that ` ` we would not expect to pay for access to their market any more than they would expect to pay for access to ours ' ' . so , why be he put his career on the line like this ? I ' ve take a look at the difference between the ` ` Canada plus ' ' option and the ` ` Swiss-style ' ' method favour by such as the Chancellor Philip Hammond , as away to ensure Britain deliver on what the people vote for last year . the appeal of Canada ' S deal Canada enjoy preferential single market access under the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) it sign with the EU , which come into force from tomorrow . the deal eliminate most trade tariff , without oblige Canada to accept issue , such as free movement , which Brussels like to force on trade partner . any downsides ? the service sector be only partially cover by Ceta , so copy and paste it as the basis for a Brexit deal would not give UK financial service the same access they currently enjoy . this be why supporter refer to the iteration Britain would have as ` ` Canada ( or Ceta ) plus ' ' , indicate they accept that the deal would have to go further . what about Switzerland ? the Swiss be neither in the EU nor the European Economic Area , but participate in the single market . Switzerland not only have to pay for access , cough up a net annual fee of ( Euro ) @card@ per capita , but it do n't even get full access for its banking sector and other part of the service sector . bear in mind that the service sector make up almost @card@ per cent of the UK ' s economic output . Switzerland be also oblige to accept free movement , which mean that it have struggle to control the influx of migrant into the country . the Swiss have try to bring in curb on immigration , as their voter demand in a referendum , but they be force by Brussels into back down in order to keep their single market access . which version be a true Brexit ? neither Canada nor Switzerland be in the EU . they be also not in the bloc ' S custom union , so either model would see Brexit fulfill in spirit , as Britain would end up outside the bloc and able to take charge of its trade policy . however , there be a price to pay in order to emulate Switzerland : Britain would not be able to control its border without approval from Brussels and would be bind into pay for continued access to the single market . few Brexit voter would have back leave in order to see that happen . that be why Mr Johnson be put his neck on the line in his fight for a free trading nation which be the master of its border post- Brexit . he would know that many Brexiters would have vote for that rather than to be perpetually yoke - as the Swiss be - to Brussels . Asa Bennett @card@ percentage of the UK ' s economic output generate by service sector ( Euro ) @card@ what every Swiss citizen pay per year for access to the single market @card@ percentage of the UK ' s economic output generate by service sector
Brexit need a vision as much as a plan body : not so long ago , the key debate around the Cabinet table be what Brexit should look like . now the discussion be all about the transition period , and what it should look like . this be progress of a kind , though not necessarily the sort that those who vote to leave the European Union want to see . many suspect that transition will become permanent , despite protestation from the Chancellor , Philip Hammond , and the International Trade Secretary , Liam Fox , that it will end by the next election in @card@ . other worry that by create a system that effectively shadow EU membership from outside , transition be lay the way for a final deal almost indistinguishable from what go before . and while minister kick such crucial proposal around , what be the Prime Minister ' S view ? we should learn more when she return to her desk tomorrow . after more than three week off , she should be refresh . and her presence be need . for while it be good to see some detail on vital issue like custom and Ireland , the EU be respond with a dead bat . the key issue at stake for its team , predictably enough , be money . the reality be that , follow an election in which the margin for shepherd Brexit legislation through Parliament have be significantly reduce , Britain ' s negotiate position have be weaken . therefore when Michel Barnier , the EU ' s Brexit negotiator , demand that a ` ` financial settlement ' ' have to be conclude first , it may be that Whitehall be prepare to concede the point . if so , and a deal be on the card , it would be good for some political preparation to be do for what may be the large single piece of state expenditure since the bank be bail out . ultimately , this mean the case for Brexit must be make again . the good way of do that be for the government to define its vision of the future , to formulate where it hope negotiation will end - not just how it can get them under way - and to make it clear that ultimately , if we be not satisfy , we be prepare to walk away with no deal . there may be Cabinet unanimity that a transition deal be need . but there seem no accord on what it be for : to smooth away Brexit cliff edge , or to kick the can down the road ? it must be the former . that original question can not be avoid . what should Brexit Britain look like ? instead of fill a vacuum , every Government move , every statement , must now fill a purpose - and fulfil Britain ' S destiny .
Scotland Liam Fox demand meeting with BBC over Brexit ' bias '
Liam Fox have demand a meeting with the BBC director-general after accuse the broadcaster of ` ` bias ' ' coverage of Brexit . the International Trade Secretary write to Lord Hall to say the corporation have ` ` wilfully ' ' ignore positive story about Brexit . he also accuse the BBC of prefer interview with pro-EU commentator , predict disaster as a result of Brexit , to speak to leave campaigner . Dr Fox write : ` ` I can not recall a single time in recent time when I have see good economic news that the BBC do not describe as ' despite Brexit ' . ' ' in his letter , see by the Daily Telegraph , Dr Fox claim there be a ` ` clear pattern of unbalanced reporting of the EU economy ' ' . Dr Fox , who be in Washington DC for the late stage of talk with the US about a post-Brexit trade deal , say reporting have undermine his effort to strike agreement . he say that on July @card@ the BBC choose not to report the annual foreign direct investment figure publish by his department , even though his team call the BBC ' S economics , business and political desk to flag up the story . he write : ` ` these figure be an important indicator of the attractiveness of the UK to foreign investor , yet the BBC turn down the opportunity to publish the story or take interview . the figure just so happen to show a record number of project in the UK from foreign investor . ' ' on July @card@ , he say , he alert the BBC to monthly trade statistic show export have rise by @card@ per cent , but the BBC ignore it and run a piece about the widening trade deficit . pa BBC/ OVERS/ a spokesman for the BBC say : ` ` we do not recognise the characterisation of our coverage outline in the letter , but the BBC be happy to talk with politician , as we do on a regular basis . ' ' Jeff ' I can not recall a time when I have see good economic news that the BBC do not describe as ` ` despite Brexit ' ' '
may to build bridge with Macron as official fail to agree Brexit talk start date
the start of formal Brexit talk be delay yesterday in the wake of the political uncertainty cause by Theresa May ' s disastrous election result . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , yesterday meet Oliver Robbins , the most senior civil servant in David Davis ' s Brexit department , but the two man fail to reach an agreement on a start date for talk . Mr Barnier last night urge Britain not to waste any time in come to the table for Brexit talk . ` ` my preoccupation be that time be pass , it be pass quicker than anyone believe because the subject we have to deal with be extraordinarily complex , ' ' he tell the Financial Times . ` ` I ca n't negotiate with myself . ' ' Mr Barnier say the EU would approach the talk with ` ` no spirit of revenge ' ' but ` ` no naivety either ' ' . he say he want negotiation to be complete by November @card@ to allow time for the agreement to be ratify in British and European parliament to meet the schedule for the March @card@ exit date , which he say should not be push back . Mrs May will this evening start try to rebuild her authority when she visit Emmanuel Macron , France ' s new president , in Paris . the Prime Minister hope to make an ally of Mr Macron before the formal opening of Brexit negotiation . the pair will discuss counter-terrorism in the wake of the recent attack in London before head to watch England play France in an international football friendly . the trip to Paris be plan week before Mrs May lose her majority in the election , but could not have come at a more welcome time for the Prime Minister . Mrs May and Mr Macron will announce joint plan to fine social medium company such as Facebook , Twitter and Google if they fail to remove extremist content from their websites . she will hope to use the meeting to build significant bridge ahead of Brexit negotiation after Mr Macron ' S predecessor , François Hollande , threaten to ` ` punish ' ' the UK . there be fear Mr Macron , an ardent pro-European who be fresh from a landslide victory , could harden France ' S already tough stance on Brexit . speak ahead of the visit , Mrs May say : ` ` we be unite in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil . ' ' Brexit talk be due to open on Monday next week but Mr Davis , the Secretary of State for Leaving the European Union , say yesterday they be now likely to take place later in the week . Mrs May need to publish her Queen ' s Speech , which will set out her legislative programme , before she start the negotiation . Angela Merkel signal yesterday that the triumph of Mr Macron ' s new centrist party in the first round of France ' s parliamentary election pave the way for deep EU integration . the German chancellor congratulate the French president on ` ` a strong vote for reform ' ' as a Franco-German working group draw up proposal for close eurozone cooperation , to be present next month . the two leader agree last month to draw up a road map for great EU integration that could entail treaty change , previously consider a taboo . a joint push to relaunch the EU and the eurozone by the currency bloc ' S two large economy could generate unstoppable momentum for ambitious reform . but the expect landslide victory for Mr Macron ' s party in the final parliamentary poll on Sunday may also mean tough Brexit negotiation . the French and German leader want to maintain the timetable for Britain ' s exit from the EU , clear the way for them to shape the bloc ' S future . proposal by Mr Macron for a joint eurozone budget , parliament and finance minister initially raise fear in Germany that Berlin could be force to pay for struggle country that resist reform . but Mrs Merkel say her government be ready to discuss Mr Macron ' s proposal after he deny German medium report that he be in favour of turn the national debt of eurozone country into shared eurozone debt . Germany ' s deputy finance minister , Jens Spahn , say yesterday that Berlin be open to the idea of a eurozone finance minister , provide the role and responsibility be clearly define . Mr Spahn , a senior member of Mrs Merkel ' s centre-Right party , say Germany be also willing to increase its funding for European investment project . he express the hope that Mr Macron will enact reform to boost economic growth in France . Mr Macron ' S expect parliamentary majority will strengthen his hand in a showdown with France ' s militant trade union as he loosen rigid employment law to end economic stagnation . the labour reform be a cornerstone of his election campaign . the rout of the Socialists after Mr Hollande ' s disastrous five-year presidency clear the way for a raft of business-friendly policy . the former banker , who have redrawn the French political landscape at the age of @card@ , plan to push through his labour reform by presidential decree before September , a move likely to spark street protest by union . ' we be unite in our total condemnation of terrorism and our commitment to stamp out this evil '
poisonous Brussel make may boil over ; Election @card@ the Telegraph Election 2017A week after Downing Street dinner turn sour , PM return fire on the mock EU bureaucrat
the EU ' s great betrayal start outside Number @card@ with a Judas kiss from Jean-Claude Juncker , and it be in the same spot , at almost the same hour one week on , that Theresa May ' S anger finally boil over yesterday with the most extraordinary speech of her premiership . Mr Juncker , president of the European Commission , be welcome with open arm in Downing Street by Mrs May on April @card@ , and he have appear in good spirit when he leave later that evening . their talk about Brexit , he say , have be ` ` constructive ' ' while his fellow dinner guest Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , describe the meeting as ` ` cordial ' ' . there have be time for a few joke and a friendly chat with Mrs May about her passion for hill-walking , a shared interest with Mr Barnier . seven day later , however , Mr Barnier be turn Mrs May ' s ramble hobby against her with a hector and vaguely sinister allegory about the Brexit talk . mountain walker , he say , have to ` ` learn a certain number of rule ' ' , such as take one step at a time ` ` because sometimes you be on a steep and rocky path ' ' . use language akin to a TV mafia villain , he warn that hiker have to beware of ` ` accident ' ' that might befall them , like fall rock . he also insist that the Brexit ` ` divorce bill ' ' be non-negotiable and that Britain could face ` ` legal ' ' consequence if it do not pay up in full . it be just the late in a series of what Mrs May yesterday describe as ` ` threat ' ' from EU politician and official that have begin the day after that fateful Downing Street dinner . Mrs May have be join at that meal by David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and the Brussels delegation include Martin Selmayr , Mr Juncker ' s powerful chief of staff . the EU delegation be all smile as they leave Number @card@ , and Mrs May be see throw her head back with laughter as Mr Selmayr make a parting joke . once they get into their limousine , however , the mask drop . Mr Juncker be quickly on the phone to the German Chancellor Angela Merkel , accuse Mrs May of ` ` megaphone diplomacy ' ' and of be ` ` delude ' ' and live in ` ` another galaxy ' ' . the day after the dinner , Mrs Merkel use a speech to the German parliament to suggest that ` ` some in Great Britain ' ' ( translation : Mrs May and Mr Davis ) be live under the ` ` illusion ' ' that they could keep the same right as member state after Brexit . Mrs May bite her tongue but before the weekend be out the Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung run a lengthy and detailed account of the Downing Street dinner , suggest that Mr Juncker leave Downing Street ` ` @card@ time more sceptical ' ' about the possibility of a Brexit deal than he have be before , and that Mrs May have tell him Britain be not oblige to pay ` ` a penny ' ' of the divorce bill . Mr Selmayr , who be German , immediately become the prime suspect for the leak . the article paint his boss Mr Juncker as the strong man of the talk , and belittle Mrs May as a naive negotiator . Downing Street insist it do not ` ` recognise ' ' the account , and Mrs May dismiss it as ` ` gossip ' ' but inside Number @card@ , the mood be start to simmer over what be see as a brazen stitch-up . there be more to come . Michael Roth , Germany ' s finance minister , take to Twitter on Monday to say ` ` the British government must abandon [ the ] myth that all British will be good off post-Brexit ' ' . the next day Guy Verhofstadt , lead Brexit negotiator for the European Parliament , mock Mrs May ' s negotiate skill by use her ` ` strong and stable ' ' campaign slogan . he say : ` ` any Brexit deal require a strong and stable understanding of the complex issue involve . the clock be tick - it ' s time to get real . ' ' Tuesday ' S Daily Telegraph reveal a plot by EU official to block an early deal on migrant ' right and shift the blame on to Mrs May . the only hint of her irritation with Mr Juncker come in a BBC interview when she briefly deviate from her script to say that Mr Juncker would find her ` ` a bloody difficult woman ' ' . by now Mrs May have form the opinion that Germany and the EU be try to influence the election by undermine her , no doubt hope to reduce her vote and thus weaken her hand . the dam hold back the Prime Minister ' S anger finally burst yesterday after Mr Barnier set out the EU ' s negotiate position , which appear to be more a series of order to Mrs May to step into line . Mr Barnier say the consequence of Britain leave without pay would be ` ` explosive ' ' . a landslide victory for Mrs May in the General Election ` ` will not change anything as regard the position and determination of the European Union ' ' and it be ` ` high time ' ' for negotiation to start because ` ` the clock be tick ' ' . then come his final flourish as he smugly patronise the hill-walking Prime Minister by advise her to ` ` learn to put one foot in front of the other ' ' . for Mrs May , enough be enough . as she leave for Buckingham Palace , reporter be brief that she would make an unscheduled speech outside Downing Street . it would be ` ` punchy ' ' , aide promise . that turn out to be the understatement of the election campaign . ' he advise the Prime Minister to learn to put one foot in front of the other . enough be enough '
Juncker : Britain will come back into the fold ; Brexit be not the end , say EU chief as top negotiator suggest Briton could keep European citizenship
JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker have say he hope Britain will one day re-join the EU , strike a conciliatory note before Theresa May trigger Article @card@ . the President of the European Commission say that he believe that Brexit could lead not to the death of the European Union , as some have predict , but to its ` ` rebirth ' ' . Mr Juncker ' S comment come after Guy Verhofstadt , the chief negotiator of the European Parliament , call for British citizen to be allow to retain the benefit of EU membership after Brexit . Mr Verhofstadt , a former Belgian prime minister , say that individual should be allow to keep right such as the freedom to travel and vote in European election . his remark come at the end of a turbulent two-day EU summit that expose deep division among the remain @card@ EU member state , who have squabble openly about the future direction of the bloc after Britain ' S departure . Mr Juncker say : ` ` the day will come when the British will re-enter the boat , I hope . Brexit be not the end of the European Union , nor the end of all our development , nor the end of our continental ambition . ` ` the Brexit issue be encourage the other to continue , unfortunately without the British . ' ' Mr Juncker ' S comment mask fierce disagreement between core EU state , lead by France and Germany , which want to revive a ` ` two-speed ' ' Europe , and small member such as Poland , Romania and Hungary , which fear that they could be leave marginalised and disadvantage . the long-simmering tension be force into the open when Poland refuse to sign off the summit ' s formal conclusion after the other member state defy its attempt to block the re-election of Donald Tusk - Poland ' s former prime minister - to the presidency of the European Council . while Germany and Mr Juncker be push for new EU project , such as a beef up common defence policy , Poland be demand ` ` less Europe ' ' , include radical reform of EU institution such as the European Commission . Warsaw believe the body be too bloated and too bossy , and warn after the summit that Europe will ` ` not survive ' ' without significant change . the leader of the @card@ EU state that will remain after Brexit will try to narrow their many difference before a meeting in Rome on March @card@ to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the EU ' s founding treaty . Mr Verhofstadt say he hope to convince European leader to allow Briton to keep certain right if they be to apply for them on an individual basis . ` ` that Britain go out of the EU be a tragedy , a disaster , a catastrophe - you name it , ' ' he tell BBC Radio @card@ ' s today programme yesterday , echo many voice in Europe who still harbour hope that Britain will pull back from the brink when the consequence of Brexit become clear . ` ` all British citizen today have also EU citizenship . that mean a number of thing : the possibility to participate in the European election , the freedom of travel without problem inside the union , ' ' Mr Verhofstadt continue . ` ` we need to have an arrangement in which this arrangement can continue for those citizen who on an individual basis be request it . ' ' Legal expert say that EU citizenship could only be extend to non-EU citizen if the EU treaty be to be revise - a very unlikely prospect in the near term - but that the EU and its member state could unilaterally extend some equivalent right to UK citizen if they want to . Mr Verhofstadt first propose the ` ` associate ' ' scheme in January but say it be now an emotional response to the thousand of letter he have since receive from British citizen who do not vote for Brexit and do not wish to lose their relationship to Europe . ask whether the UK would welcome the opportunity for its national to retain some of the benefit of EU citizenship after Brexit , no @card@ say it be ` ` not something that we have ever propose or say that we be look at ' ' . ` ` we will go into negotiation and discuss the idea put forward by the EU and its various institution , ' ' say a Downing Street spokesman . Poland condemn Britain ' s refusal to offer its support in its effort to prevent the re-election of Mr Tusk , cast a shadow over UK effort to enlist the country during Brexit . ` ` where be the UK in Brussels ? ' ' say Witold Waszczykowski , the Polish foreign minister . ' Brexit be not the end of the European Union , nor the end of ... our continental ambition '
our Brexit Bill need no amendment ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : at first glance , the amendment to the EU ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill in the House of Lords give Parliament a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on a Brexit deal may look innocuous . after all , Britain have vote to restore the primacy of its own Parliament , so why should that Parliament not decide on the Brexit deal ? that be the argument that advocate will make for the amendment , which may well be endorse in the Upper House and conceivably by the House of Commons next week , since a number of Conservative MP be say to be mind to support it there . yet that argument be flaw and this amendment should not pass . the flaw be both practical and principled . the practical flaw be find in the effect this amendment would have on Brexit negotiation . it be no secret that some EU leader still believe that Britain can be persuade to reverse its decision to leave ; the EU , after all , have a history of try to overturn democratic vote , even referendum decision , a contempt for the electorate that partly explain why the integrationist project be fail . if those leader believe that the British Parliament could reject any Brexit deal and instead continue our membership , they will have a strong incentive to offer the bad deal possible . the principled objection to the amendment be that it misinterpret the referendum vote and its meaning . Britain have indeed vote to restore national sovereignty , free itself from EU rule and return to a situation where the law and decision that affect the British people be make by politician accountable to the British people . but that do not mean that Parliament must now govern : that be the job of minister . the proper arrangement be that minister make decision and then account for those decision to the representative of the British people in Parliament . that be what should happen on the Brexit deal . in truth , the bid for a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' for Parliament be simply a ruse , an undeclared attempt to defy and eventually reverse the instruction the people give at the referendum . the same be true of the argument by the liberal democrat and other that the deal should be put to a second referendum . if the Remainers really want to force the question over the final deal to a vote , perhaps the proper forum be , as Lord Hague suggest opposite , a general election . whenever that election come , we be confident the electorate will strongly endorse Mrs May ' s handling of our EU exit .
@card@ Tory rebel ready to support Corbyn on Brexit ; Europe @card@ ; Labour leader ' s motion to force publication of May ' S plan ' supportable ' , say ex-Conservative minister
up To @card@ pro-European Conservative MP be prepare to rebel against the government and back a move by Labour to force it to publish its plan for leave the European Union , a former minister have say . Labour will tomorrow table a motion in the Commons to attempt to force Theresa May to publish the plan before Brexit negotiation be formally trigger in March . Downing Street source make clear the government will not support the motion because it believe that reveal its negotiate position would be the ` ` good way to get the bad deal ' ' . Mrs May yesterday accuse the Liberal Democrats and Labour of ` ` frustrate the will of the people ' ' and fail to back ` ` team UK ' ' by plot to delay or overturn Brexit . Nick Clegg , the former Liberal Democrat leader , say at the weekend that his party be prepare to vote against trigger Brexit negotiation unless it be give guarantee on Single Market access and a second referendum . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , have say that he will seek to amend any bill on the Article @card@ process to withdraw from the European union in order to guarantee worker ' S right . the Prime Minister ' S spokesman say yesterday : ` ` while other be seem to make clear that they want to frustrate the will of the British people by slow down the process of leave and try to tie the government ' s hand in the negotiation , the government be get on with respect what the British people decide and make a success of Brexit . ' ' the motion , table by Mr Corbyn , demand that the government set out its broad aim for Brexit and appear carefully craft to attract as much Conservative support as possible . it acknowledge that there ` ` should be no disclosure of material that could be reasonably judge to damage the UK in any negotiation ' ' . Anna Soubry , a former employment minister , tell BBC Radio @card@ ' s world at one : ` ` I have read the motion . I ca n't see anything in it that I do n't approve of and could n't support . ` ` I have never vote against my government , I have always be very loyal , but this transcend party politics . the content of that motion be eminently supportable . ' ' she suggest that up to @card@ Conservative MP could back the motion unless the government publish its own alternative . Pro-European source in the Tory party suggest the number be likely to be close to @card@ , which be still significantly more than the government ' S majority . the Government yesterday announce that it will ` ` replicate as far as possible ' ' Britain ' s trade commitment to EU nation ` ` in order to minimise disruption to global trade as we leave the EU ' ' .
stop treat Brexit like a plague of boil ; Tories in Manchester Conservative Party Conference Johnson rail against ' zombie ' Corbyn ' S 1970s ideology and attack the Remainer ' pessimist '
Boris Johnson say Britain must stop treat Brexit like a ` ` plague of boil ' ' in a half-hour conference attack on the ` ` pessimist ' ' who ` ` make Eeyore look positively exuberant ' ' . his speech wander off his foreign policy brief and touch on the economy , house building and education , add to mount speculation about his leadership ambition . but to quell the speculation he hail the Prime Minister for her ` ` steadfast ' ' leadership . he be give a stand ovation by party activist who have pack the conference hall to hear the Foreign Secretary reserve his strong criticism for Jeremy Corbyn , describe the Labour leader as a ` ` zombie ' ' and compare John McDonnell to ` ` Pol Pot ' ' . he say an entire generation be suffer ` ` amnesia ' ' about the reality of socialism in the seventy and have to fight again for a free-market economy . Brexit negativity the Foreign Secretary say the UK must stop treat Brexit as if it be ` ` an inexplicable aberration by 17.4million people . ` ` it be time to be bold , and to seize the opportunity , ' ' he say . ` ` and there be no country well place than Britain . ' ' he single out the Financial Times , say : ` ` Every day a distinguished pink newspaper manage to make Eeyore look positively exuberant and across the world the impression be be give that this country be not up to it ; that we be go to bottle out of Brexit and end up in some dingy ante-room of the EU , pathetically wait for the scrap but no longer in control of the menu . ' ' he say no country be well place than Britain to ` ` seize the opportunity ' ' present by Brexit . Corbyn be Caracas the Foreign Secretary condemn Jeremy Corbyn as a ` ` Nato bashing , Trident scrapping , would-be abolisher of the British Army ' ' . he say Mr Corbyn ' s ` ` first instinct ' ' in the wake of any international disaster be to try to blame British foreign policy . ` ` he say he still admire Bolivarian revolutionary socialism , ' ' Mr Johnson say . ` ` I say he ' s Caracas . ' ' he add : ` ` it be a disgrace - and I can tell you there be many Labour MP who feel appall that their party be still lead by this man . ' ' Mr Johnson accuse Mr Corbyn of ` ` talk this country down ' ' with his ` ` ludicrous and vacillating ' ' policy on Brexit . ` ` in the custom union one week , out the next , in the single market , out the next , ' ' he say . ` ` in out , in out . fast than one of those member of the shadow cabinet who get sack before she know she have even be appoint . ` ` a kind of manifestation of Heisenberg ' s uncertainty principle . it would be disastrous . ' ' Spectre of socialism Mr Johnson acknowledge that for an entire generation , reference to socialism in the seventy be meaningless . he say : ` ` we think they get the reference but unfortunately go back to the seventy sound to too many people like a massive joint revival concert by David Bowie , lead Zep and the Rolling Stone . they have forget that we have to fight and win battle of idea and in a way that be entirely understandable - because our victory have be so comprehensive . ' ' he say Labour ' S manifesto , include £200billion worth or renationalisation , represent ` ` a display of economic masochism that would do incalculable damage to the future of our child ' ' . he say : ` ` we want a country with a government that work for everyone . Corbyn want a Britain where everyone work for the government . ' ' he add : ` ` this battle of idea be not lose in memory of the seventy . it be back from the grave - its zombie finger strain for the lever of power and that be why we can not rest . ' ' domestic policy the Foreign Secretary say that despite its ` ` illustrious battle honour ' ' the Conservatives now have to ` ` win the battle for the future ' ' . he say that the Tories must not ` ` junk our gain ' ' and ` ` attack the market economy ' ' but make it work well for everyone . the party must ` ` make it work well for the low pay ' ' with a national living wage and build hundred of thousand of home for those ` ` who worry their kid will never find a home to own ' ' . he say that , above all , the party must help those struggle by ` ` drive benefit reform ' ' and increase employment . ` ` Our one nation conservatism that , for all its fault , an open free-trading and thriving market economy be the only sustainable way to create the wealth we will always need to help the poor , ' ' he say . nation ' s debt to May after a week in which Mr Johnson have be repeatedly accuse by his Cabinet colleague of undermine Theresa May , the Foreign Secretary hail her for win the election . he say : ` ` she win more vote than any party leader and take this party to its high share of the vote in any election in the last @card@ year and the whole country owe her a debt for her steadfastness in take Britain forward as she will to a great Brexit deal . ' ' he say that the whole Cabinet be behind Mrs May after her Brexit speech in Florence : ` ` base on that Florence speech on whose every syllable , I can tell you the whole Cabinet be unite . ' ' Britain after Brexit The UK will be ` ` free to stop be negative ' ' , Mr Johnson say , and would be able to extol the virtue of free trade . he later say that Brexit will have a ` ` galvanise effect ' ' on the UK because ` ` we wo n't be able to blame Brussel anymore ' ' . he say : ` ` Yes we be leave the EU - but as the PM have say in her Florence speech we can create a deep and special partnership build on free trade . but success will be achieve not by allow the UK to retreat from our global role but by reinforce that role . ' ' foreign policy the Foreign Secretary say that Britain be ` ` big enough to do amazing thing ' ' . he highlight the work of British soldier in Nigeria help local force ` ` defeat the numbskull of Boko Haram ' ' and the work of British ship help stop illegal migration from Libya . he also highlight the role of British soldier in Estonia , congratulate them ` ` on resist the honey traps allegedly place in their way by Russian intelligence ' ' before add : ` ` at least they say they have resist . ' ' Jokes on colleague he could not resist a poke at colleague . the Northern Powerhouse mean job in finance , academia , journalism and the art , all ` ` hold by George Osborne ' ' he say , and describe Sir Alan Duncan as the ` ` Mount Rushmore of wisdom ' ' . ' it be time to be bold and seize the opportunity . and there be no country well place than Britain '
Frankfurt defeat Paris in EU bank battle ; French start to doubt that damage the City of London be in their longterm interest after all Frankfurt ' S rise stoke fear of German bank dominance
Frankfurt be sweep aside rival to become the dominant financial centre of the EU after Brexit , a triumph that threaten to entrench German hegemony and profoundly upset the internal balance of the EU system . as Paris fall far behind in the quest for post-Brexit spoil , it subtly alter the strategic calculus for French leader . there be mount doubt over whether it be really in France ' s longterm national interest to see the City of London seriously damage . Germany ' s top banker tell a highlevel forum in Frankfurt that the city have already win the post-Brexit prize as Paris , Amsterdam and small financial hub be mostly leave with crumb , consolidate its hegemonic position as the locus of the European Central Bank and the eurozone ' s monetary machinery . Carsten Kengeter , head of Deutsche Borse , say the Hessian city promise to be the ` ` massive winner ' ' follow British withdrawal from the single market , warn that Paris can not even count on secure euro clear business as it leave London . ` ` the decision remain open , ' ' he say . global bank and financial institution be already work on the assumption that the British government be willing to sacrifice part of the City to achieve its Brexit objective on immigration , a policy choice of enormous implication . ` ` Anything other than a bone-hard Brexit would be a surprise , ' ' say Hans-Walter Peters , chairman of the German banking federation . ` ` sadly there be those sitting in London who be relish victory , because Brexit be what they want . ' ' the lobby group Frankfurt Main Finance say it expect roughly @card@ banker to migrate to the city . four Japanese bank have already plump for Frankfurt . Goldman Sachs be to double its presence with @card@ extra staff , and Citigroup be base its eurozone broker-dealer operation on the Main . most bank be shift @card@ to @card@ staff each , though it could be much high in a snowball effect . the pace be expect to pick up briskly in @card@ . John Cryan , the head of Deutsche Bank , tell the forum earlier that speculation over who would win the post-Brexit business be pointless . ` ` I ca n't fully understand this debate because , as I see it , the race have already be win before it even begin , ' ' he say . a major financial centre require a complex eco-system and the right mix of tax , regulation and market breadth . ` ` there be only one European city that can fulfil these requirement and that city be Frankfurt , ' ' he say . Mr Cryan say London ' S infrastructure be unique and can not easily be duplicate . it handle the lion ' s share of debt and equity security issue in Europe . roughly 40pc of global currency trade be book in London , as be two third of all interest rate derivative in euros . within the eurozone , the real battle be not between Paris , Dublin or other centre , but whether Frankfurt will retain Europe ' s financial business , or whether it will leave the EU altogether and go to Singapore or New York . the emergence of Frankfurt as the pre-eminent player be unsettling for the City of London . a recent report by consultant Oliver Wyman suggest that financial job loss could perhaps be confine to between @card@ and @card@ , so long as the exodus be scatter around the eurozone . ` ` at present , none of the other European banking centre seem set to replace London as a pre-eminent global financial service hub , ' ' it say . ` ` Should a new EU hub emerge , bank would be quick to reorient their operation towards that location . ' ' yet it be also unsettling for France and other EU state that fear the emergence of an over-mighty Germany that disturb Europe ' s delicate equilibrium , ultimately to the point where it threaten the survival of the EU itself . Jonathan Fenby , head of European research at TS Lombard and author of a book on French politics , say German ascendancy be an ` ` existential problem ' ' for the French psyche . the French hark back to the powersharing concordat between Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer that deliberately restrained - or mask - German strength . ` ` they still like to think that Germany should be the economic engine while France be in the political driving seat . obviously this be unworkable and it be very difficult for the French to swallow , ' ' he say . Charles Grant , from the Centre for European Reform , say France have win very little Brexit business so far , despite an aggressive bid back by the government , and lead by Christian Noyer , the former governor of the Banque de France . Paris have since switch from be an ultra hardliner on Brexit talk a few month ago to a leader of the ` ` soft ' ' camp in recent week . France ' s change in tone have surprise the UK Government . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , say over the weekend that France have be refreshingly co-operative in the late article @card@ talk . 40pc the proportion of global currency trade that be currently book in the City of London , accord to estimate
Davis lead army of bureaucrat into EU lair
Britain deploy nearly a @card@ negotiator to Brussels yesterday in a bureaucratic show of force that see our Brexit negotiating team outnumber their EU counterpart two-to-one . after month of goad from the European Union that the UK be fail to fully engage , the 98-strong team of official from across Whitehall arrive for the first substantive face-toface talk at the European Commission . the deployment be lose in the main image of the opening day of talk , however , after David Davis and Olivier Robbins , the UK ' S top Brexit official , be photograph face Michel Barnier in a meeting room but without any document . take minute before Mr Davis jet back to London for a Parliamentary vote , the EU ' s top negotiator strike stern expression behind their thick sheave of paper , while the British team grin for the camera but with their side of the table empty . the image provoke a deluge of comment on social medium about the lack of preparedness for the www.talks.UK staff later insist the photo be take before they have unpack their bag . ` ` we have less than @card@ month of Brexit talk leave , yet David Davis have skulk back to the UK after just half a day , ' ' say Tom Brake , the Liberal Democrat Brexit spokesman . ` ` he do n't have any position paper with him because this government have no agree Brexit position . ' ' Labour be also critical of Mr Davis who spend less than three hour in Brussels , include a one-to-one meeting with Mr Barnier to discuss the objective of the week , which official describe as ` ` friendly ' ' . ` ` Mr Davis can hardly say this be the time ' to get down to business ' and then spend only a few minute in Brussels before head back to Whitehall , ' ' say Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary . before the British negotiator get down to business , start with a ` ` line by line ' ' rebuttal of the EU ' s demand for a gross ( Euro ) 100billion financial settlement , they be give a rousing pep talk by Mr Robbins . ` ` Ollie be very clear . ' this be the big thing any of you will ever do in your career ' , he say . ' so let ' s get it right ' , ' ' report a source who be present . Mr Davis ' S return to London to vote on a Private Members ' Bill in the Commons , which provide a reminder of the government ' s precarious majority . Labour have promise to double the number of such bill in this Parliament . the Brexit talk will this week centre on the three major issue : EU citizen ' right , the border with Ireland and the so-called Brexit Bill . Mr Barnier have say ` ` sufficient progress ' ' must be make on these three dossier in order to progress on to talk over trade and the future EU-UK relationship . source on the UK side expect the most difficult of these to be money , with British negotiator refuse to discuss what Britain might pay until the European side explain the legal rationale for demand the UK side consider outlandish . across town , meanwhile , Boris Johnson be attend a meeting of EU foreign minister , take time out to josh with Anders Samuelsen , his Danish counterpart , about the prospect for trade after Brexit , after the Danish foreign minister arrive in a camp van from which he intend to follow the Tour de France cycle race this summer .
close trade will secure our special relation
it have be just over @card@ year since Winston Churchill introduce the phrase ` ` special relationship ' ' to describe the intimate bond between the United States and the United Kingdom . despite its longevity , even the good relationship require work . in this moment - with a new and unconventional president in my country and grow political , economic and security challenge in the UK - that work necessitate a discussion about how we approach issue like Brexit , the economic relationship between our country , and the grow threat of terrorism . but first , what the special relationship be not . while our unique and beneficial association have endure through @card@ US president and @card@ British prime minister , it be not principally a relationship between two elect leader . even Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher find their relationship strain by such thing as the war in the Falkland . I have experience the special relationship through three distinct lens : first as a student study at Edinburgh , second as majority leader in the US House of Representatives , and now as the vice-chairman of a US-based investment bank with office and extensive business in the UK . what make the relationship special be the closeness of our people and our shared belief in principle of self-government , free enterprise , and human freedom and dignity . the US be strengthen when the UK be strengthen , which be why we both need a Brexit that provide certainty and great economic opportunity for the UK . while we may share common goal , the task of conclude a successful Brexit belong to the UK ' S leader . the US government should offer support in the Brexit negotiation , but must recognise that , at time , the good support may be in the form of space for UK and EU leader to manoeuvre . in the US , we must do a good job of ignore the noise of the day and instead remain focus on the overriding objective : a successful conclusion to Brexit . while UK official be negotiate , business leader on both side of the pond must continue to do what we do good : look for opportunity for great business engagement between the US and UK firm . even with the political uncertainty around Brexit , there be ample opportunity for investment and growth . at the appropriate time , our elect leader should further cement the economic tie between our two nation with a robust trade agreement , which through the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barrier can serve as a model for the rest of the world . goal for a US-UK trade agreement must include ease market access - especially for service industry - strengthen investment procedure , include through appropriate dispute resolution mechanism , facilitate cross-border datum flow , and great co-operation on the protection of intellectual property . the reduction of non-tariff barrier , especially in government regulation , between the US and Europe , be a major goal of the now-stalled Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ( TTIP ) . there be a tremendous opportunity to enhance the economic tie between the US and the UK via a trade agreement that achieve for our two country the goal of TTIP - namely great regulatory co-operation and standard setting , include in the financial service sector . in the same speech that Churchill coin the ` ` special relationship , ' ' he also introduce the phrase ` ` iron curtain ' ' . much of what animate that speech and our special relationship be our share security interest . while we no longer confront the threat of Soviet aggression , our two country have be force to confront the danger of terrorism . these be challenge time for the British and American people . but strong economic and security tie will cement the special relationship in the same way it do for prior generation , and it will endure . Eric Cantor be the vice chairman and manage director at Moelis & Company , and former house majority leader and US representative for Virginia ' there be a tremendous opportunity to enhance the economic tie of the US and UK '
Yellen and Draghi warn of ' significant ' Brexit repercussion ; banker ' concern come as Jaguar Land Rover estimate leave EU could cut profit by £1bn a year
the two most powerful people in central banking have give their strong warning yet on the impact of a Brexit vote , as lead Wall Street bank Morgan Stanley warn that a British decision to leave could push the world towards recession . Janet Yellen , chairman of the US Federal Reserve , and Mario Draghi , the European Central Bank president , warn that Brexit could have deleterious effect for the global economy . ahead of tomorrow ' s landmark referendum , Ms Yellen warn that a withdrawal from the EU ` ` could have significant economic repercussion ' ' , during testimony in front of the US Senate banking committee . she caution that Brexit ` ` could usher in a period of uncertainty ' ' , and potentially a period of market volatility that could worsen financial condition in the US and add that there be a risk of flight by money manager into the perceive safety of US asset , drive up the dollar ' S value . separately , Mr Draghi warn that it be ` ` very difficult to foresee the impact and various dimension of how the vote in the UK will impact market and the economy of the eurozone ' ' . the Italian say that ` ` it would be dif-ficult to speculate about one outcome , we ' re try to be ready to cope with all possible contingency ' ' . he insist that the central bank have ` ` do all the preparation that be necessary ' ' and explain it have make plan to stabilise jittery market , if the need arise . Ms Yellen admit that the fallout after a Brexit vote be ` ` by no mean certain ' ' and a US recession spark by Brexit be ` ` not the most likely case ' ' . it come as Morgan Stanley economist tell client to prepare for the possibility of a global recession if the UK vote to leave the EU behind . a Brexit result would be likely to push global growth below 3pc , the bank ' S analyst say , push the world ` ` into the danger zone for a global recession ' ' , on Morgan Stanley ' s definition of GDP growth below 2.5pc . the Wall Street bank say ` ` a vote to leave could cause protracted political uncertainty in Europe , create negative spillovers for the rest of the world ' ' . the warning echo that of Nouriel Roubini , the economist know as ` ` Dr Doom ' ' who predict the US financial crash of @card@ . earlier in the day he say that Brexit could tip the UK economy into a recession . Mr Roubini ' S comment be counter by the Vote leave campaign , with a spokesman say : ` ` the British public have have enough of this incessant scaremongering from people who have a vested interest in keep the UK in the EU . ' ' meanwhile , it emerge Jaguar Land Rover ' S profit could take a £1bn a year hit if Britain vote to leave the EU . the car company be understand to have conduct an internal analysis of the likely impact of a leave vote . JLR produce over @card@ vehicle a year - almost a third of the UK ' s annual car output - and be likely to suffer through high trade tariff as import and export deal agree through the EU unwind . the variety of comment , and a new poll show the referendum remain almost neck and neck , lead the FTSE to modest gain , close up @card@ point , or 0.36pc , to @card@ as investor turn cautious . Ben Wright ; John Napier : page @card@ 2.5pc Morgan Stanley ' s global growth rate for GDP below which a recession be call . it claim Brexit could trigger such an event
British Airways owner ' S profit take off in spite of Brexit threat and terrorist attack
IAG ' S fortune have be dampen by the recent Brussels terrorist attack and the risk of Brexit to the airline company ' S outlook . British Airways ' owner report that profit stand at ( Euro ) 124m ( £97m ) in the first three month of the year , compare with a loss of ( Euro ) 37m in the same quarter a year earlier . however , sign of distress over the come vote on the UK ' s membership of the EU knock 4.7pc off IAG share yesterday . Willie Walsh , IAG ' s chief executive , admit that despite a ` ` good performance ... in what be traditionally the weak quarter ' ' for IAG , the possibility of Brexit be a threat to the business . ` ` there be probably a case to be make for Brexit to have an impact , ' ' he say . ` ` certainly anecdotally , you hear of US corporate slow investment to consider what Brexit could mean . ' ' IAG share be expect to fly if Britain vote to remain in the European Union on June @card@ , as the decision would be likely to boost economic growth compare with the alternative and preserve easy travel to and from the political union . despite sign that the UK will vote to remain , Damian Brewer , an RBC Capital Markets analyst , say investor ' concern over the impact of the referendum be serve as ` ` a deterrent to new investment ' ' . the performance of the FTSE @card@ company beat the good estimate of City analyst , with revenue of ( Euro ) 5.1bn , more than 2pc strong than anticipate . Mr Walsh say that last month ' S revenue be ` ` affect by the timing of Easter and the Brussels terrorist attack ' ' . the IAG boss note that the impact of the attack be continue into the second quarter . the company say that , ` ` as a result , IAG have moderate its short-term capacity growth plan ' ' . IAG plan to increase seat by 4.9pc , rather than a schedule 5.2pc rise , for @card@ . IAG , which be the parent company of Aer Lingus , Iberia , and Vueling , say that despite the weaker-than-anticipated start to the year , it still expect to deliver operate growth ` ` similar ' ' to that of @card@ for the year as a whole .
Scotland ' Russian bot ' behind thousand of tweet on Scots referendum
nearly @card@ Twitter post about Scottish independence be post by fake account , many think to be link to Russia , accord to new research . hundred of automated account , know as ` ` bot ' ' , send tweet over an 18-month period between May last year and September this year . expert say yesterday that it be likely many , if not most , be link to Russian attempt to disrupt democracy in western Europe . news of the tweet emerge day after two study suggest Russian-controlled Twitter account post thousand of pro-Brexit message before last year ' s EU referendum . researcher at Swansea University last week unveil research that claim thousand of suspect Russian account be tweet extensively about Brexit in the run-up to last year ' S vote . the academic tell the Sunday Post that , when they investigate their database of tweet for post about Scottish politics , there be more than 2.2million contain at least one of the key term - ` ` Scotland ' ' , ` ` Scottish ' ' , ` ` Sturgeon ' ' , ` ` indyref ` ` , ` ` scotref ` ` and ` ` SNP ' ' . a total of @card@ be send by bot , accord to the expert . Sasha Talavera , a professor of finance at Swansea University , say : ` ` like the work on Brexit and the US election we carry out , this show the influence of the bots in this area . ' ' the research see spike in activity from human and bot on two day - on June @card@ last year , the day of the Brexit vote , and on March @card@ this year , when Ms Sturgeon announce plan for a second independence referendum . a sample of the bot-produced tweet show most have a pro-Brexit or pro-independence theme . Ben Nimmo , of the Washington-based Atlantic Council ' s digital forensic research lab , say : ` ` it be entirely plausible these tweet come from Russia . we know the Scottish independence vote be divisive and the model deploy by the Russians be to target geo-political event around the world where they can encourage division . ' ' Russia have repeatedly deny interfere in last year ' s US presidential election and British politics . ' the Russians target geo-political event where they can encourage division '
fear for patient safety as Brexit threaten free flow of medicine
Britain ' S medicine bill could jump by £100m a year if pharmacy be not able to source cheap drug from the continent after Brexit . pharmacist currently buy the bulk of their medicine from UK wholesaler , but look to supplier in mainland Europe for a minority to make saving . now the Healthcare Distribution Association ( HDA ) , an organisation represent firm that supply 92pc of the NHS ' S medicine , have warn that failure to agree a smooth exit from the EU could jeopardise patient . its member include giant Alliance Healthcare , the sister company of high street pharmacy chain Boots . in a submission to MP on the health select committee , which be gather evidence on the potential impact of Brexit , the HDA warn it could lead to supply problem and health risk . the HDA say that ` ` disruption to the cross-border flow of medicine have the potential of place patient safety at risk ' ' . it warn a disorderly Brexit could lead to custom control and add administrative hurdle slow the supply of medicine to patient . the UK buy £26.4bn of drug from overseas while export £25.1bn in @card@ , the most recent year for which data be available , make it a net importer . access to skilled labour be also a concern raise by the organisation . it note that across the healthcare sector - from research scientist , to pharmacist - highly qualify worker be often sourced from EU country . ensure that the UK maintain a parity of professional standard with EU nation after Brexit be crucial in order to ensure that EU worker could still practise in the UK with ease , the HDA warn . there be even risk that pharmaceutical manufacturer ` ` may choose not to market their product in the UK at all ' ' if face with new , country-specific red tape , due to the associate cost and relatively small population compare to that cover by the broad European licensing regime . concern have be grow in Britain ' s healthcare industry in recent month at the lack of progress on Brexit . last week GSK , Britain ' s big drug maker , warn it expect to start incur cost from prepare for Brexit as early as this year , include on plan for duplicate medicine testing centre in the EU and prepare for separate drug licensing regime . Emma Walmsley , GSK chief executive , call for a transition period of ` ` at least two year ' ' to be finalise ` ` as soon as possible ' ' . £26.4bn the value of medicinal drug import to the UK from overseas in @card@ , compare to export of £25.1bn in the same year
Scotland Flights could halt without Brexit air deal , say Hammond ; Chancellor warn of risk to airport and airline if Britain and Europe fail to forge new aviation accord
flight between the UK and the European Union could all be ground on Brexit Day if Britain leave without a deal , Philip Hammond have claim . the Chancellor say that while highly unlikely , it be ` ` theoretically conceivable ' ' that flight could be suspend on March @card@ , @card@ . negotiation between Britain and Brussels remain deadlock because of dispute over the Brexit divorce bill , migrant right and the Northern Ireland border . Mr Hammond tell the Treasury select committee yesterday : ` ` it be theoretically conceivable that in a no-deal scenario there will be no air traffic move between the UK and the European union on the 29th March , @card@ . ` ` but I do n't think anybody seriously believe that be where we will get to . on that specific point it be very clear that mutual self-interest mean that even if talk break down , even if there be no deal , there will be a very strong compulsion on both side to reach agreement on an air traffic service arrangement . ' ' the UK ' s large airport , include Heathrow , Gatwick and Manchester , have previously warn that flight to Europe could stop if there be no deal on aviation in the wake of Brexit . the EU Open Skies agreement , which be introduce in the ninety , currently provide rule for airline and airport of member state . it allow flight between any airport in the EU . the agreement have enable the development of low-cost airline in the UK such as easyJet and Ryanair , and see passenger number fly within Europe triple to nearly a billion a year . Britain will have to negotiate a new treaty with the EU after Brexit to ensure flight take off . the failure to secure an agreement so far have lead to increase concern in the industry . a spokesman for Thomas Cook , Britain ' s second-largest holiday firm , say : ` ` we be sell holiday for the post-Brexit world , so we be prepare the business to operate in that environment . we do expect some form of agreement on aviation , but we now need urgent clarity from government . ' ' the Chancellor say leader of the @card@ other EU nation have to recognise the ` ` need for speed ' ' in agree a transition period of two year to follow the official date of Brexit in March @card@ . he say a transition agreement be a ` ` wasting asset ' ' whose value will decline the later it be reach , as business have to take investment and relocation decision in advance . Mr Hammond say : ` ` it have a value today , it will still have a very high value at Christmas and early in the New year , but as we move through @card@ its value to everybody will diminish . ` ` I think our European partner need to think very carefully about the need for speed in order to protect the potential value to all of us of have an interim period that protect our business and citizen and allow investment and normal business activity - contracting and so on - to carry on . ' ' he say the EU ' s reluctance to move on to talk about future relation with the UK after Brexit be ` ` astonishing ' ' . ` ` the most important question , which be what be our long-term relationship with the European Union go to look like , have not yet even begin to be discuss , ' ' he say . ` ` we have make the running in this ... let ' s sit down around a table and have a chat . that ' S all we be say . ' ' ' we do expect some form of agreement on aviation , but we now need urgent clarity from government '
Malta PM : Brexit disastrous
Malta ' S prime minister have brand Brexit a ` ` disastrous creature ' ' that the European Union should have see come but do nothing to stop . Joseph Muscat appear to rebuke other EU leader over their handling of British demand for reform in Brussels before the referendum . those reform in area such as immigration be water down by the EU , damage David Cameron ' s campaign to keep Britain in the bloc . Mr Muscat be speak at the European Parliament in Strasbourg . Malta have just finish its six-month term as holder of the rotate presidency of the EU , which coincide with the trigger of Article @card@ and the first round of Brexit negotiation . ` ` Our presidency have also to deal with Brexit . this disastrous creature which all of us should have see come but none of us act to stop , ' ' he tell an audience include Jean-Claude Juncker , European Commission President . Mr Muscat praise the ` ` excellent collaboration ' ' between the Maltese presidency and the EU institution deal with Brexit . ` ` but then again what be we praise here ? the term of a painful divorce which million of citizen will have to go through ? ' ' he previously warn Britain it could expect no special favour from Malta . just @card@ MEPs attend the debate , draw strong criticism from Mr Juncker . editorial comment : page @card@
Scotland Davis and EU slam the door on any hope of soft Brexit
David Davis and the European Union last night quash hope for a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit as formal negotiation on leave the EU finally get under way in Brussels . the Brexit Secretary confirm Britain would be leave the custom union and the single market , in a move design to scupper any parliamentary plot to water down the term of the UK ' s withdrawal from Europe . his counterpart , Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , also confirm that Britain would leave the single market and the custom union . such a unified public declaration of the intention to press ahead with a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit send a clear message to Remainers in Parliament who still hope membership of the custom union and the single market be up for grab . Mr Davis say Britain would seek a free trade agreement and a custom agreement with the EU , but add : ` ` we need to bring back to Britain control of our law and control of our border so we will be leave the single market . similarly we will be leave the custom union . that ' S the only way we can develop our free trade arrangement with the rest of the world and that be a major upside for Britain . ' ' Mr Barnier say : ` ` the United Kingdom be go to leave the European Union , single market and the custom union . ' ' Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be the most prominent of several Cabinet member who would prefer Britain to stay in the custom union , which would prevent the UK from strike its own trade deal outside the EU . Mr Barnier and Mr Davis disclose that they hope to reach a deal on migrant ' right by the end of October , but trade talk will not begin until agreement on migrant , the Brexit ` ` divorce bill ' ' and the Irish border have be reach . Mr Davis deny that the government have abandon its demand for parallel talk on trade and the term of withdrawal , say ` ` nothing be agree until everything be agree ' ' . but Mr Barnier say : ` ` I be not in a frame of mind to make concession . the United Kingdom have decide to leave the European Union , it be not the other way around ... the consequence be substantial . ' ' the pair say that the issue of Northern Ireland ' s border with the Republic of Ireland have take up the most time in their first day of talk . there be also disagreement over the ` ` divorce bill ' ' , as EU official say no agreement have be reach on the need for Britain to pay anything . meanwhile the Daily Telegraph have learn of a plot by Labour , the SNP and the Liberal Democrats to use the debate over tomorrow ' s Queen ' s Speech to topple the government . the opposition party intend to table an amendment to the Queen ' s Speech that would demand easy access to the single market and a crossparty Brexit Commission to reach a broad consensus on the term of Britain ' S withdrawal . they hope to tempt so-called ` ` remoaners ' ' on the Tory bench into voting in favour of the amendment , which would strike a potentially fatal blow to Theresa May ' S authority . the last time a government be defeat over a Queen ' S Speech be in @card@ . report : page @card@ , @card@
Anti-Brexit leave line up to create a new party if Corbyn get humiliate ; Clegg and Cable call for unity against the Tories if May achieve crush election victory
labour and liberal Democrat candidate be plot to unite and form an ` ` anti- Brexit force ' ' after the election as they lie the ground for a new party . Nick Clegg , the former deputy prime minister , say over the weekend that centre-Left party in the UK be ` ` duty bind to work together ' ' . Sir Vince Cable , the former business secretary who be seek a return to Parliament on June @card@ , have suggest a Conservative landslide would spark the birth of a new party . he say Labour would face a ` ` bloodletting ' ' in the wake of a humiliate defeat as he predict there would be ` ` serious conversation ' ' about create a viable alternative to Theresa May ' S conservative . Sir Vince will today join Clive Lewis , the former shadow business secretary , to address the launch of a campaign aim at build alliance in an attempt to stop Tory candidate in marginal seat . it also emerge that ally of Tony Blair be draw up plan for a new party in an effort to combine the force of anti-Brexit Labour , Liberal Democrat and Green politician . Mr Clegg tell a conference on Brexit in Westminster : ` ` you can not restore the genius , the elixir , the necessity of competition to the British democratic system without non-Conservative anti-Brexit force work effectively together . ` ` for any of us who do n't feel that either of those option be the kind of future that we want - of Scottish nationalism on the one hand and an increasingly angry Ukip-lite English nationalism at the hand of the Conservative Party - it ' S not a choice , we be duty bind to work together . ' ' Sir Vince tell Pienaar ' s politics on BBC Radio @card@ live that Labour ' S future ` ` be in great doubt ' ' as he suggest a new party could be form in the aftermath of a massive victory for Mrs May . he say : ` ` there will be serious conversation about where British politics go and how you create an alternative to the conservative which ... be centrist , centre-Left , pro-business , practical , offer an alternative to what be potentially a very damaging form of conservatism . ' ' much of the speculation surround the formation of a new party have focus on the role Mr Blair could play after the former Labour prime minister say Brexit have give him a ` ` direct motivation ' ' to return to front-line politics . a source who use to work for Mr Blair tell the Sunday Times : ` ` people be wait to see just how bad the damage be on June @card@ . they will look at the result and say , ' be this horse a dead horse or can it still be revive ? ' some people have already come to the conclusion that it ca n't and therefore something else will have to be bear . ' ' Senior figure from Labour , the Lib Dems and the green will today address the campaign launch of the Progressive Alliance which be focus on do deal to stop Conservative candidate win seat . the Tories have estimate that more than @card@ deal have already be do . Patrick McLoughlin , the party chairman , say : ` ` all over the country Green and Liberal Democrat candidate be do their utmost to put in power a coalition of chaos that would be lead by a weak , shambolic Jeremy Corbyn . ' ' but a Labour spokesman say : ` ` this be desperate rubbish from the Tory , make thing up to try and deflect from their own failure . ` ` Labour do n't and wo n't do deal . we ' re fight to win in every seat . ' ' people be wait to see how bad the damage be . they will say , be this a dead horse or can it be revive ? '
Scotland Blair ' s EU campaign insulting , say Boris ; Ex-PM call for new movement to take place of Labour and make the case against Brexit
Boris Johnson yesterday accuse Tony Blair of ` ` insult the intelligence ' ' of the British public after the former Prime Minister urge people to ` ` rise up ' ' against Brexit . Mr Blair yesterday attack both the Government and Jeremy Corbyn ' s Labour as he warn that the UK be head for ` ` Brexit at any cost ' ' . speak at the same London location where David Cameron announce his plan to hold an EU referendum , Mr Blair also warn that Brexit have strengthen the case for Scottish independence . although stress that he be oppose to Scotland leave the Union , he warn that independence be ` ` now back on the table , but this time with a context much more credible for the independence case ' ' . address the issue of Brexit , Mr Blair say voter have the ` ` right to change their mind ' ' . he pledge to form a cross-party movement to fight leave the EU , although he insist he be not try to build a new political party . Mr Blair reserve his strong criticism for Mr Corbyn , say the ` ` debilitation of the Labour Party ' ' that he once lead be now a ` ` facilitator ' ' for Brexit . he speak as a new ICM poll find that @card@ per cent of all voter , and a majority of Remain voter , now want the government to get on with implement the EU referendum result . Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say : ` ` we hear all these argument last year . not a thing have change . I think it be insult the intelligence of the British people to say they get it www.wrong.Be in no doubt that the people of this country be tell all sort of claptrap about the economic consequence of leave the EU . the very opposite have happen . ` ` as for Tony Blair , whatever his merit as a former Prime Minister this be the guy who would have take our country into the euro with what would have be catastrophic consequence , this be the guy who dragoon the UK into the Iraq war on a completely false prospectus . ' ' speak earlier at Bloomberg in London , Mr Blair say : ` ` Yes , the British people vote to leave Europe , and I agree the will of the people should prevail . I accept right now there be no widespread appetite to rethink . ` ` but the people vote without knowledge of the true term of Brexit . as these term become clear , it be their right to change their mind . ' ' he have criticism for Theresa May as he continue : ` ` nine month ago she and the Chancellor [ Philip Hammond ] be tell us that leave would be bad for the country , its economy , its security and its place in the world . today , it be apparently a ' once in a generation opportunity ' for greatness . ' ' Mr Blair say he be set up his movement in the ` ` absence of an opposition which look capable on the poll of beat the government ' ' . he add : ` ` the debilitation of the Labour Party be the facilitator of Brexit . I hate to say that , but it be true . what this means be that we have to build a movement which stretch across party line ; and devise new way of communication . ' ' Entertainment EMPICS ` ` it come as Baroness Chakrabarti , the shadow attorney general , tell the BBC ' S Question Time programme on Thursday that she expect peer of all party to water down the Brexit Bill in the House of Lords PETERS/ Doug Analysis : page @card@ SNP praise Blair speech : page @card@
Scotland Sturgeon back away from Article @card@ battle ; SNP retreat on Brexit constitutional battle
Scottish Political Editor Nicola Sturgeon have effectively admit that the trigger of Article @card@ be a matter for Westminster by refuse to follow the formal parliamentary procedure for MSPs to give or withhold their consent , the Conservatives have claim . the First Minister insist that a purely symbolic vote at Holyrood this afternoon on whether Brexit should proceed be one of the most important in the parliament ' S history . but the Conservatives say she have back away from a previous promise to table a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) , the formal device use for the Scottish Parliament to give permission for Westminster to legislate in devolve area . John Lamont , the party ' s chief whip , say she have decline to do so because she know that the trigger of Article @card@ be outside Holyrood ' S competence and accuse her of try to ` ` manufacture grievance out of nothing ' ' . he say SNP minister be ` ` grandstand ' ' on the issue after the Supreme Court rule that an LCM be not need before the trigger of Article @card@ . MP overwhelmingly vote by a margin of @card@ to @card@ last week to allow the Prime Minister to start Brexit negotiation . it be expect that Ms Sturgeon will use the result of this afternoon ' S vote , in which MSPs be likely to overwhelmingly oppose proceeding with Brexit , as a propaganda tool in her case for a second independence referendum . in another boon for the SNP , the debate have further expose major division in the Labour Party after Kezia continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Dugdale , the Scottish party leader , announce that her MSPs would vote to oppose trigger Article @card@ in direct contravention of Jeremy Corbyn ' s stance at Westminster . the SNP ' S motion be debate this afternoon state that MSPs agree with all but one of Scotland ' s MP that the UK Government ' S Brexit Bill should not proceed and complain there have be no ` ` effective consultation ' ' with the three devolve administration . it also attack Theresa May ' s government for refuse to guarantee that EU national can stay in the UK , fail to provide detail about the implication of withdraw from the single market and provide no assurance there will be a relevant parliamentary vote on the eventual deal reach . but Mr Lamont say he be ` ` somewhat surprised ' ' that no LCM have be table after Mike Russell , the Scottish Brexit minister , ` ` promised ' ' to publish one less than a fortnight ago . ` ` could it be that the Brexit minister be wrong ? ' ' he ask . ` ` could it be that the Scottish Government have n't submit an LCM because they know it ' S outwith the competence of this Parliament , despite all their grandstand ? ' ' he conclude : ` ` this be an important point because it show the Scottish Government ' s default position be to try to manufacture a grievance out of nothing . ' ' he also lambaste Labour for fall for a Nationalist ` ` stunt ' ' pretend that Holyrood have a say . Ms Sturgeon would have face major political embarrassment if her LCM have be block by Ken Macintosh , Holyrood ' s preside officer , who would have have to rule whether it be within the parliament ' S power in the wake of the Supreme Court ruling . but the First Minister say a symbolic debate and vote be ` ` a chance for our national parliament to reaffirm the voice of the people of Scotland and make clear that , as a nation , we oppose the catastrophic hard Brexit now be pursue by the Tories at Westminster ' ' . refer to her threat of a second independence referendum , she say : ` ` if the Scottish Parliament vote against trigger Article @card@ and the UK Government ignore Holyrood , then people across Scotland will be right to start think about how our national interest be well serve . ' ' Ms Dugdale say Scottish Labour accept the UK be leave the European Union but will vote against the trigger of Article @card@ because it do not agree with Mrs May ' s blueprint to leave the single market and control immigration . her party table an amendment to the SNP motion call on the nationalist not to use Brexit as an excuse for a second independence referendum . Mr Corbyn impose a three-line whip on his MP to vote for Brexit in the Commons last week but @card@ , include Ian Murray , Labour ' S only Scottish MP , rebel against him . a UK Government spokesman say Holyrood be ` ` free to debate any issue it choose ' ' but note that the Brexit Bill ` ` relate to reserve matter ' ' .
Scotland Sturgeon ' S threat water down ; First Minister appear to backtrack after hint soft Brexit could see plan for vote on separation shelve Sturgeon backtrack on separation vote ' she know she would lose '
Nicola Sturgeon have signal she be ready to take a snap second independence referendum ` ` off the table ' ' in the event of a soft Brexit . the First Minister say that if there be a way of protect Scotland ' s interest inside the UK , then she be ` ` up for try to do that ' ' . she have claim repeatedly since the Brexit vote last year that a new vote on break up Britain be ` ` highly likely ' ' , but appear to row back on her ` ` indyref2 ' ' threat in a radio interview . she indicate she be willing to put aside her preferred option of independence in Europe in the short term - within the ` ` timescale of Brexit ' ' - if a suitable compromise could be reach . her remark prompt call from opposition party for her to shelve a new vote ` ` altogether ' ' , and claim that her change of tone be the result of the fact that she know she would lose a second vote on separation . the comment follow a series of poll show Scot be not ready for a new vote , with one this week suggest more than six in @card@ voter be oppose to a snap referendum in @card@ . however , Ms Sturgeon also agree later in the day with a comment on Twitter suggest a new vote currently seem more likely than any deal to keep Scotland in the single market . Ms Sturgeon have claim her government be the only one in the UK to put forward comprehensive plan on how to move forward . she add that the Prime Minister do not appear to have a Brexit negotiating position , say : ` ` Anything from Theresa May that tell us something we do n't know be a step forward . ` ` it frankly beggar belief that so many month on from the referendum we still do n't know answer to basic question . I hope before too much time elapse we have a clear negotiate strategy from the Prime Minister . ' ' her proposal for a soft Brexit , publish in December , would involve work with other to keep the UK in the single market , and , if that could not be do , explore way of keep Scotland in the single market while protect trade across Britain . she say the second option would require additional devolution and claim there be a ` ` lot of consensus ' ' on some of the issue in question , such as give Scotland power on immigration . she add : ` ` so I ' ve in a sense be willing , and be willing , to put aside my preferred option of independence in the EU to see if we can explore a consensus and compromise option . ' ' ask on the BBC ' S Good Morning Scotland programme if another independence referendum would come off the table in the event of a soft Brexit , she say : ` ` I be never go to stop argue for independence , I think Scotland will become independent and I think that be the direction of travel , but we be talk at the moment in the context of the Brexit vote . ' ' she add : ` ` what I ' ve say be , if we can find a way of protect Scotland ' s economic interest , of protect our democratic interest in the UK , then I be up for try to do that . be I go to stop argue for independence or believe in independence ? be I go to stop believe Scotland be on a journey to independence ? ` ` no . but we be talk here in the particular context and timescale of Brexit . ` ` and I be put these proposal forward in good faith , I ' m deliberately say put my preferred option to one side , and ask people if we can find a consensus and compromise option . ' ' the Scottish Conservatives say the remark only suggest shelve separation plan temporarily , and have not remove the risk of cause more uncertainty to people and business across the country . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , add that the First Minister ' s comment on the BBC ' S Good Morning Scotland programme be in stark contrast to her reaction the day after the Brexit vote last June , when she instruct civil servant to start draft plan for another independence referendum . Ms Davidson add : ` ` Nicola Sturgeon have spend six month try desperately to use Brexit as a way of increase support for independence . she ' S fail . ` ` the First Minister know that if another referendum on independence be call tomorrow , she ' d lose . ` ` poll show few and few Scot agree with her separation obsession , and support for the question be ask again have collapse . ` ` we be be leave in the bad of all possible world . ` ` Scotland be keep in limbo as Nicola Sturgeon try to find an escape route after march her troop to the top of a mountain , but still keep the threat of a second referendum on the table as a possibility for the future . ' ' Iain Gray , for Scottish Labour , say Ms Sturgeon could clear up any doubt about her intention by ` ` rule out another referendum altogether ' ' . he add that the vast majority of Scot would prefer the SNP to address the crisis in the NHS and ` ` clean up the mess ' ' nationalist minister have make of education . ' Sturgeon have spend six month try to use Brexit to increase support for independence . she ' S fail '
Baldrick prove to be a cunning opponent by get the good of the Prime Minister ; Sketch
it seem unbelievable , look back , but TV camera be n't allow into the commons until @card@ . that ' S ridiculously recent . before then , unless you have the privilege of a seat in the Commons gallery , you have no way of see what your elected representative be up to . now , though , everyone can watch them . include the people those elect representative be talk about . who can then make headline themselves by respond . take yesterday at Prime Minister ' S question . Jeremy Corbyn tell Theresa May that her catchphrase ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' be meaningless , and that she remind him of Baldrick from Blackadder - because her ` ` cunning plan ' ' be to ` ` do nothing ' ' . Mrs May respond by note that the actor who play Baldrick , Tony Robinson , be a Labour supporter who have say Mr Corbyn be a hopeless leader . so who should pop up on Twitter moment later but Robinson himself - to shoot back at Mrs May by tweet ` ` Baldrick mean Baldrick ' ' . prime minister in the old day have it so much easy . Anthony Eden may have have to deal with the Suez crisis , but at least he do n't have Arthur Askey heckle him while he do it . perhaps the most remarkable aspect of yesterday ' S PMQs be that Mr Corbyn ask about Brexit . though it ' S by mile the most important political issue of our time , at PMQs he generally give the impression that the whole thing have somehow pass him by , and that he would rather ask about butterfly farming in southern Bolivia or government policy on bicycle clip . so credit to the Labour leader for ask about Brexit this time . I suppose it would be ungrateful to complain that he fail to ask the obvious question . yesterday morning the Guardian have a front-page story that report that during the EU referendum campaign , Mrs May have admit to banker in the city that , in the event of Brexit , company could leave Britain . she tell them : ` ` I think there would be firm and company who would be look to say , do they need to develop a mainland Europe presence rather than a UK presence ? ' ' these day , of course , now that she have anoint herself the high priestess of Brexit and cut short all criticism with an icy reminder of ` ` the will of the British people ' ' , she would never suggest something so heretical . Mr Corbyn , therefore , could have put her on the spot by say , ` ` Mr Speaker , in May the Prime Minister say that Brexit would mean company move abroad . now she supposedly think they wo n't . be she make it up then - or be she make it up now ? ' ' then again , maybe Mr Corbyn be n't in a position to ask that particular question . after all , he can hardly accuse someone of be an unconvincing Brexiter , when he himself have always make such an unconvincing Remainer . in which case , I suppose he have little choice but to take Baldrick ' S advice . and do nothing .
so , how will Brexit affect the game ? try ' Football Manager ' ; Sport Football ; Video game chief tell Alistair Tweedale it be a tall order to build in forecast for an EU exit
Miles Jacobson be frank about what he be up against : ` ` as far as I know this be the first time a computer game have try to predict the future of a country . ' ' this would always have be a busy time of year for the man in charge of Sports Interactive , the maker of the phenomenally successful Football Manager series of video game . a new instalment be release on Nov @card@ , but the period lead up to the @card@ edition have be make particularly complicated by the big political decision take in this country since the Second World War . while the rest of the world wait to see how the government approach the trigger of Article @card@ , Jacobson and his team have build a Brexit simulator into this year ' S game , which model some of the consequence of the UK leave the European Union . the world outside football be not something that have previously be incorporate into Football Manager , a game so comprehensive that some club be now use it as a resource to help scout player . but Brexit , say Jacobson , be too big to be leave out : ` ` we usually try and keep politics out of the game , because nobody want it ram down their throat . but we be leave with an interesting situation this year when the people of Britain vote to leave the EU , and it would n't have feel right to leave that out . it ' s something we have to reflect in the game . ` ` so we sit down with the research guy and start to plan how we might put it in . ' ' the consequence for sport of leave the EU could be farreaching , and Jacobson have have to establish what might happen . ` ` I always read the party manifesto before a general election , ' ' he say . ` ` Preparing for the Brexit aspect of the new game have take a lot of research , too : a lot of reading , a lot of talk to politician and people in football . ' ' it soon become obvious that the possible ramification in football be almost endless , and also constantly change . ` ` of course , none of us know what will happen , ' ' say Jacobson . ` ` it change on a daily basis . we know Article @card@ will be invoke before the end of March , but we do n't know how long negotiation be go to take . they could take two year , but there could be a general election within that time . ` ` the first option for the game be to have just one scenario and that would be it , Brexit do , but it ' S not possible to come out with one outcome , and it wo n't be until all the negotiation be do . ` ` as a result we ' ve decide to go down another route , and have include every possible outcome in the game , use artificial intelligence and percentage chance to make every game different . ' ' in game , player of Football Manager @card@ will be alert , at some point between two and @card@ year in , that trade negotiation have begin , and a year later a news bulletin will detail the extent of Brexit . there be three main scenario : 1 . soft Brexit - free movement of worker remain ; 2 . footballer be grant the same special exemption that be currently give to ' entertainer ' . this mean it be easy for them to obtain work permit , and it will not have a huge impact on player movement from the EU ; 3 . hard Brexit : similar rule to those which currently apply to non-EU player be adopt for all non-UK player . it be this third option that would see the big effect on game play .
poll point to a dash of leaver ' regret , but to mention it would be treason ; Road to Brexit
no doubt about the story of the day . a Conservative councillor from Surrey call Christian Holliday ( can that really be his name ? what do his friend call him ? Easter ? ) have actually start a petition to make support UK membership of the EU a treasonable offence . well , I suppose that ' S one way to uphold democracy : suppress democracy . I do n't know whether Mr Holliday be watch live coverage of Parliament yesterday , but if so , he will have be scandalise . in Westminster Hall , MP be debate Brexit . and one of them - Geraint Davies , the Labour MP for Swansea West - be commit treason left , right and centre . on June @card@ , declare Mr Davies , voter have make ` ` a dreadful mistake ' ' . the EU alone , he say , would dictate the term of our exit , leave us with no choice but to take whatever we be give . outside the EU , we ' d be so desperate we ' d sign up to any old trade deal , no matter how rotten . before it be too late , conclude Mr Davies , the referendum must be rerun , so that voter could , in his charming phrase , ` ` take a more considered view ' ' . but even if the referendum be n't rerun , the result from June @card@ , he maintain , have only be ` ` advisory , not mandatory ' ' . Paul Scully - the pro-Brexit Tory MP for Sutton & Cheam - politely remind Mr Davies that during the referendum campaign the government have promise to do whatever the voter decide . ` ` well , sadly for myself and for the country , ' ' say Mr Davies , ` ` I ' m not in the government . ' ' never mind in the government . if he do n't look out , he ' ll be in the Tower of London . a pro-Brexit Tory , Philip Hollobone ( MP for Kettering ) , chide Mr Davies for his ` ` unremitting doom and gloom ' ' . why , say Mr Hollobone , he be be so negative about Brexit , he sound as if be present ` ` the business section of the today programme ' ' . a comforting thought for Mr Davies there . at least he wo n't be lonely in his cell . he ' ll have the entire staff of the BBC in there with him . a fellow heretic , Patrick Grady ( SNP , Glasgow North ) , dare to suggest that Mr Scully ' s support of Brexit be illconsidered . if Mr Scully despise Brussels red tape so much , he ask , could he reveal which specific EU law he be most look forward to see the back of ? Mr Scully mull it over . ` ` what I ' m really look forward to , ' ' he decide , ` ` be take back control . ' ' he do n't actually cite a specific EU law , but perhaps he take the patriotic view that all EU law be equally bad . sadly , however , it seem that not all his countryman be so steadfast . a poll of @card@ voter by the British Election Study find that six per cent of Leavers regret their decision . be this swing reflect in a rerun of the referendum , Remain would win . Let ' s hope it do n't come to that . it would be awful to see the British people ignore the will of the British people .
it will take age before we be able to work out Brexit ' s impact
how be the UK economy perform since we vote to leave the European union at the end of June ? the answer be that we do n't really know - and wo n't for some time . the figure we have so far present a very incomplete picture . retail sale appear to hold up well in July , while CBI survey indicate resilient manufacturing order and output - possibly help by a weak pound . inflation pick up slightly but it remain very low , at 0.6pc . however , the fall in sterling be start to push up the cost of import . as these high cost feed through to consumer , they could well put a brake on spending growth - as we see when the pound fall sharply after the financial crisis . we be clutch at straw , however , if we make too much of these very early and fragmentary piece of information . we still have no comprehensive official figure cover any period since the referendum for industrial production , GDP , employment , investment , broad measure of consumer spending and overseas trade . it be far too early to draw any substantive conclusion about the economic impact of the Brexit vote . when will we be able to do so ? the analysis we conduct at PwC before the referendum suggest that there be three key area of likely impact - and the timescales to assess them stretch from about six month after the referendum result to a decade or more . the most immediate impact be political and economic uncertainty . this be particularly acute at the beginning of July after the Prime Minister resign and the leadership of the country be adrift . the formation of a new government under Theresa May have stabilise the political situation - though the direction of policy be still unclear on many issue , not least the timing and content of future Brexit negotiation with our EU partner . a degree of uncertainty could also persist during these negotiation - from next year onwards . however , base on the contact with business that I have have over the summer , most company seem prepare to take time to assess the full implication of the Brexit vote . they have absorb the initial shock of the EU referendum vote and be now in ` ` wait and see ' ' mode . day-to-day business carry on as normal , but there may be a more cautious approach to big strategic investment in the UK . I do not find it surprising that retail sale be hold up in the aftermath of the Brexit vote . uncertainty will affect consumer mainly through its effect on job and investment - and it will take a while for these to feed through to individual spending decision . we will need to see at least three to six month of datum before we draw even provisional conclusion about the impact of Brexit uncertainty on job , investment and consumer spending . the second key time horizon be when negotiation about the UK ' s relationship with the rest of the EU be take place between @card@ and @card@ . over this period , we will become clear about how close our trade relationship be with the European Single Market , not just generally but in key sector like manufacturing and financial service . if it be possible for the UK to strike a deal with other EU member which largely preserve our access to European market in manufacturing and key service , this will be a good Brexit outcome - not just for the UK but for the rest of Europe . but it be also possible that the negotiation become confrontational and unproductive . we will not know much about this until Article @card@ be trigger next year . the third time horizon we need to think about be the long term - how strong economic growth will be in the 2020s and 2030s in a UK outside the EU . here , there be two alternative vision of the future for the UK outside the EU . many - like myself - who argue for a Remain vote worry that the longterm economic impact of Brexit be quite likely to be negative . in the past @card@ to @card@ year , the performance of the British economy benefit from membership of the European Economic Community and the EU . the UK turn around from be the ` ` sick man of Europe ' ' in the 1960s and 1970s to become one of its good performer from the 1980s onwards . our close relationship with European market play an important part in this improvement in economic performance , as new investment be attract to the UK - for example in the car industry . the alternative view be that there be now a big world of opportunity in rapidly grow market such as China , India , Africa and South America - and UK economic growth could be boost by forge strong trade link with these country and region . the challenge here will be our ability to gain access to these market on good term . that will not be sort out until we have complete our negotiation with the EU and establish a new relationship with the World Trade Organisation , the guardian of global trade agreement . in summary , therefore , we may learn more about the short-term impact of Brexit over the next six month or so . but the more profound effect will be feel over year and decade . previous experience suggest we should not be surprise if it take a while for even the short-term impact of the Brexit decision to feed through to the UK economy . in the early 1990s , it take one to two year before high interest rate push the economy into recession . even though the first tremor of the global financial crisis be feel in @card@ , the economy do not move decisively into recession until late @card@ . I ' m keep an open mind on the economic impact of Brexit . by the end of this year , we should be clear on the effect of heightened uncertainty on the UK economy . but the other economic impact will take year and possibly decade to unfold . in the meantime , however , consumer and business would be wise to adopt a ` ` wait and see ' ' approach , and not rush to either a negative or excessively positive view . decision which have yet to be take and discussion which have not yet start will have a crucial impact on the full economic consequence of Brexit . Andrew Sentance be senior economic adviser at PwC ' most company seem prepare to take time to assess the full implicaitons of the Brexit vote '
UBS back City supremacy , but urge quick progress on Brexit
UBS , the Swiss investment bank , have say it want London to remain Europe ' s financial hub and it will try to keep as many staff in the city as possible after Brexit . speak to Bloomberg TV at the World Economic Forum in Davos , Andrea Orcel , UBS ' s investment banking head , say the Zurich-based bank want to keep ` ` as much as we can in the UK ' ' . the bank favours have a strong European financial centre to ` ` balance ' ' New York , Mr Orcel say , add that global bank have cluster in London historically to save cost and be reluctant to move out . however , he warn that ` ` everybody have a plan on how to redeploy and relocate ' ' staff and say bank need to see progress on Brexit trade talk - include an agree transition period - by March at the late . Mr Orcel say : ` ` now we be beyond maximum time so all investment bank need to take a view and need to start execute , so March be really the deadline ' ' . UBS have centralise much of its European operation in London , include move more than @card@ staff to a purpose-built ` ` groundscraper ' ' at @card@ Broadgate . in its result earlier this month UBS reveal it would start to implement Brexit contingency plan early this year , with around @card@ role reportedly earmark for relocation . several investment banking boss in Davos this week have urge the UK to make quick progress in Brexit trade talk . Jamie Dimon , the JP Morgan chief executive , and Lloyd Blankfein , the Goldman Sachs boss , tell the BBC that City job would go without a deal . Mr Dimon warn that more than @card@ UK job at the US bank could relocate over the long term . Mr Blankfein say that some step already take by his bank to prepare for Brexit be ` ` not go to be undo ' ' . other European financial hub include Paris , Frankfurt , Dublin and Amsterdam have start court City firm in the hope they will relocate staff to their city . Bruno Le Maire , the French finance minister , tell Reuters in Davos that Paris could overtake London . ` ` there will be a new leader after Brexit , ' ' he say . ` ` I see the possibility for France to become in the come year the most important financial centre in Europe , and the UK be in Europe . ' ' the Bank of England and EY , the consultancy , have warn that as many as @card@ City job could go by March next year without a Brexit trade deal .
Scotland Absence of leadership on Brexit be a danger ; Head of fiscal watchdog warn of loom chaos if Whitehall be leave in strategy vacuum ; Watchdog speak out on Brexit strategy drift
Theresa May ' S administration be put a successful Brexit at risk by fail to show ` ` active and energetic ' ' leadership , the head of the National Audit Office ( Nao ) have warn . in an unprecedented intervention , Sir Amyas Morse say Whitehall department be be leave to ` ` struggle on their own ' ' with Brexit because of a failure of leadership and direction . he say Brexit pose the ` ` big challenge ' ' to the nation since the Second World War , but government could ` ` come apart like a chocolate orange ' ' unless department be give more support . Sir Amyas also reveal that David Davis ' s Brexit department fail to show him a plan for leave the European union despite his request for one , and could only offer a ` ` vague ' ' explanation as to why it be unable to do so . ` ` Government will need to be fast and flexible and act in a unified way , ' ' Sir Amyas say . he add that he have serious doubt about the likelihood of a unified approach , say : ` ` we have an issue here because of departmental government and what we do n't want to find be that at the first tap it come apart like a chocolate orange . ' ' Sir Amyas ' S remark follow week of speculation about the Prime Minister ' s ability to lead after the election defeat and plot to replace her at no @card@ as well as fear of a rift between her and her Cabinet colleague over Brexit strategy . earlier yesterday Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , hit back at Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson ' s declaration that the EU can ` ` go whistle ' ' if it think the UK will pay a large exit bill . Sir Amyas say the scale of the Brexit task be ` ` only just start to click into people ' S awareness ' ' and that leave the EU mean minister would not have ` ` space for legislate on other issue ' ' . he also highlight fear that UK custom would descend into a ` ` horror show ' ' as Britain leave the union because a new £150million system may not be ready in time and without it million of trade transaction could be delay and tax lose . critic warn the Nao ' S report show the government do not have a grasp on how trade will work after the UK leave the custom union , while Sir Amyas call on minister to plan further in advance to provide ` ` insurance ' ' for UK taxpayer against the impact of leave without adequate system in place . HM Revenue and Customs have only allow two month between the completion of the project to overhaul the custom system on the UK border and leave the EU , which be not enough to be sure everything will work out in time , the Nao say . it also warn that the system have not be test properly so minister be uncertain that it will be able to cope with the number of declaration , which will rise from 55million to 255million after March @card@ . more than £700billion of good cross the UK border in @card@ , the Nao continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ say , as it warn that get the system right be ` ` critical to the UK ' S economy and consumer ' ' . there be ` ` very little flexibility ' ' in the plan and the department in charge be not be give the support it need to put back-up option in place , Sir Amyas warn . explain his unusual decision to intervene , he tell reporter he ` ` would n't be speak like this ' ' if he believe the coordinate support need across government be in place . he add : ` ` the reason for emphasise these point be the government really need to recognise that . I notice in some of the public comment it ' s start to kind of lay off on the risk a little bit . ` ` we still think that the risk of not be ready on the day could be reduce by the government take a strong and more unified line ; that ' s the reason for say this . ` ` the impact of Brexit be not go to fall evenly across the department . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
lack of leadership put Brexit at risk , say watchdog ; Watchdog warn of Brexit ' horror show '
Theresa May ' S administration be put a successful Brexit at risk by fail to show ` ` active and energetic ' ' leadership , the head of the National Audit Office ( Nao ) have warn . in an unprecedented intervention , Sir Amyas Morse say Whitehall department be be leave to ` ` struggle on their own ' ' with no direction . he say Brexit pose the ` ` big challenge ' ' to the nation since the Second World War , but government could ` ` come apart like a chocolate orange ' ' unless department get more support . Sir Amyas also reveal that David Davis ' s Brexit department fail to show him a plan for leave the European Union , despite his request for one , and could only offer a ` ` vague ' ' explanation as to why it be unable to do so . ` ` Government will need to be fast and flexible and act in a unified way , ' ' Sir Amyas say . he add that he have serious doubt about the likelihood of a unified approach , say : ` ` we have an issue here because of departmental government and what we do n't want to find be that at the first tap it come apart like a chocolate orange . ' ' last night Labour say it would vote against Mrs May ' s ` ` great repeal Bill ' ' unless she make significant concession on issue such as worker ' right . also Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , hit back yesterday at Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson ' s declaration that the EU can ` ` go whistle ' ' if it think the UK will pay a large exit bill . Sir Amyas ' S remark follow week of continue on Page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ speculation about Mrs May ' s ability to lead after the election defeat and plot to replace her at no @card@ as well as fear of a rift between the PM and her Cabinet colleague over Brexit strategy . Sir Amyas say the scale of the task be ` ` only just start to click into people ' S awareness ' ' and that leave the EU mean minister would not have ` ` space for legislate on other issue ' ' . he also highlight fear that UK custom would descend into a ` ` horror show ' ' as Britain leave the union because a new £150million system may not be ready in time and without it million of trade transaction could be delay and tax lose . however , a Government spokesman say minister be ` ` alive to the task ahead ' ' . the criticism come as the Great repeal Bill come before the Commons today , in what Mr Davis call ` ` a major milestone ' ' . the Bill will convert EU law into UK law . meanwhile , the Office for Budget Responsibility be also publish a key policy paper today detail the fiscal risk of Brexit .
why do Hammond still seem to blame the voter for back Brexit ? ; Analysis
there be a simple yet devastating reason why the Budget have descend into farce . it be now clear that the Chancellor , alone among this government ' s senior figure , have yet to accept , let alone embrace , the fact that Britain be about to leave the European Union , and decide instead to dedicate his energy at such a crucial time to go off on the irrelevant and explosive tangent . he invent a technocratic mission for himself - tweak the tax status of the self-employed - rather than accept that Brexit be the only game in town , and land himself and the government in its bad crisis to date . Philip Hammond ' s lack of seriousness on the most important issue face our country be genuinely disappointing . yes , he back Remain , but why be he take so much longer than anybody else to adjust ? why do he continue to give the impression that he continue to blame the voter for their suppose recklessness ? and why be he destabilising the government and fuel a potentially lethal rebellion just day before Article @card@ be mean to be invoke ? what message do he think this be send to EU negotiator ? no Chancellor who be truly focus on try to make a success of Brexit could possibly have conclude that the good way of do so be to declare war on a key part of the aspirational , self-reliant coalition that be the country and the Tory party ' S www.future.No Chancellor who have truly buy into the Brexit project would have choose to make zero provision in his budget for finance or upgrade the new it , custom , immigration and trade infrastructure that we will need when we leave the EU , or even mention that the UK would soon be back in control of swathe of spending in area such as agriculture . there be no mention , either , of the windfall to the public finance from the end of our annual payment , nor , for that matter , any discussion of a potential ` ` exit fee ' ' . instead , the big priority be an esoteric side-issue . how could the Chancellor be so lack in perspective ? it would have be premature to go into too much detail about the fiscal implication of Brexit , for sure : we do n't yet know what shape it will take , nor what deal , if any , we will strike with the EU . but the @card@ budget , which claim to include forecast for the public finance to @card@ , in effect pretend that Brexit be n't about to happen , apart from a few prediction relate to lower migration . it be almost as if Mr Hammond still hope to be fight a phony war , and that we wo n't actually be leave . he certainly be n't meaningfully plan for our departure . yet Brexit be happen , and it will change everything : in political , economic and historic term , it be all that matter . the government may wish to believe that it can still be define by its approach to other issue , but all policy and all of the government ' S effort must now be solely dedicate to make a success of our forthcoming return to self-government . those of us who have always back Brexit be far from delude about the magnitude of the task at hand : we will be saddle our establishment , our government and our civil service with an immensely complicated task . we also desperately need a new , progrowth vision for the country that allow the economy to power ahead outside of the custom union and single market . and yet , instead of unveil an epoch-defining Brexit Budget , or at least build the beginning of an agenda around it , the Chancellor choose to pretend that nothing be happen . he barely mention the B-word in his speech , decide instead that the really important issue be the suppose long-term erosion of the UK ' s tax base ( as if , for a Tory , a structural shift towards low tax ought to be see as a bad thing ) . this be a budget for delusional Left-wing technocrat , the kind of people who be obsess with ` ` progressive ' ' tax hike and who spearhead Project Fear , not one to prepare Britain for the radical change the Prime Minister have promise . the target audience seem to be Blairite policy wonks , not Brexit Britain . until Mr Hammond begin to feel he own Brexit , these sort of disaster will keep on happen . he need to feel responsible for make our return to self-government a success ; yet he still sound like a man who have be force to take on a project he do n't really believe in . the Chancellor be hugely effective earlier this year when he threaten , to a German audience , that he would turn the UK into a Singapore-style economy with low tax and a small state if the EU decide to slap protectionist tariff on British firm . but how will anybody believe that he really mean it after the fiasco of the past few day ? how can somebody who reject supply-side economics be trust to implement a radical , free-market agenda to steal business from Europe ? even worse , this nonsense will weaken the government domestically at a very dangerous time . the Budget ought to have be a show of confident strength ; instead it be a destabilising own goal which will just encourage those who want to overturn democracy . we ' ve have the Brexit ping , with pro-EU irredentist in the House of Lords defeat the government on two amendment and send the legislation back to the Commons ; now be the time for a decisive , crush pong . to ensure that the upper house and , just as crucially , rebel MP fall into line , it be essential for the government to be able to dangle the implicit threat of a general election ( there be way around the Fixed-Term Parliaments Act ) . other punishment , such as the possibility of deselection , must also sound credible . prior to the Budget , the Tories enjoy a massive lead in the poll , so these be strong argument . but such a threat now suddenly look much less likely : why would the government engineer an election when it have just alienate a big chunk of its base , include those in a large number of marginal seat ? and if a rebelliousness be in the air more generally , how will the Remainers be whip back into their box ? all the good work of the past few month , and the astonishing opportunity deliver by Labour ' S total , abject incompetence , could yet be for nothing . these be perilous time and the Chancellor ' s disastrous , embarrassing budget be now threaten to overshadow what ought to have be a glorious March for Theresa May ' s merry band of Brexiteers . ' this be a budget for delusional Left-wing technocrat , people who spearhead Project Fear '
judge blame minister for create void over Brexit ; Europe @card@ ; @card@ legislation on EU referendum be ' very carefully silent ' on what the effect of vote should be
minister could have avoid bruising court case over Brexit if they have make sure the EU referendum be legally binding , the country ' s foremost judge have say . Supreme Court justice who be decide whether Parliament must have a vote on trigger Article @card@ appear mystify as to why the issue have be leave open to debate . Lord Neuberger , the President of the Supreme Court , be among the judge who question why the government fail explicitly to state in legislation that the result of the vote have legal effect , rather than just ` ` political ' ' effect . the court be hear an appeal bring by the government against a High Court rule last month that Brexit can only be trigger by a vote in Parliament to leave the EU , mean the result of the referendum be merely advisory , rather than final . the government argue that Theresa May have the power to invoke Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty - which give notice of Britain ' s intent to leave the EU - use a royal prerogative , without the need for a specific act of Parliament . but Lord Neuberger say the @card@ legislation that provide for the referendum be ` ` very carefully silent ' ' on what the effect of the referendum should be . he point out that when a referendum be hold in @card@ on whether Britain should adopt the alternative vote system at election , the legislation clearly set out the fact that the result of the referendum would be legally binding . Lord Neuberger tell James Eadie QC , counsel for the government : ` ` you may say to yourself ... it be not for the court to say what the effect of the @card@ act be , where Parliament have be very carefully silent , but to say that be a matter for Parliament . ' ' Lord Clarke , another of the @card@ Justices hear the case , say : ` ` of course , it do n't have to be silent , do it ? I mean Parliament could have [ be explicit ] . ' ' Lord Neuberger add : ` ` it could have say it be advisory or it could have do what it do in the alternative vote legislation ... it could have say what it do . if Parliament mean it to have a legal effect , it say so , whereas it do n't say so in the @card@ [ Act ] . ' ' Lord Reed say that ` ` hold a referendum be a political event , the significance of the outcome depend on thing like the size of the turnout , the size and majority one way or another ' ' . he say that these be ` ` inevitably a matter of political judgment , which court be not equip to do ' ' . the judge imply that if the government have word the @card@ legislation more carefully , the matter would never have end up in court . Lord Pannick QC , set out the case for Gina Miller , the businesswoman who challenge the government ' s right to trigger Brexit without a Parliamentary vote , suggest it be a nonsense to suggest the @card@ act that take Britain into Europe could ever be revoke without a new law be pass . he say the @card@ Act , which have ` ` constitutional status ' ' , make no provision for a prerogative power to be use to nullify it in the future , and it would be ` ` quite extraordinary ' ' if it be to be revoke by ` ` the action of a minister act without parliamentary authority ' ' . however , Mr Eadie warn the judge that they would be set ` ` a serious constitutional trap ' ' if they uphold the previous High Court ruling . he say : ` ` we submit that it would take the court over the line , a line which it have be assiduous to respect , between interpretation and judicial legislation . ` ` the court would be impose in effect a new control of a most serious kind in a highly controversial and , by Parliament , carefully consider area . ' ' the justice have emphasise that the appeal concern an issue of law and do not address the wide political question surround a departure from the EU . Reuters WERMUTH/ Lord Pannick add that the ` ` political significance ' ' of the referendum vote be ` ` irrelevant ' ' to the legal battle . Mr Eadie concede that if the government lose the case , it would have to introduce a ` ` one line ' ' Act of Parliament to invoke Article @card@ . STEFAN what be behind today ' S vote ? how MP will be force to show their hand Q what have the government do to change the course of Brexit ? a Theresa May have table an amendment which will force a non-binding commons vote on whether Parliament agree that the government must trigger Article @card@ by the end of March next year . Downing Street have also commit to present MP with a Brexit ` ` plan ' ' after criticism from backbencher . Q How do this affect the Supreme Court hearing on Article @card@ ? a The Government be argue in court that Mrs May should be able to use the royal prerogative to trigger Brexit negotiation , which do not require a vote in Parliament . however , today ' S vote be not binding - mean that technically it do not have any bearing on the Supreme Court case . Q what be the point of the court ruling if the government have already hold a Commons vote on Article @card@ ? a today ' S amendment only state that Parliament ` ` should respect the wish of the United Kingdom as express in the referendum on @card@ June ; and further call on the government to invoke Article @card@ by @card@ March @card@ ' ' . crucially , it do not by itself trigger Article @card@ , but it will force Europhile MP to say whether they will back the action . the Supreme Court will rule on whether Mrs May must seek a binding vote in Parliament before she tell Brussel that she have formally trigger Article @card@ and that negotiation have start . if the Supreme Court rule against her , that Commons vote would give MP an opportunity to block Brexit by vote against the government . it mean that Mrs May would need an Article @card@ Act of Parliament , which would also have to be pass by the House of Lords . Q so what be the real point of today ' s commons vote ? a although the vote will not make a difference legally , it be politically significant . it will force MP to show their hand , make it very difficult for them to reverse their position and block Brexit if the Supreme Court rule against the government . by the end of proceeding today , there will be a list of MP who be willing to say they do not respect the decision of the British people to vote leave in June . the Brexit judgment Access to Telegraph Premium article online be include free of charge for all of our print subscriber . just log into the site for full and unlimited access . not a subscriber ? visit www.telegraph.co.uk/editions or call @card@ @card@ @card@ @card@ to select your package . unparalleled event require unparalleled insight the road out of the European Union Will Britain meet its Brexit target of @card@ ? Parliament vote on motion challenge Commons to ` ` respect the wish ' ' of UK voter , trigger Article @card@ by March @card@ . Dec @card@ Closing argument in Supreme Court , which will rule whether PM have power to trigger Article @card@ use royal prerogative Jan @card@ Supreme Court expect to deliver its ruling on whether the process to start Brexit require an Act of Parliament March @card@ Deadline Mrs May have set for invoke Article @card@ by notify the European Council of Britain ' s intention to leave EU Sept @card@ date by which EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , Michel Barnier , want to wrap deal on Britain ' s exit from the Union March @card@ date by which Theresa May want her minister for Brexit to complete negotiation with the European Union May @card@ ? Britain formally exit the EU , follow ratification of Brexit by all other member state ' it be not for the court to say what the effect of the @card@ act be ... that be a matter for Parliament '
Labour and Brexit ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : the House of Commons be not sit today , so there will be no Prime Minister ' S question and no chance for Jeremy Corbyn to ask Theresa May about her position on Brexit in the light of the legal challenge that could yet compel minister to seek parliamentary approval before start the Article @card@ process of withdrawal . even before the Scottish National Party ' s absurd and self-aggrandising attempt to jump on the bandwagon , the court action be cause the government no little worry , but the person who should be grateful for the Commons recess be Mr Corbyn . for while Mrs May have a clear position on the fundamental question of Brexit - she be commit to Britain leave the EU - Labour have no such clarity . indeed , it be impossible to say whether Labour would support or obstruct parliamentary move to begin the Brexit process . some Labour MP , such as David Lammy , say they would vote against Article @card@ , try to overturn the referendum result . Labour ' s Brexit spokesman , Sir Keir Starmer , say he will support Article @card@ , but also hint that could be conditional on the government commit to keep Britain in the single market . Mr Corbyn have say Labour could vote against Article @card@ , but Tom Watson , his deputy leader , say that be not so . even by the dismal standard Mr Corbyn have set , this be shambolic . Brexit pose vital question , yet Labour ' S position be utterly unclear . when the commons return next week , if Mr Corbyn want to question Mrs May about her plan with even a shred of credibility , he should either explain Labour ' s policy on Brexit - or admit it do not have one .
Brussels believe it can make Britain beg ; European state ' not on same page ' after Brexit
Britain have become ` ` completely lost ' ' since the Brexit vote and can eventually be expect to ` ` plead ' ' for a deal when it realise the weakness of its position at the negotiate table , senior European Commission official now believe . while publicly press for Britain to invoke Article @card@ and begin divorce talk , official in Brussels be take grow satisfaction in what they believe be paralysis and disarray in Theresa May ' S government , accord to internal discussion see by the Daily Telegraph . the spectacle of Mrs May rebuke David Davis , the Brexit minister , at Prime Minister ' s question for prematurely reveal the government ' S hand be take as further evidence in Brussels that Downing Street do not have a coherent strategy for Brexit , accord to one commission insider . official be also jubilant that the United States , Japan and India all give Britain what one EU diplomat describe as ` ` the cold shoulder ' ' at the recent G20 summit in Hangzhou , China , heed Brussels ' demand that the country can not begin independent trade negotiation before Brexit . the revelation come as Europe attempt to stage a post-Brexit vote display of unity this week . Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , will deliver his ` ` State of the Union ' ' address on Wednesday follow by a meeting of all other @card@ EU leader in Bratislava on Friday . Mrs May have pledge not to trigger Article @card@ until next year at least , but be likely to face rise pressure from European capital if she do not act soon after the new year . the Prime Minister stick to her gun this week during a visit to London by Donald Tusk , the European Council president , who hint at rise impatience in EU capital , say that Britain should trigger talk ` ` as soon as possible ' ' . British official concede privately that the Whitehall bureaucracy be still ` ` mile and mile ' ' from be ready to conduct detailed negotiation as it come to term with the new departmental structure create by Mrs May , although official contend that Europe be equally in disarray . British negotiator be determine that the European Commission , with its more ` ` theological ' ' approach to issue such as free movement , must not be allow to dominate the Brexit negotiation but want them control by EU leader who , Britain feel , may take a more pragmatic approach . however , the Commission hope that division among the remain @card@ member state will enable the Brussels bureaucracy , with its mastery of the legal detail , to insert itself more forcefully into the come talk - a strategy that some analyst warn could backfire . ` ` Member state be n't on the same page follow Brexit , and the commission clearly see this space and want to exploit it for its own end , to push its agenda , ' ' say Mujtaba Rahman , manage director for Europe at the Eurasia Group risk consultancy . ` ` it ' S a high risk strategy , and be likely to fail , further alienate Juncker from the member state . ' '
future will be bright after Brexit , say May ; Tory leadership frontrunner insist she be no ' Remainer ' and can take Britain out of EU ; May challenge Leadsom to sign ' pledge card ' in run-up to leadership contest
Britain will emerge from Brexit with a ` ` good , bright future ' ' , Theresa May pledge today as she warn that the country face ` ` tough time ' ' while it negotiate to leave the European Union . in her first interview since she and Andrea Leadsom be name as the final two candidate vie to become the next prime minister , Mrs May tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` Politics could do with some bloody difficult woman . ' ' the Home Secretary say that a female prime minister will bring ` ` honesty ' ' and a great focus on ` ` delivery ' ' in Downing Street , as she suggest that man tend to treat politics as a ` ` game ' ' . she also appeal to people not to consider her as a ` ` Remainer ' ' after she campaign to keep Britain in the EU , say that she be ` ` very clear that Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . she insist that she be not the ` ` new Margaret Thatcher ' ' , describe the former prime minister as ` ` absolutely unique ' ' . ` ` people love to draw parallel , but I just get on with the job and that be my philosophy , ' ' she say . Mrs May , the longest-serving home secretary in a century , top the second-round poll of Tory MP with the support of @card@ out of @card@ member . the decision on who will lead the country out of the EU and through negotiation with Brussels now rest with the @card@ member of the Conservative Party . Mrs May adopt a more cautious tone than her rival about leave the European Union , admit that ` ` difficult time ' ' lie ahead despite the fact that she be ` ` optimistic ' ' for the future . Mrs May say : ` ` if I be prime minister , we will come out of the European union and part of that will be control of free movement . but alongside that , it ' S important to show how we can come through what will be , I think , some difficult time with a good , bright future . ' ' she urge the party to drop the term ` ` Brexiteers and Remainers ' ' , echo the suggestion by Lord Hague last week that ` ` we be all leaver now ' ' . she say : ` ` we have a job to do in make the good deal we can in come out of the EU and I be very clear that I will deliver Brexit . ' ' she pledge to act on David Cameron ' s election manifesto by make a continue on Page @card@ interview : page @card@ editorial comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ decision on Heathrow and push ahead with HS2 . her approach contrast with that of Mrs Leadsom , who have question the need for the HS2 railway line and criticise gay marriage as part of an appeal to the Tory heartland . she also embrace Ken Clarke ' s description of her last week as a ` ` bloody difficult woman ' ' . she say : ` ` we [ woman ] just get stick in . Politics be n't a game . the decision we make affect people ' S life and that be something we must keep to the forefront of our mind . ` ` woman often focus more on delivery - what the outcome be go to be rather than what be the interaction people have in order to get there . I also think that right now people be look for an honesty in politics . we could go through some tough time and we need to be honest with people about that . ' ' she admit she like to keep her ` ` personal life personal ' ' but say she and her husband Philip ` ` deal with ' ' the fact they could n't have child and ` ` move on ' ' . ` ` I hope nobody would think that matter , ' ' she say ` ` I can still empathise , understand people and care about fairness and opportunity . ' ' Mrs May today challenge Mrs Leadsom to sign a five-point ` ` pledge card ' ' as she call for a ` ` clean campaign ' ' . it include a pledge not to ` ` co-operate in any way with other political party ' ' , include donor or member . Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader , and Arron Banks , the party ' S donor , have say they support Mrs Leadsom as next Tory leader . Mrs Leadsom last week refuse to rule out Mr Farage form part of her Brexit negotiating team . it come as President Barack Obama dismiss claim that the special relationship be be put at risk by Brexit as ` ` hyperbole ' ' . he say that Brexit negotiation should not be ` ` protracted ' ' .
Davis U-turn after he say MP might be deny vote on EU trade deal
David Davis be under further pressure last night after he be force into a climbdown for say that Parliament may be deny a vote on a final trade deal before Brexit . the Brexit Secretary , who have already be accuse by colleague of delay the Brexit bill , yesterday say MP may not be give a vote in Parliament until after March @card@ . his comment prompt a furious response from pro-European Tory MP , who say that a vote after Brexit would be meaningless and ` ` absolutely unacceptable ' ' . an hour later Theresa May contradict Mr Davis at Prime Minister ' S question , tell MP she be ` ` confident ' ' they would get a vote before Britain leave the EU . Mr Davis subsequently issue a statement clarify that he ` ` expect and intend ' ' for there to be a vote in Parliament before Britain leave . one Tory minister tell the Daily Telegraph that Mr Davis have ` ` mentally check out ' ' and ` ` do n't seem to care ' ' , amid claim that he could stand down after deliver Brexit in @card@ . a source close to the Brexit department say : ` ` the Secretary of State have always be clear , include in the House of Commons , that the vote will happen before departure . ' ' the row erupt after Mr Davis suggest that the EU may delay come to a deal until the ` ` last moment ' ' . he tell the Exiting the EU select committee : ` ` it ' S no secret that the way the union make its decision tend to be at the 59th minute of the 11th hour of the 11th day and so on , and that be precisely what I would expect to happen . ` ` if there be a time limit on a negotiation the union stop the clock . it assume that it ' S still at @card@ until it be conclude , sometimes over the course of @card@ , @card@ , @card@ hour thereafter , and that ' s what I imagine it will be . ' ' press on whether that mean a vote in Parliament on the deal could be after March @card@ , he reply : ` ` it could be , yes , it could be . ' ' however an hour later the Prime Minister contradict Mr Davis . she say : ` ` I be confident because it be in the interest of both side ... that we will be able to achieve that agreement and that negotiation in time for this Parliament to have the vote that we commit to . ' ' the Prime Minister ' S spokesman subsequently say that Mrs May have ` ` full confidence ' ' in Mr Davis . Tory rebel will back an amendment to the EU withdrawal bill table by Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general , which state that there must a vote before the UK leave the EU . Mr Grieve yesterday warn the government that it will face legal action if it try to leave without a vote . Anna Soubry , a pro-European Tory MP , say that Mr Davis ' s suggestion that Parliament would be deny a vote before Brexit be ` ` absolutely [ and ] totally unacceptable ' ' . Mr Davis also warn that the UK must retain the option of leave the EU without a deal until the last moment or Brussels will ` ` think they have get you over a barrel ' ' . it come as Sir Ivan Rogers , the UK ' s former ambassador to the EU , say that Britain be be ` ` screwed ' ' in negotiation with Brussels . he say that Mrs May ' s decision to trigger Brexit before resolve the timetable allow the EU side to dictate the ` ` rule of the game ' ' . Nick Timothy : page @card@
the lady be not for turn as Tory aim to ' plough on ' with Brexit plan
there be no sign of retreat . perhaps that will change but , for now , the Government position on Brexit appear to be ` ` plough on ' ' . there be an inexorable logic to this decision . the staunch Brexiteers in office be afraid of open a can of worm by trigger any kind of leadership contest . they win the argument in Cabinet before the election and their good hope for execute it be to seize the initiative now , before their opponent can get organise . the problem with this strategy should be obvious . Brexit be n't a momentary decision or a single bill . it ' S not like a box that can be close one minute and open the next . it be more like build an enormous cathedral over many year . the architect of one particular plan might be very keen to get start , but if they forge ahead without check everyone be on board , their chance of success be extremely low . in Brexit ' S case , the mason , carpenter and painter reside in Parliament . Brexit can not be implement properly without pass law . and whereas the definitive result of the referendum have push both chamber of parliament into a quiescent state , make them ready to fall into line in spite of their strong pro-Remain tendency , the inconclusive election result have reawaken the spirit of rebellion . many backbench Tory be uneasy with the Prime Minister ' S plan and although Labour ' S manifesto outline a similar approach , that position command little support among MP . in short , the government ' s original plan have become unworkable . many Brexiteers do not yet see it that way , imagine they might be able to ram a deal through Parliament by present it , at the last minute , as the only alternative to no deal at all . but because of the many new area of law Britain plan to take back from Brussels , Brexit require Parliament to pass a series of bill - on immigration , fishery , agriculture and so on - and MP can not therefore be hold to ransom at the eleventh hour . the decision to press ahead obliviously be fraught with risk . negotiator in Brussels will be entitle to question whether May can actually deliver any promise or concession she offer , and will also wonder why they ought to give any ground when it ' S not clear if Parliament would vote through any deal . this heighten the risk of the talk collapse . for business , this be a nightmarish cocktail of political risk . everything suddenly seem to be back on the table , from a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit with no deal to none at all . those hope that Brexit can now somehow be avert be ignore the toxic electoral politics of such a move but , equally , Brexiteers who think nothing change last week be in for a surprise . the simple way out of the current mess would be for Theresa May to seek a transitional arrangement that buy more time for both politics and business to adjust . she would probably have have to do so anyway , because it be unlikely that a comprehensive trade agreement could have be finalise in the next @card@ month . her shaky support at home make a transitional arrangement even more important as a way of create parliamentary consensus and protect the economy from an unnecessarily sudden shock . there be only one obvious , readymade template suitable for a transition : join the European Economic Area . this would not yet allow the government to deliver on its immigration promise , but would set Britain on a smooth path out of the EU while we get our house in order and negotiate the fine detail of whatever our new relationship be . join the EEA would require the permission of its current non-EU member - Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein - but assume they can be persuade , it be the obvious halfway house . shun the EEA and seek just to join the European Free Trade Association , as some Brexiteers advocate , be n't actually much simple than go for a fully complete Brexit , because in order to maintain full market access it would be necessary to negotiate a lot of bilateral agreement with the EU , as Switzerland have do . EEA membership , by contrast , be relatively straightforward . it allow unfettered market access in return for an agreement to obey whatever regulatory diktat come out of Brussels . Britain would get back control of home affair and could request , separately , to remain part of the custom union until we be ready to sign our own , new trade deal and work out a new tariff schedule . before any Remainers get too excited by the prospect of this watered-down Brexit , however , it should be make clear that EEA membership be not a permanent solution , as a permanent arrangement it be the bad of all world , require obedience to Brussels but allow no input into its rule making . the fact that it deny the government the ability to control immigration will also be unacceptable to voter in the long-run . it make sense , therefore , to set a clear time limit on the transitional arrangement . five year , extendable by mutual agreement , should allow enough time to work out a proper long-term trade agreement between Britain and the EU , while give business and investor time to understand and adjust to the change . most Brexiteers understand that Brexit can not be pull off in the blink of an eye . their fear that it might never happen doe not , however , justify a headlong rush into the unknown when there be good way to approach it . voter have force the government ' S hand and it be no longer possible for May to set her own pace and priority . parliamentary involvement might be annoy and inconvenient , but there be now no way around it . the government will negotiate more effectively if it recognise its new situation at the outset , rather than face a crisis later when it ca n't deliver on its promise . ' Everything suddenly seem to be back on the table , from a hard Brexit with no deal to none at all '
' no deal be good than a bad deal ' ; MP given vote on outcome of talk but Britain will not remain
Theresa May yesterday warn the European union she will walk away from the negotiate table unless its leader accept her demand , as she set out her plan for Brexit for the first time . the Prime Minister announce that Britain would leave the single market and effectively depart the custom union - and then tell European leader that any attempt to ` ` punish ' ' Britain for its stance would be ` ` an act of calamitous self-harm ' ' . she say she would rather do ` ` no deal ' ' than one which be a ` ` bad deal for Britain ' ' and say that any attempt by the EU to harm the UK would cause her to change the country ' s ` ` economic model ' ' by lower tax and cut regulation to compete with Brussels . European leader give a cautious welcome to Mrs May ' S speech . Donald Tusk , the president of the European Council , say Mrs May ' S demand be ` ` realistic ' ' . ` ` Sad process , surrealistic time but at least more realistic announcement on Brexit , ' ' he write on Twitter , add that the @card@ remain EU state be ` ` united and ready to negotiate ' ' after Article @card@ be invoke . François Hollande be understand to have tell Mrs May that he want Brexit negotiation to begin as soon as possible , while French diplomatic source describe Mrs May ' s comment as ` ` useful clarification ' ' . Germany ' s foreign minister welcome Mrs May ' s decision to give ` ` a bit more clarity ' ' about her idea for Brexit . Frank-Walter Steinmeier say : ` ` almost seven month have now pass since the referendum on Britain ' s membership of the European Union . the British government have still to formalise its desire to leave . ` ` we therefore welcome the British Prime Minister ' s speech in which she outline her government ' S idea on the exit and finally create a bit more clarity about Britain ' S plan . ' ' Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , today hail the speech as set out a ` ` powerful and ambitious vision ' ' . write for the Daily Telegraph , he say that Mrs May have set out a clear plan that can work for both Britain and the EU . the value of the pound soar as Mrs May deliver her speech to member of her Cabinet and European ambassador , see its big daily rise against the dollar since @card@ . Mrs May reveal her 12-point plan for Brexit in a speech yesterday in Lancaster House - the venue for Baroness Thatcher ' s ` ` Europe open for business ' ' speech argue for single-market membership in @card@ . the Prime Minister say that Britain will quit the European single market but seek a ` ` bold and ambitious ' ' freetrade agreement to allow it to continue do business with its @card@ former partner without have to pay ` ` vast ' ' sum into EU budget . she effectively announce that Britain will leave the custom union , allow it to secure freetrade deal across the world with country such as the US and India . however , Mrs May say she still want to ensure ` ` frictionless ' ' crossborder trade , but have an ` ` open mind ' ' on whether that should be do through associate membership or a completely new custom agreement . she promise to control Britain ' S border and create an immigration system that ` ` serve the national interest ' ' and relieve pressure on school and housing supply . and she say that both house of Parliament would get a vote on the final deal with Brussels , thus set up a battle with Remain-supporting MP and peer in the month ahead . Mrs May make clear to EU leader that she will not allow them to attempt to force a Brexit deal that damage Britain ' S economy . in comment that draw comparison with Lady Thatcher ' S @card@ demand for ` ` our money back ' ' as a rebate , Mrs May say : ` ` Britain want to remain a good friend and neighbour to Europe . yet I know there be some voice call for a punitive deal that punish Britain and discourage other country from take the same path . ` ` that would be an act of calamitous self-harm for the country of Europe . and it would not be the act of a friend . ' ' she add : ` ` Britain would not - indeed we could not - accept such an approach . and while I be confident that this scenario need never arise - while I be sure a positive agreement can be reach - I be equally clear that no deal for Britain be good than a bad deal for Britain . ' ' her threat be a marked contrast with the approach take ahead of the referendum by David Cameron , who repeatedly refuse to say he would walk away and support Brexit if EU leader do not offer Britain a good deal . however , in comment design to calm her counterpart across Europe , she also insist she do not support ` ` great unravel of the EU ' ' . Mrs May say she expect ` ` compromise ' ' on both side during the twoyear negotiation . she say she be commit to immigration control , free trade with European market and the freedom to strike deal outside the EU . ` ` we do not seek membership of the continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ single market , ' ' she say . ` ` instead we seek the great possible access to it through a new , comprehensive , bold and ambitious free-trade agreement . ' ' make immigration control her negotiating ` ` red line ' ' , Mrs May say : ` ` Brexit must mean control of the number of people who come to Britain from Europe . and that be what we will deliver . ' ' she announce that MP and peer will be give a vote on the final deal reach with the EU in Article @card@ talk , due to be trigger by the end of March . remain supporter , include Nick Clegg , immediately say they would be prepare to vote down the deal in Parliament . labour source also make clear that they be not rule out voting against the deal . however , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , later tell the commons the vote would not be an opportunity for MP to prevent Brexit , as defeat for the government would not mean Britain stay in the EU but leave without a deal . Lord Bridges of Headley , a Brexit minister , also advise peer to ` ` tread carefully ' ' over the temptation to vote against the final Brexit deal reach between the UK and European Union . Senior conservative praise Mrs May ' S speech . Mr Johnson say it be a ` ` fantastic ' ' address and say that it be a ` ` very , very exciting vision for this country ' ' . Peter Bone , a prominent Eurosceptic campaigner , say that Mrs May ' S speech be the ` ` good by a British prime minister on Europe - ever ' ' . Carolyn Fairbairn , the CBI directorgeneral say business would welcome the clarity offer by Mrs May . Ms Fairbairn warn that rule out membership of the single market have ` ` reduce option for maintain a barrier-free trading relationship ' ' and say company would be ` ` concern about fall back on damage World Trade Organisation rule ' ' if the UK crash out of the EU without a deal . Labour react with confusion to the speech , with shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer claim Mrs May ' S remark have make clear she be not pursue a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' while Jeremy Corbyn , the party leader , claim she want to make a ` ` bargain basement tax haven on the shore of Europe ' ' . Tim Farron , the Liberal Democrat leader , say : ` ` Theresa May have confirm Britain be head for a hard Brexit . she claim people vote to leave the single market . they do n't . she have make the choice to do massive damage to the British economy . ' '
Europe will lose the plot if it seek to punish UK for Brexit , warn Irish prime minister
Europe be in danger of ` ` lose the plot ' ' if it obsess over punish Britain in the forthcoming Brexit negotiation , the Irish prime minister Enda Kenny warn yesterday , predict that the UK-EU talk could become ` ` quite vicious ' ' . Mr Kenny tell an all-Ireland forum on Brexit that the British decision to leave the EU present Ireland with the ` ` most significant economic and social challenge of the last @card@ year ' ' , and that some EU member want to punish Britain for leave . ` ` the other side of this argument may well get quite vicious after a while , because there be those around the European table who take a very poor view of the fact that Britain decide to leave , ' ' he say . but he also warn that Europe need to take a pragmatic , long-term view of the UK divorce talk or risk damage itself . ` ` Europe ' S get to decide for itself in these negotiation where it want to be in the next @card@ year , and if it become obsessed with what the United Kingdom might , or might not , get then Europe itself lose the plot , ' ' he tell the conference in Dublin . Ireland have express deep concern about the economic and political impact of Brexit , warn that a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit would cause a disproportionate economic shock to Ireland and also threaten to unravel the good Friday agreement that end the Troubles in Northern Ireland . Mr Kenny warn that Ireland might not have long to prepare for Brexit since Theresa May , who have set a deadline of the end of March to invoke Article @card@ , could do it earlier , in December , January or February . he add that he have agree with Mrs May that there would be ` ` no return ' ' to the border of the past and a continuation of the Common Travel Area that have enable free travel between the UK and Ireland since @card@ . ` ` Neither I , nor the Prime Minister , desire to limit the freedom of people on both side of the Irish Sea to trade , live , work and travel freely across these island . therefore we have agree that the benefit of the Common Travel Area be preserve , ' ' Mr Kenny say . however politician and industry expert warn that if the UK demand draconian curb on EU free movement , as Mrs May have previously hint , then other EU member state may not be prepare to allow Ireland and the UK to grant each other special status deny to Poland or Hungary . separately , economic adviser to Angela Merkel ' S government call for Germany to intervene to prevent Brexit from go ahead . ` ` an exit of the United Kingdom from the EU would not only mean an economic loss , but above all a big political loss , ' ' the Council of Economic expert write in their annual report , add the good outcome of forthcoming talk would be to avert Brexit . however , Mrs Merkel have already make clear that the referendum result must be respect . ' the other side of this argument may well get quite vicious after a while '
May ' s warning to EU leader : you will sign a deal that ' s right for us ; PM hit back at nation threaten to make Brexit ' very painful ' for the United Kingdom
Theresa May have deliver a sharp rebuke to EU leader threaten Britain ahead of Brexit negotiation , warn them that they ` ` will sign up to a deal with us ' ' . the Prime Minister hit back at her counterpart after they say they will make Brexit ` ` very painful ' ' for Britain to ensure the UK be worse off outside the bloc . a number of eastern European nation have warn they will threaten Britain ' s Brexit deal unless their citizen be give full access to live and work in the UK , something government source say will not happen . Mrs May will today address the UN and defend the Brexit vote , say that the British people do not back leave because they want to ` ` turn inwards or walk away ' ' . she will also warn world leader that the referendum show that voter want ` ` a politics that be more in touch with their concern ' ' . Robert Fico , prime minister of Slovakia , say yesterday that member state intend to make it ` ` very difficult for the UK ' ' and say Britain be ` ` bluff ' ' when it say it can get a good Brexit deal . however , Mrs May dismiss those comment and say the @card@ other EU member will sign up to ` ` the deal that ' s right for the UK ' ' . address the warning make by EU leader and ask whether it be a sign that they will refuse to do a deal with Britain , Mrs May say : ` ` the @card@ will sign up to a deal with us . we will be negotiate with them and we will be ambitious in what we want to see for the United Kingdom . ` ` but I think a good deal for the UK can also be a good deal for the other member state because I believe in good trading relation and I want the UK to be a global leader in free trade . ' ' the Prime Minister add : ` ` I have very constructive meeting with [ Mr Fico ] when I be do my visit earlier in the summer . ` ` we ' re go to be in a negotiation with the @card@ member of the European union about the relationship we will have with them when we leave the EU . ` ` I ' ve say what I want to see be the deal that ' s right for the UK . I think that will also be a deal that ' s good for the member state of the European Union . this be not just about us - it ' S actually about relationship and trading within that European arena . ' ' Mrs May last night meet some of America ' s most powerful business leader amid concern that they could be prepare to move their European base out of the UK in the wake of the Brexit vote . the Prime Minister attend a reception with executive from company include IBM , Morgan Stanley , Goldman Sachs and Amazon . speak ahead of the meeting , she say that she would tell them that she want to hear what their concern be over the Brexit vote . American executive want assurance that the right of their employee base in Britain will be protect once the UK leave the EU . Mrs May say : ` ` what I ' ll be talk about with both American and British business leader be about how we can encourage that trade and investment between the two country . ' ' she also appear to criticise comment by Liam Fox , the international trade secretary , who describe British business as ` ` fat ' ' and ` ` lazy ' ' , say ` ` we all put thing in different way ' ' .
it ' s time to invoke Article @card@ and get on with the Brexit negotiation ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - I agree with Sir James Dyson , who believe that we should quickly sign Article @card@ - and then get on with our Brexit negotiation ( Business , September @card@ ) . most of those who vote to leave the European Union do not want a long period during which we would continue to pay into the EU and have to abide by all its rule . if ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' , can someone explain why people such as Sir James be be ignore - and why the process have to take some year ? Roger Payne London NW3 Sir - Herman Van Rompuy , the former European Council president , have predict that Brexit negotiation may not begin until after the German election next year . I be not aware that our departure be dependent on the election of any one of the remain @card@ constituent section of the supranational state . Stephen J Bedford Kidderminster , Worcestershire Sir - if Britain be truly leave the EU , then it seem only fair that we should no longer be a part of the single market . to ask for such special status after leaving be unreasonable . Britain need a bespoke trading deal , as an independent and sovereign state . Jack William Ruddy Blandford Forum , Dorset Sir - I like the idea of Britain form a ` ` Canzuk ' ' alliance ( Comment , September @card@ ) with Canada , Australia and New Zealand . we have a common language , as well as share cultural value and level of development . this alliance would make much more sense than the one we have with the EU - an idea whose time have pass , and perhaps never really come . what a powerhouse we would be , and how well-place for influence the world : Canada contiguous with the United States and close to South America ; Britain a platform to Europe ; and Australia and New Zealand close to east and south-east Asia . James Wilson London W2 Sir - Jean-Claude Juncker use the phrase ` ` galloping populism ' ' when discuss the EU and Brexit . do he mean ` ` democracy ' ' ? Michael Lavelle Scaynes Hill , West Sussex Sir - Mr Junker be in denial . the ` ` existential crisis ' ' that he describe in the EU predate Britain ' S referendum . blame Brexit be merely an attempt to divert attention from the way that the EU be fail as a state . the twin rock of Greek-led Mediterranean insolvency and uncontrolled immigration will ensure the collapse of the myopic Brussels bureaucracy . I suspect that , if Mr Junker and his colleague continue on their rigid course of ` ` ever-closer union ' ' , the demise of the EU can not be far off . Tim Cunis London SW14
banking giant robust enough to survive a chaotic Brexit ; Carney urge swift action on Brexit after late stress test
Britain ' S major lender be robust enough to survive a chaotic Brexit but the government must act quickly to minimise disruption to trillion of pound of contract , the Bank of England have say . regulator on Threadneedle Street give the UK ' S seven big lender a largely clean bill of health after subject them to their tough ` ` doomsday ' ' round of annual stress test yet . but they ask the lender to set aside a further £6bn in capital against the ` ` bad case scenario ' ' of a global downturn coincide with a disorderly Brexit , with the warning the requirement could go up again early next year . the extreme stress test scenario include a slump in both world and UK GDP , a dive in the value of the pound , and house price fall by a third . all but two lender pass outright , with RBS and Barclays fail to clear the Bank ' s higher so-called ` ` systemic ' ' hurdle . but the Bank say the duo would pass if it re-ran the test today use their improve capital buffer since the end of last year , although Barclays would have the least wriggle room , in part due to its high projected loss in consumer credit because of its large credit card business . for the first time since start the stress test in @card@ the bank do not demand any of the bank improve their capital position . but the dividend policy of the bank again come into sharp focus . the report show that in the stress test scenario the bank , which also include Lloyds , HSBC , Standard Chartered and the UK arm of Santander , stop pay out a dividend within three year . building society Nationwide expect to continue pay around £100m a year through deferred share . Joseph Dickerson , analyst at Jefferies , say that as a result of the stress test he do not expect Barclays to offer large payout to shareholder ` ` in the near term ' ' , whereas Asia-focused lender Standard Chartered - which be give remedial action by the Bank after last year ' s stress test - could be expect to ` ` return to ordinary dividend ' ' next year . Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank , say the stress test show ` ` the banking system can continue to support the real economy even in the unlikely event of a disorderly Brexit ' ' . he add : ` ` it ' S a big call . we ' re put our money where our mouth be . ' ' while he say the test be not specifically design to simulate a hard Brexit , he note they ` ` encompass the risk that could arise ' ' . Mr Carney step up his call for swift action on Brexit , urge politician on both side of the Channel to pass legislation to resolve potential conflict on cross-border contract , include £60bn worth of consumer insurance policy and £26 trillion of derivative . he also repeat his call for a swift transition deal of ` ` at least @card@ month ' ' . comment on the combination of risk face the UK financial system , Mr Carney say that while there be ` ` pocket of risk ' ' such as rise consumer credit , ` ` aside from Brexit ' ' he consider them to be ` ` standard ' ' . Rob Smith , banking partner at KPMG , say six of the seven lender rack up high loan loss in this year ' s stress test than last time round , with ` ` over half ` ` of these loss in consumer credit . there be no further news on risk in consumer credit , beyond the £10bn requirement issue by the Bank for extra capital in the summer . the Boe suggest the bulk of the bank ' capital buffer would still be above any increase threshold , have triple over the last decade to 16.7pc on average . £6bn the additional capital the Bank of England have ask lender to set aside in case of a global downturn and disorderly Brexit
House price forecast to fall after Brexit vote
house price will fall next year as the uncertainty surround Brexit take hold , but far less than the Treasury ' s gloomy warning before the EU referendum . in its first post-Brexit forecast , estate agency Countrywide say that house price will fall 1pc across the country in @card@ , before rise by 2pc in @card@ . it add that house price would rise by just 2.5pc this year as the market cool in the second half of @card@ . in December @card@ , with a leave vote far from certain , Countrywide forecast that house price would rise by 4.5pc in England and Wales during @card@ and @card@ . however , Countrywide say that the cool market be not just down to uncertainty about Brexit . it also highlight the impact of stamp duty increase on the top end of the market . it add that the chronic lack of supply of home would continue to keep price from fall further . separate datum from the Mortgage Advice Bureau show that few homebuyer apply for mortgage in July than in June , as nervous buyer hold off make major investment in the wake of the Brexit referendum . the number of purchase application fall 5.9pc compare with June , represent a sharp turnaround for a market which have be grow strongly . the number of home for sale fall to a record low last month as seller decide against raise ` ` for sale sign ' ' amid fear that house price growth be slow , or even go into reverse in expensive area such as central London . on the commercial side of the property market , company be increasingly look to short-term office contract as a way of ride out the uncertainty in the UK ' S economy , accord to provider . Regus , which be the world ' s large provider of flexible office space , say inquiry have rise 10pc month-onmonth in July , which chief executive Richard Morris attribute to company be more cautious . by take workspace as they need it , company can scale their operation up or down as the economic condition dictate . traditional office space tend to have a minimum lease of five year , make it more difficult to pull out of contract .
slow economy after Brexit could force Bank to raise interest rate , warn Carney
interest rate may have to rise in the face of a slow economy if Britain vote to leave the EU , accord to the Governor of the Bank of England . Mark Carney warn that policymaker would have limit space to stimulate the economy after a Brexit vote because a sharp slowdown in growth could be accompany by a spike in inflation . Mr Carney also say that mortgage cost for homeowner could rise even if the Bank cut rate to boost demand . Sterling climb almost 1pc against the dollar to $ @card@ yesterday after poll and bet market show a clear lead for an EU Remain vote . Mr Carney say policymaker ' response to a Brexit vote would depend on the strength of ` ` countervail force ' ' on the economy . while a Brexit vote ` ` on balance ' ' would ` ` reduce ' ' the Bank ' s current expectation that rate will rise , Mr Carney warn that ` ` in this case ' ' , a drop in the pound after Brexit might do ` ` too much of the work ' ' in stimulate the economy by make UK export more competitive . this , in combination with a potential shock to supply , ` ` might reduce the likelihood or degree of stimulus that would be appropriate , ' ' he say . ` ` it be not as simple as : the economy slow , therefore rate get cut . ' ' it come as George Osborne suffer a double blow yesterday after official figure show public borrowing , at £7.2bn in April be high than expect , while the previous year ' S deficit be also large than first thought . the Office for National Statistics also revise up total borrowing in the @card@ financial year to £76bn - £2bn higher than previously estimate and above the £72.2bn project by the Office for Budget Responsibility in March .
may to use EU-Canada pact as template for trade deal
Theresa May will pledge to use a trade deal already agree by the European Union and Canada as a basis for a new bilateral arrangement after Brexit . the Prime Minister will make the pledge when she fly to Canada and the US on a three-day visit from today . she have use the promise of ` ` global Britain ' ' make its own tariff-free trade deal to sell the benefit of Brexit to voter . say that an existing EU trade deal will form the template for Britain ' s post-Brexit arrangement will sound alarm bell with some leave campaigner , who argue that ` ` copy and paste ' ' trade deal go against one of the major reason for leave the EU . minister have also say they want the EU ' s trade deal with Japan - which be yet to be complete - to form the basis of Britain ' s post-Brexit trade deal with Asia ' s economic powerhouse . in talk with Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau , Mrs May will make it clear that she want the UK to agree a deal with Canada as soon as possible . it would be base on the EU/Canada deal that take seven year to negotiate and formally take effect from Thursday this week . the deal - know as CETA - eliminate @card@ per cent of all Canadian tariff between the EU and Canada . Mrs May will also say that Britain will act ` ` as champion for free trade that deliver for all part of society ' ' .
EU regulator backtrack on drug industry Brexit warning
the European Union ' S drug regulator have admit Brexit guidance issue last week that expert warn could cost the UK pharma sector hundred of million of pound to implement be only a ` ` bad case scenario ' ' . the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) - one of two prized EU regulatory body currently base in the UK that be expect to move to the continent - issue a paper last week detail how firm should prepare for Brexit . in it the regulator advise UK-based pharma company to move hundred of role and function to an EU member state ahead of Brexit in order to maintain their exist right to sell medicine in the common market . the paper also warn that the UK face a sharp hike in regulation and stringent check on medicine export from March @card@ , @card@ . trade body the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry ( ABPI ) , which lobby for the 60,000-strong sector , criticise the EMA for only outline one scenario , ` ` the hard of hard Brexits ' ' . it warn the guidance pose a risk to UK pharma job and public health , and would cost ` ` hundred of million of pound ' ' to take up . the EMA have subsequently clarify that the paper be preparation for a ` ` bad case scenario ' ' where no early deal for the pharma sector be strike . the ABPI warn last week the paper highlight the ` ` critical importance ' ' of politician , regulator and company work to strike an early compromise deal . Dr Virginia Acha , executive director of research , medical and innovation at ABPI , say : ` ` [ before Brexit negotiation have even begin ] it seem premature to advise company to prepare only for an outcome where the UK be isolate from the European system . ' '
bank will need transition deal on Brexit to avoid sudden fall over cliff edge , lobby group warn
LONDON and Brussels have be urge to strike a Brexit transition deal by one of Europe ' s top financial lobby group amid concern that bank will be unprepared for the UK ' S secession . the two-year deadline for Britain to negotiate term for EU departure be too soon for bank , investor and regulator to prepare for the new rule that will come into force after Brexit , the Association for Financial Markets in Europe ( AFME ) warn . just a week after Theresa May trigger Article @card@ , the influential group have call on politician in Britain and the EU to quickly agree on an extra transition period to ensure financial market be not plunge into turmoil . ` ` affect market participant and supervisor will clearly need more time to prepare effectively for Brexit than the two year provide for by the Article @card@ process , ' ' AFME say . ` ` overall it can be argue that bank will require a three-year implementation period follow the completion of the Article 50-exit negotiation . ' ' the 40-page AFME report advise : ` ` it will be vital to give an early indication that a transitional arrangement will be agree upon as part of the exit negotiation . ' ' the fate of the City of London will be central to Brexit talk . international bank such as Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan use London as their base for European operation and have already warn that they will have to shift job to one of the @card@ remain EU member state to protect their operation . HSBC , Europe ' s big bank , have say it could move up to @card@ job to France . Brexit ` ` be likely to be particularly challenging in wholesale banking , give the high concentration of Europe ' s market capacity in the UK and the high share of cross-border business currently conduct from a UK base , ' ' AFME caution . set up new business in the EU , obtain licensing , office and new staff , and install technology would all take long than two year , it say . the City ' s big fear be of a ` ` cliff edge ' ' effect cause by an abrupt end to existing rule and legal arrangement . ` ` the main risk be that after Brexit , a bank which have sign a contract may no longer have the require approval to lawfully perform the service it have commit to , or could no longer access the necessary market infrastructure , ' ' AFME caution . the lobby group argue that a transition deal should include ` ` a bridge period ' ' until the new trade relationship be ratify and ` ` an adaptation period ' ' after that , which would enable phase adjustment to the new trade relationship ' ' . @card@ year the extra time , on top of the two-year deadline under Article @card@ , that bank could need to make the change
Tory MP walk out as report criticise Brexit ' good deal or no deal '
Tory MP have savage a controversial report which criticise Theresa May ' s Brexit plan , describe it as ` ` rush , skewed and partisan ' ' . Conservative member of the Brexit select committee last week walk out after be present with a report which criticise the Prime Minister ' s claim that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' . the report , publish today , warn that Mrs May ' S claim be ` ` unsubstantiated ' ' and urge the government to provide more clarity . the House of Commons ' Exiting the EU Committee call on the government to conduct and publish an assessment of the consequence of leave the EU without agreement on future trade relation . it say that , in these circumstance , Parliament must be give a vote on whether to accept the Prime Minister ' s decision to leave without a deal at the end of the two-year Brexit negotiation process . the finding prompt a furious response from Eurosceptic member of the committee , with five voting against it and two abstain . Dominic Raab , a Tory MP , say : ` ` the report be rush , skewed and partisan . after two report that have strong support , it ' S regrettable that this one split the committee . ` ` that undermine its credibility and influence , but I hope and expect the committee will learn the right lesson , as we move forward . ' ' the MP be particularly angry with Hilary Benn , the Labour MP and chairman of the committee , and have accuse him of fail to consult them properly . John Whittingdale , another Eurosceptic Tory MP , say that the report be ` ` unduly negative ' ' . the committee last month hear David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , admit that no assessment have be make of the cost of leave the EU without a trade deal and fall back on World Trade Organisation tariff . ` ` without an economic assessment of ' no deal ' have be do and without evidence that step be be take to mitigate what would be the damaging effect of such an outcome , the government ' S assertion that ' no deal be good than a bad deal ' , be unsubstantiated , ' ' the report say . it say parliament and the public have a ` ` right to the maximum possible information ' ' about the impact of fail to secure a deal , and the government should conduct ` ` a thorough assessment of the economic , legal and other implication ' ' of all option under consideration . the committee challenge Mrs May ' s insistence that she will offer only a ` ` take it or leave it ' ' vote to Parliament on any deal she achieve , state it be ` ` essential ' ' that MP also get a vote ` ` in the event that there be no deal ' ' . Mr Benn say : ` ` Leaving the EU without a future trade deal and in do so default to World Trade Organisation rule be no less an important decision for the UK ' s economic future than the term of any future Free Trade Agreement between the UK and the EU . ` ` it be therefore essential that such a step be not take without Parliament have a vote on the matter . ' '
Brexit ' big than the Union ' ; two-third of public see leave the EU as more important than Scottish independence , poll find May attack SNP ' muddle on muddle '
BREXIT be more important to voter than keep the United Kingdom together , a poll for the Daily Telegraph have reveal . almost two third of people agree that Britain ' s EU departure matter more than stop the UK ' S break-up , while just @card@ per cent disagree . furthermore , a majority of respondent say they would still vote for Brexit even if they know it could trigger Scotland ' S independence . the result indicate that UK voter agree with Theresa May that no independence referendum should be hold until Brexit be complete . it also suggest there be no ` ` buyer ' S remorse ' ' for pull Britain out of the EU despite a dramatic week in which the UK ' S future have be call into question . Theresa May yesterday pledge to fight ` ` heart and soul ' ' to keep the ` ` precious , precious Union ' ' together after the SNP demand a second referendum.The Prime Minister have reject a demand from Nicola Sturgeon , Scotland ' S First Minister , for a vote before spring @card@ , when Britain be likely to leave the EU . Senior SNP figure yesterday repeatedly refuse to rule out hold an ` ` advisory ' ' independence referendum - one which would not be legally binding but could build pressure on Westminster . however , it be think more likely the party will pursue an intense campaign of march , petition and mass protest to whip up public opinion in favour of another referendum . an ORB poll of @card@ British voter conduct on Wednesday and Thursday give an insight into how the week ' S event have affect their view . ask whether they would still back Brexit ` ` even if I know it could lead to the break-up of the UK ' ' , @card@ per cent of voter agree and @card@ per cent disagree . the rest say they do not know . there be also support for Mrs May ' s stance that a Scottish independence referendum should not be hold before spring @card@ . almost @card@ per cent think that prepare for a referendum would undermine negotiation for Brexit , while just @card@ per cent disagree . most UK voter also do not want Scotland to become independent . when ask if Brexit be more important than the potential break-up of the UK , a majority of voter in every British region except Scotland say yes . Mrs May yesterday dismiss Ms Sturgeon ' S plan for a new independence referendum as ` ` muddle on muddle ' ' as she reject the ` ` divisive , obsessive ' ' nationalism of the SNP . the Prime Minister in her speech to the Conservative Spring Forum in Cardiff defend the ` ` precious , precious Union ' ' and say she want the country to become more , not less , unite . Mrs May tell delegate : ` ` Our Party believe heart and soul in our United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . the precious bond between four nation : England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . but that union be more than just a constitutional artefact . it be a union between all of our citizen , whoever we be and wherever we ' re from . ' ' Ms Sturgeon say her ` ` intention ' ' be to get the legal power from the Prime Minister to stage another vote and she would not outline possible plan B to the Scottish people ` ` at this stage ' ' .
Heseltine sack for rebellion over Brexit ; Conservative peer oust as government adviser after back Article @card@ amendment in Lords
the former Cabinet minister Lord Heseltine be sack as a government adviser last night for rebel over Brexit by back an amendment to the Article @card@ bill in the Lords . the Conservative peer lose his position after the government suffer a second parliamentary defeat in the space of a week , with peer demand MP be give a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal before Britain ' s withdrawal from the EU . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , last night accuse peer of try to ` ` frustrate ' ' the process of trigger Brexit and insist the government would overturn the late amendment . Lord Heseltine say after his dismissal : ` ` this be entirely the right of the Prime Minister and I ' m sorry that the expertise which I have put at the government ' s disposal over the last six year have now come to an end . ` ` however , in the last resort , I believe , as I say in the House of Lords , the future of this country be inextricably interweave with our European friend . it ' s the duty of Parliament to assert its sovereignty in determine the legacy we leave to new generation of young people . ' ' his departure come after Lord Tebbit , who serve alongside Lord Heseltine in Margaret Thatcher ' s Cabinet , tell the Telegraph last week that his former colleague should be ` ` kick out of the party he clearly loathe ' ' for try to ` ` wreck the Brexit Bill ' ' . Theresa May be determine to throw out the amendment when the Bill return to the commons for its final reading next week . she believe her hand would be significantly weaken when she begin Brexit negotiation with the EU if Parliament have the power to stop her leaving without a deal . Mrs May ' s existing position be that no deal be good than a bad deal , mean she will take Britain out of the EU even if MP reject the deal offer . up to @card@ Conservative MP could vote in favour of the amendment , with rebel encourage other to abstain . they include Anna Soubry , the former business minister , who believe a ` ` significant ' ' number of Tory might defy the whip . the government have a ` ` Brexit majority ' ' of around @card@ MP , double its normal work majority , because it can count on the support of a number of MP from other party . the danger for Mrs May be that the Lords vote , in which the amendment be pass by @card@ vote to @card@ , could encourage Conservative MP represent pro-Remain constituency to abstain . thirteen Tory peer vote against the government as a new record be set for the number of peer take part in a vote , at @card@ . Downing Street insist the vote would not derail the timetable for trigger Article @card@ by the end of this month . it come after a vote last week in which the Lords add another amendment that would guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK , regardless of whether British citizen live in the EU be give similar guarantee . Mr Davis say it be ` ` disappointing ' ' that the Lords have make further change to the bill . he say : ` ` it be clear some in the Lords would seek to frustrate that process , and it be the government ' s intention to ensure that do not happen . ' ' Ms Soubry say : ` ` I ' m hope a significant number of colleague who may not be able to vote against their government would consider abstain , and recognise that their lordship have consider the bill carefully . ` ` what do these hard Brexiteers fear ? they want to restore parliamentary sovereignty , but suddenly they seem terrify of Parliament have a say , never mind sovereignty . ' '
Brexit fade to insignificance set against other economic challenge
Investment , investment and investment . if there be one thing Phillip Hammond , the Chancellor , need to focus on like a laser in next month ' S budget , it be this long standing deficiency in the UK economy . in our obsession with Brexit - what form it might take , whether it will be good or bad for the economy , or indeed the anxiety over whether it will happen at all in any meaningful sense - we ' ve tend to shove all other concern to one side . the business of leave the European Union threaten to become so all consuming that it eclipse everything else . citizen can be divide into two extreme . for avid Brexiteers , there be the almost delusional belief that the mere act of exit the EU automatically transform economic prospect for the well ; the fact that the economy have so far defy warning of Brexit invoke doom be take as evidence that thing can be even more glorious once formally free from the dead hand of the Brussels machine . at the other extreme lie those who cling almost religiously to the view that because of the potential damage to trade with Europe , Brexit be almost bind to be harmful to the economy in the long run . for them , today ' s consumption-led growth be just a case of pain delay , buy largely on the ` ` never never ' ' of spending beyond our mean . they be equally impervious to counter argument . despite the futility of these prediction - it will be a long time before we know one way or the other , and in any case , the ultimate outcome depend crucially on how policy respond to Brexit - they have come to dominate economic debate to the exclusion of virtually all else . Brexit spell either disaster or sunlit upland , take your pick ; fundamentally , the debate have n't change since the heat of the campaign . it have fall to the Institute for Fiscal Studies ' s annual ` ` Green Budget ' ' - which attempt to assess the nation ' S tax and spend choice - to provide its now customary , Eeyore-like reality check . Brexit or no Brexit , there remain a daunting array of economic challenge for the government to address . these non-Brexit issue can be divide into three broad category . first , there be the continued , harrow legacy of the financial crisis . despite real term cut in public spending of @card@ per cent since @card@ - the long and big fall in public spending on record - Britain be still run one of the large budget deficit in the world . what ' s more , this shortfall seem substantially impervious to an increase tax burden , expect shortly to rise above 37pc of national income for the first time since @card@ . as a percentage of national income , the national debt be also at its high level since the mid-1960s , and be again one of the high debt burden in the industrialise world . in any case , by the IFS ' S estimation , it will require a further £34bn of fiscal consolidation on top of that already plan to eradicate the deficit by the unspecific target date of some time during the next parliament . what then be the chance of the government achieve this apparently ever recede goal ? give the record so far , pretty much zero . the second challenge revolve around the cost of an age population . since the financial crisis , the government have be relatively effective in keep the lid on health spending , which in real term be rise at its slow rate since comparable record begin in the mid-1950s . because of cut in other public service , however , it be continue to rise quite sharply as a proportion of total spending . unfortunately , this do n't much mitigate the evident sense of crisis in a health service stretch to break point . the unavoidable implication of the now intense demographic pressure on public spending be that the tax burden will rise further , just the opposite of what be require to ensure a competitive , post-Brexit economy . . the third concern revolve around still very depress level of productivity growth and business investment . many of the pressure on the public finance outline above could be relieve or even get rid of altogether by a return to pre-crisis level of productivity growth , but there be no such miracle in the making , or if there be , it be very well hide . minister be not entirely tin-eared . even as it cut back on day-to-day , current spending , the government be increase the share of the cake that go to capital project . I ' d add a hat tip to Sajid Javid ' S proposal , outline in a White Paper yesterday , to revive Britain ' S shamefully poor level of housebuilding . I doubt they be enough , but almost anything that confront this key structural deficiency in the UK economy deserve some applause . yet the big difference be go to be make in business investment , and on this front there be as yet little reason for optimism . to the contrary , Brexit have add a further level of uncertainty . since the referendum , a number of big , high profile investment project have admittedly be announce , both by overseas company and British one . overall investment never the less remain subdue , both relative to precrisis level and overseas competitor . as a country , we be still invest disgracefully little in our long term future , but continue to spend as if there be no tomorrow . this have to change . the difficulty face by the Chancellor as he square up to these myriad economic challenge be that in order to succeed and attract the business investment need to prosper in post-Brexit form , the UK will need to become one of the most business friendly economy on the planet . this necessarily require sharp cut in business taxation and regulation . at the same time , however , the Chancellor may need to increase most form of personal taxation to meet the challenge of an age population . politically , this be go to be an extraordinarily difficult trick to pull off . Theresa May have thankfully retreat somewhat from the antibusiness , anti-globalisation rhetoric of her early month as Prime Minister . but for a government intend on do something for the ` ` just about managing ' ' , axe business taxation at the same time as massage it up for the humble citizen be not go to look good , not good at all . ' the tax burden be about to rise further , just the opposite of what be need to ensure a competitive post-Brexit economy '
Corbyn ' s Brexit silence anger Labour MP
furious Labour MP have threaten to rebel against Jeremy Corbyn amid claim he be refuse to speak up in favour of a soft Brexit because he stand to gain politically from Theresa May ' S failure . the Labour leader reportedly block his spokesman from talk to the medium after the Prime Minister fail to win agreement in Brussels to move on to trade talk . now MP be demand Mr Corbyn come out in support of stay in the custom union and have warn they will rebel against the party ' s position in a Commons vote on the matter early next year if he refuse . the party be split on the issue , with the shadow Brexit secretary keep custom union membership on the table , the shadow trade secretary warn it would be a ` ` disaster ' ' and the shadow chancellor ruling out single market membership after transition while the deputy leader have suggest Labour should back it . so far , Mr Corbyn have refuse to commit to try to remain in the custom union after the transitional period be over , with a spokesman only suggest option should n't be sweep off the table . one senior remain-backer tell the Daily Telegraph that Mr Corbyn and John McDonnell , his shadow chancellor , ` ` do n't care ' ' about Brexit . they say : ` ` McDonnell and Corbyn be not natural pro-Europeans , they do n't care . they ' re only interested in the politics of Brexit and they see everything through the prism of how do we get into no @card@ . ' ' Labour source believe Mr Corbyn and Mr McDonnell want a hard Brexit because it help feed their anti-capitalist narrative .
high-end car maker seek assurance over Brexit term
Britain ' S global leadership with advanced technology use in highperformance car could be threaten unless it achieve a favourable Brexit deal , the industry have warn . the UK head the world in low-volume , high-value car manufacturing , and a study by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders ( SMMT ) yesterday reveal that the sector - which include sport car such as Aston Martins , McLarens and TVRs , specialist vehicle such as electric taxi and luxurious bespoke vehicle such as Rolls-Royces - produce @card@ vehicle last year . this be up 25pc on four year ago , and generate a turnover of £3.6bn in @card@ . accord to the SMMT , on current trend , output may surge 60pc by @card@ , hit an annual rate of @card@ . however , the SMMT warn that , outside of the EU , British manufacturer develop new technology might be hamper if they can not influence European regulation . however , industry chief present the report yesterday describe the industry ' s ` ` buccaneering ' ' spirit in the face of Brexit . Andy Palmer , chief executive of Aston Martin , say : ` ` there ' s some good news in Brexit for our part of the industry . the weak pound mean there ' S pricing advantage , tariff work both way and that could shut out competitor such as Ferrari . ' ' he add that he expect a deal between Britain and the EU because of the UK ' s reputation as the ` ` Treasure Island ' ' of Europe for the car industry , largely because of its appetite for car . his thought be echo by executive from McLaren , Lotus and TVR . ` ` we work in the luxury good market , so if price rise in the event of tariff , well it ' S not desirable but it be by no mean the end of the world , ' ' say TVR chairman Les Edgar .
Scotland Scottish financial service look to move job to EU
Scotland ' s financial service company be draw up contingency plan to deal with the bad possible outcome of Brexit that could involve total restructuring of their operation , the industry body have warn MSPs . Scottish Financial Enterprise ( SFE ) say the two-year negotiate period to hammer out Brexit be ` ` unlikely ' ' to be long enough for the UK to agree its future trading relationship with the EU or to provide the ` ` lead time ' ' necessary for firm to reorganise . the trade body , which represent bank include the Royal Bank of Scotland and HSBC as well as company such as Aberdeen Asset Management , Standard Life Investment and JP Morgan , say its member ` ` want to continue to service their existing EU customer and client follow Brexit , with as little disruption as possible ' ' . although the SFE do not outline specific proposal , its intervention raise the prospect of separate EU base for firm , with job be move from Scotland to Europe . pa Earlier this month it emerge that RBS be in talk with the Dutch central bank to use the Netherlands as its EU trading base after Brexit . it plan to increase the number of staff at its Amsterdam unit from a ` ` handful ' ' to @card@ . Scotland be home to the second large financial service centre after London , with the industry north of the border employ @card@ directly as well as support another @card@ job . it be worth £8.6 billion to the Scottish economy . BARLOW/ Jane the industry ' s main concern be Brexit end the ` ` passporting ' ' arrangement which allow them to provide service throughout the EU as long as they be operate from a UK base . SFE ' S submission say that company ` ` want to keep as much of their activity in the UK as possible ' ' but they also want to continue service their EU-based client . regulator at the Prudential Regulation Authority ( PRA ) contact firm in April this year ask for detail of their contingency plan for Brexit ` ` cover a range of potential scenario , include the most adverse potential outcome ' ' . the submission say : ` ` accordingly , financial service company be put in place contingency plan and structure solution on the assumption that various scenario could apply . ' ' the SFE call for a transitional deal with the EU to ensure ` ` continuity for business and customer ' ' at the point of Brexit , provide a ` ` bridge period ' ' until a new trade deal could be agree . a further ` ` adaptation period ' ' would be need to allow firm to work out the implication . the SFE also warn that convert @card@ European regulation and @card@ statutory instrument into British law would be the ` ` big legislative challenge the UK have ever face , both in its scale and complexity ' ' . it add : ` ` this challenge be compound by the very tight timescale in which to deliver it . ' ' Derek Mackay , the SNP ' S Finance Minister , say : ` ` this submission further highlight the danger pose by the UK Government ' S extreme Brexit plan , which threaten job , investment and living standard . ' '
labour in chaos after Starmer say UK could stay in custom union after Brexit
labour ' S Brexit plan descend into chaos yesterday after Sir Keir Starmer suggest the UK should remain in the custom union and try to negotiate a new form of single market membership outside of the European Union . the shadow exit the EU secretary say Britain will leave the EU as another referendum be ` ` not viable ' ' , but the option of retain UK membership of the custom union ` ` should be leave on the table ' ' . both Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , and John McDonnell , his shadow chancellor , have insist the party be formally commit to take Britain out of the single market and the custom union . Britain will only be able to sign trade deal with other country outside the EU if it also leave the custom union . Sir Keir ' S comment highlight the split at the heart of Labour over Brexit between Mr Corbyn , who be consider more Eurosceptic , and his predominantly pro-European shadow cabinet . the division over the issue be such that the policy be not set out fully in Labour ' s election manifesto , which instead refer generally to ` ` retain the benefit of the single market ' ' . during an interview on BBC @card@ ' S Andrew Marr Show , Sir Keir say Theresa May have ` ` alienate our ally in Europe ' ' with her Brexit approach . he also say Britain could not stay in the single market in ` ` an unreformed , unchanged way ' ' . he say : ` ` you can only be a full member of the single market if you be an EU member and therefore it be obvious that we be look for something else . ` ` the question be do we leave option on the table , and I ' ve say repeatedly - yes , let ' s leave option on the table . ' ' Sir Keir acknowledge freedom of movement for people would end after Brexit but say membership of the custom union should ` ` stay on the table ' ' . pa ask whether Britain could stay inside the custom union , he say : ` ` Yes . ' ' he add : ` ` I think the Prime Minister have get us into a complete mess . she ' S get no mandate here and she ' S get no authority abroad and the negotiation start tomorrow . ` ` thing have to change . her approach so far have alienate our ally in Europe , it ' S weaken our position with the EU and it ' S actually get us into the bad possible start position . ' ' Later , press over the party ' s stance on Britain leave the EU , John Mc-Donnell , the shadow chancellor , tell Sky News yesterday : ` ` once you leave the EU , formally you be outside the single market . but what we be try to get be tariff-free access to the single market . ` ` I do n't care how we get it in term of the structure as long as we get access to the single market tariff free and that mean also we be not constrain by the existing rule of the single market and that ' S obviously freedom of movement . ` ` the structure become immaterial to achieve the objective . ' ' he have previously say the issue of single market will not be ` ` on the table ' ' in Brexit negotiation , add that try to retain membership would mean fail to respect the result of the EU referendum . Labour have struggle to nail down its position on whether Britain can stay within the single market , which could form a key part of the Brexit negotiation due to start today . last week Barry Gardiner , the shadow trade secretary , also appear to suggest the UK should try to negotiate a new form of single market membership .
Scotland Younger generation ' will reverse Brexit ' ; Senior figure blame Tory ' catfight ' for decision to leave and predict UK will one day return to bloc
Britain ' s decision to leave the European Union be the result of a ` ` catfight in the Conservative party that get out of hand ' ' , a senior Brexit negotiator have claim , as he predict the next generation of Briton would take the UK back into the bloc . ` ` there will be a young man or woman who will try again , who will lead Britain again into the European family ... and a young generation that will see Brexit for what it really be , ' ' Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' s Brexit negotiator , say . he go on to claim that Brexit be cause by a ` ` catfight in the Conservative party that get out of hand - a loss of time , a waste of energy and a stupidity ' ' . his intervention come as the EU Parliament , sit in Strasbourg , vote overwhelmingly in favour of the suggested ` ` red line ' ' for the Brexit talk , as set out by senior figure in Brussels . the resolution demand that EU and UK citizen receive ` ` reciprocal treatment ' ' , that the final deal should not be a ` ` trade-off ` ` between trade and security , and that the UK pay cost link to its withdrawal , the so-called divorce bill . it also say that the European Banking Authority and European Medicines Agency should be move out of their London office and transfer to an EU member state . the resolution be pass by @card@ vote to @card@ , with @card@ abstention , put it well beyond the two-third majority need . MEPs will get a final say on the term of any deal broker between the UK and Brussels , as will the @card@ individual member parliament . in the debate prior to the resolution ' s adoption by the parliament , Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader and the MEP for South East England , accuse EU leader of behave like ` ` the Mafia ' ' and hold Britain ` ` hostage ' ' with their divorce bill . ` ` you have be vindictive and nasty . you ' re behave like the Mafia , like we ' re a hostage , ' ' Mr Farage say , add : ` ` we ' re not - we ' re free to go . ' ' ` ` it ' s exactly what I expect - they [ the EU ] see that £52billion divorce bill as simply settle the balance ... but they ' re hold us to ransom . ' ' Jean Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , have suggest Britain pay the bloc around £50billion in liability from Brexit . but Mr Farage complain that ` ` we will have put in £30billion net by the time we leave , and now you want another @card@ ... it just do n't work . ' ' when Mr Farage be later reprimand by Antonio Tajani , the EU parliament ' s current president and an Italian , for his Mafia jibe he amend his comparison to ` ` gangster ' ' . he later admit in an interview outside the parliament that he be ` ` not optimistic ' ' about the Brexit talk . other senior MEPs show few sign of back down on their demand , with one parliamentary group leader warn that ` ` cherry-pick will not happen ' ' in the negotiation . ` ` a state outside the European Union will not have good condition than a state inside the European Union , ' ' say Manfred Weber , the German leader of the centre-Right European people ' s Party group in the parliament . Mr Verhofstadt refuse to name a figure when ask about divorce talk at a post-debate press conference , insist that ` ` we do n't start with the figure , we start with the principle ' ' . ` ` and if we can agree with the British government on the principle ... then you apply the principle and you have a figure , ' ' the Belgian MEP add . ` ` we want to have a clear signal that the European Union be unite , ' ' say Mr Weber . ` ` London must understand that no splitting up of the EU position be possible . ' ' ' You ' ve be vindictive and nasty , behave like the Mafia , like we ' re a hostage . we ' re not - we ' re free to go '
Sterling set to surge as fear over Brexit begin to fade ; Bank of America predict rally in pound as market focus on underlie strength of UK economy ; Bank of America warn EU vulnerable after ' hard Brexit '
bank of America have advise client to prepare for a major rebound in sterling as market become inure to each breathless twist in the Brexit saga and focus instead on the underlie resilience of the UK economy . the bank ' s currency team say there may be one last leg down for the pound after Article @card@ be trigger in March , probably hit a three-decade low of $ @card@ against the dollar before charge back up in V-shaped recovery later this year . ` ` the pound look cheap . we think the start of the countdown to Brexit may prove to be the low and the opportunity to enter sterling long ( position ) , ' ' say strategist Athanasios Vamvakidis and Kamal Sharma . ` ` we have no doubt that many political hurdle lie ahead for the pound in the year ahead , but we doubt that the market will be in a perpetual state of panic over every Brexit-related headline . ' ' Sterling be likely to climb back up towards its post-Brexit ` ` equilibrium level ' ' of $ @card@ to the dollar , and could possibly reach $ @card@ , provide common sense prevail and Britain secure a transition deal with the EU to avert a cliff-edge shock for bilateral trade . Bank of America say the market have essentially price in a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' already . the pound would normally be ` ` much strong ' ' base on the difference in interest rate and two-year bond yield that tend to drive currency market . the real effective exchange rate ( REER ) be almost 20pc below its longrun average and now match the his-toric low see at the depth of the global financial crisis . robust job growth and a firm housing market may ultimately force the Bank of England to tighten monetary policy . manufacturing be hold up . Sterling be highly-geared to the global trade cycle and Bank of America argue that this be at last recover . view in the City be starkly divide on the future of sterling , just as they be on the large issue of Britain ' s economic destiny as a global trading nation . but the view from America and Asia be broadly more positive than the handwringing jeremiad of European catch in a cycle of pessimism . Stephen Jen from Eurizon SLJ Capital , a Taiwanese adviser to sovereign wealth fund in Asia and the Middle East , say Britain be ahead of the curve in understand shift in the global economy . the current narrative over Brexit will be overtake by event as Europe ' s own woe become clear and withdrawal from the dysfunctional bloc will ultimately be see as a shrewd move . ` ` Britain have a fantastic culture and economy ... I think sterling will end up be the Swiss franc on steroid , ' ' he say . ` ` what be extraordinary be that continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Britain and America have see the good growth rate since the global financial crisis , yet they be the one go through a political revolution . what they have understand be globalisation be a tussle between the owner of labour , the owner of capital , and the owner of technology , and they be face up to this first , ' ' he say . Deutsche Bank and UBS be at the other extreme , forecast sterling at or near parity with the euro this year as negotiation turn tetchy and company start to move operation abroad . interestingly , Bank of America have a warning for the EU side if it push for an extremely hard bargain . as a matter of pure politics , it would be easy for the UK Government to walk away from a punitive deal and blame the debacle on European intransigence . Britain would suffer the hardest hit in strict trading term . but nation state be institutionally resilient . the eurozone would suffer less on paper , but the bloc ' s fragile monetary structure and half-formed polity leave it acutely vulnerable to any stress . the asymmetry of pain be very hard to estimate .
May : my 12-point plan for Brexit ; Quitting single market and take control of border will make us strong , say PM May ' s promise to take Britain out of single market will be welcome by Eurosceptics
Theresa May will today set out a 12-point plan for Brexit as she promise there will be no ` ` partial ' ' membership of the EU ` ` that leave us half-in , halfout ' ' . Mrs May will make her most significant speech since become Prime Minister in July and confirm that Britain will leave the single market and custom union after Brexit . in remark that will delight Conservative Eurosceptics , she will pledge that Britain outside the European Union will be a ` ` great , global trading nation ' ' that be ` ` respect around the world and strong , confident and unite at home ' ' . Mrs May will make regain control of Britain ' S border one of the central theme of her Brexit strategy and will also say that the right of UK expats will be protect . she will make clear for the first time that Britain will not seek a watereddown version of Brexit , something Remain campaigner be still push for . the Prime Minister will say Britain be quit the single market and , although she will be less explicit on the issue of the custom union , her remark will make clear that after Brexit the UK will no longer be a member . her remark will be see as a direct rebuke to European leader who have repeatedly claim that Britain will have to compromise on freedom of movement if it want membership of the single market or custom union . Donald Trump , the US presidentelect , say this week that Britain and America will get a new trade deal ` ` do quickly and do properly ' ' . Mr Trump also dismiss Nato as ` ` obsolete ' ' and say he believe the EU will break up in the wake of the Brexit vote . in comment that risk anger the incoming US president , Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , yesterday respond by say that ` ` we European have our fate in our own hand ' ' . the Prime Minister , in her speech at Lancaster House in London today , will say : ` ` we seek a new and equal partnership - between an independent , selfgoverning , global Britain and our friend and ally in the EU . ` ` not partial membership of the European Union , associate membership of the European Union , or anything that leave us half-in , half-out . we do not seek to adopt a model already enjoy by other country . we do not seek to hold on to bit of membership as we leave . ` ` the United Kingdom be leave the European Union . my job be to get the right deal for Britain as we do . ' ' Mrs May ' S speech will directly counter claim that she have no plan for Brexit . the four principle guide the negotiation with Brussels will be ` ` certainty and clarity ' ' , ` ` a strong Britain ' ' , ` ` a fair Britain ' ' and ` ` a truly global Britain ' ' , she will say . the Prime Minister will say that the government have ` ` @card@ objective that amount to one big goal : a new , positive and constructive partnership between Britain and the European Union ' ' . as well as leave the single market and custom union , Mrs May ' S @card@ objective be understand to include gain control of Britain ' S border , take the UK out of the jurisdiction of the European court , preserve the Union , maintain worker ' right and sign major free trade deal . ` ` and as we negotiate that partnership , we will be drive by some simple principle : we will provide as much certainty and clarity as we can at every stage , ' ' Mrs May will add . ` ` and we will take this opportunity to make Britain strong , to make Britain fair , and to build a more global Britain too . ' ' she will concede that the ` ` road ahead will be uncertain at time ' ' , but say the British people ` ` vote to shape a bright future for our country . they vote to leave the European union and embrace the world . ` ` and they do so with their eye open : accept that the road ahead will be uncertain at time , but believe that it lead towards a bright future for their child - and their grandchild too . ` ` and it be the job of this government to deliver it . that mean more than negotiate our new relationship with the EU . it mean take the opportunity of this great moment of national change to step back and ask ourselves what kind of country we want to be . ' ' she have pledge to trigger Article @card@ , which begin formal Brexit negotiation , by the end of March . Tory Eurosceptics and senior leave campaigner will welcome Mrs May ' s commitment that Britain will quit the single market . with regard to the custom union , Mrs May will suggest that there could be scope for negotiate access for some sector - such as the automotive industry - after Brexit . however , it will be clear from her word that Britain be leave the custom union . although she will not set out her plan for Britain ' s post-Brexit immigration system , it be understand that she favour a work permit system , mean EU migrant will only be able to come to the UK to live or work if they have a firm job offer . Mrs May will add : ` ` I want us to be a truly global Britain - the good friend and neighbour to our European partner , but a country that reach beyond the border of Europe too . a country that get out into the world to build relationship with old friend and new ally alike . ' ' yesterday , the IMF say that the UK economy grow fast among all advanced economy in @card@ despite the Brexit vote and admit that its forecast before the referendum have be too pessimistic . it estimate that Britain ' S economy grow by @card@ per cent last year and predict that it will now grow by @card@ per cent - a major upgrade from its last forecast of @card@ per cent make in October . ' [ I want us to be ] a country that get out into the world to build relationship with old friend and new ally '
Metro Bank on brink of maiden profit as it dismiss Brexit fear
metro Bank have shrug off the Brexit vote to win more customer and boost lending , take it to the cusp of report its first profit . Craig Donaldson , chief executive of the challenger bank , say it have so far feel no impact from the vote to leave the European Union . in the three month to the end of September , deposit jump 66pc to £7.3bn compare with a year earlier and lending climb 73pc to £5.2bn . that help Metro , which open its 44th branch this week , narrow its statutory quarterly net loss to £416,000 , from £10.7m in @card@ , and help it swing to its first underlie pre-tax profit of £567,000 , which strip out certain expense , include the cost of its stock market float in March . Mr Donaldson say Metro be on course to post a statutory profit during the final quarter of @card@ and a maiden annual profit next year , with both retail and business customer seemingly unfaze by Brexit . the bank enjoy a record @card@ increase in customer account to @card@ in the previous quarter . ` ` in the early part of next year we ' ll go through a million , which I think be a huge validation of what we ' re do , ' ' he say . ` ` Genuinely we ' ve see no Brexit impact , if anything we ' re win more customer and we ' re grow strong . business customer be genuinely just get on with build their business . ` ` the only place where we ' re see any impact be in house purchase over £3m in central London and I do n't think that ' s get anything to do with Brexit , I think that ' S much more to do with the stamp duty change that come in in April . ' ' quarterly revenue surge 78pc to £53.4m , while Metro ' s net interest margin , the gap between interest pay on deposit and the loan interest it receive , edge up to 1.95pc from 1.93pc at the end of June . the lender be found by American billionaire Vernon Hill six year ago to challenge the established high street bank such as Barclays and Lloyds . a review of the banking sector by the Competition and Markets Authority , which the challenger bank hope would shake up the sector by make it easy for them to take market share , be brand a damp squib by many new entrant , include Metro , this year . ` ` it be a bit of a whitewash , I think that it ' ll have add no value to the competitive landscape , ' ' Mr Donaldson say , add that he would continue to lobby the Treasury and the Prudential Regulation Authority ease capital rule to make it easy for challenger to compete . Metro share rise 1.4pc to £27.63 , value the lender at £2.2bn .
Scotland Corbyn reject Sturgeon ' s Brexit strategy ; Corbyn out of touch , say SNP leader
Nicola Sturgeon yesterday lash out at Jeremy Corbyn after he reject her plea to support stay in the single market , damage her claim that there be a commons majority for the plan . speak ahead of the publication today of a Scottish government report on the economic impact of Brexit , the First Minister claim there be a ` ` real opportunity ' ' to stay in the single market if Labour MP support the move . but moment later , the Labour leader at Westminster reject her demand , say he do not understand why she be focus on the single market when Brexit mean leave it . he make clear his disapproval of EU state aid restriction , note that the UK have a ` ` very different ' ' economy from small , non-EU country such as Norway , which access the single market via membership of the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) . his rejection prompt Ms Sturgeon to accuse him of mislead people and be ` ` out of touch ' ' with the view of his own Labour supporter . his intervention have also undermine her report , as any single market blueprint would require Labour ' S support . Ms Sturgeon have hope this would relaunch her Brexit strategy after her ill-fated attempt last year at a second independence referendum . a study last week claim her call for single market membership have make ` ` little headway ' ' , with Scot oppose to freedom of movement and to adopt a different immigration system from the rest of the UK . it also show wane support for independence , but Ms Sturgeon tell the Andrew Marr Show on the BBC that she still intend to decide whether to call for a second independence referendum by the end of the year . she have previously say she would announce plan after the final shape of the Brexit deal be know this autumn but hope the economic reality of Brexit would change people ' S mind . refer to today ' S report , she say : ` ` I believe there ' s a majority in the House of Commons for remain in the single market if Labour get its act together . ' ' in a direct challenge to Mr Corbyn , she say : ` ` Jeremy have to decide where he stand on all of this . I think most of his supporter will be deeply disappoint that he appear to be only slightly less in favour of a hard - and possibly the hardest possible - Brexit than the Tories be . ' ' but shortly afterwards , Mr Corbyn tell ITV ' s Peston on Sunday that he want a tariff-free trade deal with access to the single market . he add : ` ` I do n't understand why she would keep saying ' join the single market ' when leave the EU mean you leave the single market . ' ' that prompt Ms Sturgeon to lash out on Twitter , accuse Mr Corbyn of mislead people : ` ` why do Corbyn insist on be so out of touch ? ' ' Today ' s Scottish government report examine three post-Brexit trade option : stay in the single market and custom union , a freetrade agreement , or revert to World Trade Organisation rule . argue it be ` ` shameful ' ' the UK Government have not conduct similar analysis , Ms Sturgeon say all three would be damage but stay in the single market would be least harmful . if she press on with an independence referendum , she hint it could be hold in the transition period that conclude in @card@ . John Lamont , a Scottish Tory MP , say : ` ` Nicola Sturgeon have no interest in secure a successful Brexit deal . all she care about be a second referendum . ' ' Willie Rennie , Scottish Lib Dem leader , say : ` ` the last thing we need be the turmoil of independence . ' '
Brexit plan get airborne - then nosedive ; analysis either Mrs May be keep the UK in line with Europe , or she ' S sell NI down the river
after @card@ month of phoney war - of talk , position and negotiate behind the scene - the rickety craft of Theresa May ' s Brexit strategy briefly take flight yesterday , and then promptly nosedive back to earth . within hour of Ireland ' s state broadcaster report that the Prime Minister have agree that the UK would ensure ` ` continued regulatory alignment ' ' between Northern Ireland and the EU , political gravity take over . if the game of leak the compromise be to railroad Mrs May into sign off the deal at her lunch with Jean-Claude Juncker , it backfire spectacularly , expose this most carefully word of text to more scrutiny than it could bear . wrap up in the language be a subtle compromise that official have work on for the good part of a month , and try to be all thing to all party . the UK have not be force to agree to Ireland ' s initial demand for ` ` no regulatory divergence ' ' ; instead it be elect to use newfound freedom after Brexit to maintain convergence . to Dublin the compromise give clear reassurance that Northern Ireland would not diverge , obviate the need for a return to a hard border , while simultaneously give Arlene Foster ' s Democratic unionist a promise that the ` ` alignment ' ' would only be in the sector that be relevant to the good Friday Agreement . it be at this moment that Brexit ' s immutable logic take over , and inexorably over the course of the next few hour begin to unravel the deal . Mrs Foster be emphatic that Northern Ireland must not be treat differently from any other part of the United Kingdom . the North , she say , could not become a regulatory exclave of the Republic , or the EU itself . but how then to square her demand for equality , with the idea that Northern Ireland be apparently be grant a soft Brexit that seem to make it part of the EU ' s single market and custom union in all but name ? either Northern Ireland be be treat differently , which would imply an east-west border to monitor mainland Britain ' s divergent trade policy after Brexit , or , contrary to everything we have be tell by Mrs May , the UK be not diverge at all ? it could not be both . in try to placate the DUP , Downing Street signal that Mrs May be sign up to ` ` regulatory alignment ' ' for the whole of the UK but only in those area that impact the Irish border question , principally agriculture and electricity . but there lie the rub . if that be the case - and there be some @card@ area that have reportedly be identify as crucial for north-south cooperation in Ireland - how free , really , would the UK be to diverge with Liam Fox ' s muchvaunted independent trade policy ? EU official be privately very clear that the ` ` fudge ' ' on Ireland leave little room for manoeuvre . the level of regulatory convergence require to avoid a hard border - and the east-west border that imply - be inescapable . so either Mrs May be sign up the UK to vast swathe of convergence with the EU , something Boris Johnson and free-trading Brexiteers have explicitly rule out , or she be sell her DUP partner down the river with false promise . clearly Mrs May hope the reality of these conflicting position could survive unnoticed at least until the EU have grant ` ` sufficient progress ' ' at the European council in @card@ day ' time , and she could claim a pre-Christmas victory at the end of a disastrous year . in the event , her gambit do not survive the afternoon . such be the political horizon of a prime minister whose cabinet have not even hold a substantive discussion on the shape of the UK ' s future relationship with the EU . on today ' S show it be not difficult to see why .
Brexit progress only possible if Irish border issue be solve ; Brexit ; EU hand 10-day deadline to Prime Minister before it agree to begin talk with the UK over a trade deal
Theresa May have @card@ day to resolve the issue of the Irish border if she want to make a Brexit breakthrough at a key summit next month , Donald Tusk warn yesterday . the Prime Minister meet Donald Tusk , the President of the European Council , in Brussels as she signal she be prepare to give ground on the Brexit divorce bill if the EU commit to trade talk . Mr Tusk say that a breakthrough at the European Council summit on Dec @card@ be possible but will still be a ` ` huge challenge ' ' . he add that progress must be make ` ` on all issue , include on Ireland ' ' . British official believe that the EU be likely to concede that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make on citizen ' right and the Brexit divorce bill , make the Irish border the big outstanding issue . Ireland yesterday threaten to block talk on the future relationship between the EU and the UK unless it be give ` ` credible answer and a credible road map ' ' to ensure there be no hard border . Simon Coveney , Ireland ' s foreign minister , yesterday receive assurance from Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , and Mr Tusk after meet them in Brussels . Mr Coveney say : ` ` the truth be that if we see regulatory divergence between the two jurisdiction on the island of Ireland it be very hard to see in that scenario how you avoid hard border check . ` ` I hope and expect that we can get that by December so that we can all move on . if we ca n't , then I think there be go to be a difficulty come up . ' ' however , the Prime Minister have repeatedly make clear that the UK , include Northern Ireland , will leave the Single Market and the Customs Union after Brexit . she say yesterday : ` ` we [ the UK and the Republic ] have the same desire . we want to ensure the free movement of people and trade across the border can carry on as now . ' ' Tory Eurosceptics have warn the Prime Minister that she must not give any more ground . Jacob Rees-Mogg , a Eurosceptic MP , say : ` ` the EU can not expect the UK to continue to give into its absurd demand . the integrity of the United Kingdom be not up for negotiation . ' ' the issue be further complicate by the prospect of a snap election in Ireland which could derail Mrs May ' S hope of a breakthrough at the December summit . Leo Varadkar , Ireland ' s prime minister , have back his beleaguered deputy in a scandal that could topple his minority government at a crucial point in UK-EU discussion . Frances Fitzgerald , the Fine Gael Tanaiste , be resist grow opposition party call to quit over a controversy involve a bid to discredit a Garda whistleblower . Fianna Fail , which have a confidence and supply deal with Fine Gael , have say it will table a no-confidence vote against her next week - a move which could force a snap election . Mr Coveney say : ` ` Ireland do not need an election right now . we do not believe the country need that in the context of some of the enormous decision that will be take on Ireland ' s fu-ture in the context of our relationship with Britain at a summit in three week ' time . ' ' it come as Boyko Borissov , the prime minister of Bulgaria , break rank with the remain @card@ member state and predict that Britain be head for a hard Brexit . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , accuse the European union of behave like a ` ` gang ' ' during negotiation by try to punish Britain for Brexit . during their hour-long meeting , Mr Tusk set Mrs may an ` ` absolute deadline ' ' of Dec @card@ for resolve the Ireland issue , when the Prime Minister travel to Brussel for dinner with Jean Claude-Juncker , the President of the European Commission . editorial comment : page @card@ ' the EU can not expect the UK to give into its demand . the integrity of the UK be not up for negotiation '
Scotland Boris yield on Brexit divorce
Boris Johnson and Michael Gove have agree for the first time that Britain should increase its Brexit divorce bill offer above £20billion if the EU be prepare to make concession in return . the Cabinet ' S lead Brexiteers drop their long-standing opposition to a promise of more money to the EU , pave the way for David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , to break the deadlock that have so far prevent trade talk from start . however , they and other minister make it clear that no specific monetary offer should be make at this stage , with any extra cash to Brussel be dependent on Britain get a good deal . the government face an immediate backlash from Leave-supporting Conservative MP , who insist the £20billion already offer be enough . one MP warn voter would go ` ` bananas ' ' if the offer be eventually increase to £40billion , as have be rumour , while Philip Hammond be tell that any tax increase in tomorrow ' S budget would be interpret as taxpayer ' pocket be pick to pay for the Brexit bill . it come as Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say the EU will reject any future free trade agreement with Britain if it involve the UK undercut European regulation . the chance of agree a trade deal before Britain leave the EU in March @card@ be also deal a blow when Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , suggest she might have to call another general election after fail to form a minority government . such a move could lead to month of uncertainty for EU ' s most powerful nation . the Prime Minister spend two hour chair a meeting of the 10-strong Brexit Cabinet sub-committee yesterday , at which no figure for the final Brexit divorce bill be discuss . but Whitehall source say the minister , who include Mr Johnson , Mr Gove and Liam Fox , the Brexit-supporting International Trade Secretary , reach a consensus over the need to tell the EU that more money will be make available as long as a good trade deal be on offer . one source say : ` ` any offer would be determinant on the overall progress of the negotiation , so it ' S not a case of ' take that money and bank it ' , because move forward have to be do together . ' ' a Downing Street spokesman say : ` ` it remain our position that nothing ' S agree until everything ' S agree in negotiation with the EU . as the Prime Minister say this morning , the UK and the EU should step forward together . ' ' Mr Davis will pass on the news to Mr Barnier in the expectation that Brussels will agree to begin trade talk when EU leader meet for a key summit in December . however , Robert Halfon , a Conservative MP and former minister , warn : ` ` if we start say that we ' re go to give £40billion to £50billion to the EU , I think the public will go banana . ` ` I can not believe the public would accept such a huge amount when we need money for school , hospital , our housing and many other thing . ' ' Jacob Rees-Mogg , a Tory member of the Treasury Select Committee , warn Mr Hammond that if he make any tax increase in the Budget taxpayer will think they be be use ` ` to fund a blackmail EU settlement ' ' , which ` ` would not be in the national interest ' ' . government source last night play down report that the Cabinet committee have agree to allow the European Court of Justice to oversee the right of EU migrant live in the EU permanently after Brexit . meanwhile , Mr Barnier make it clear that any attempt to lure investment away from the EU would scupper a trade deal . he say that if Britain promise to adhere to EU standard Brussels would offer ` ` its most ambitious free trade agreement ' ' . Owen Paterson : page @card@ ' if we start say we ' re go to give £40 billion to £50 billion to the EU , the public will go banana '
Britain have a shortage of worker , but that may be a good problem to have ; Industry moan that Brexit be rob it of staff . it have grow lazy on the back of high level of immigration
Afew week ago there be a fuss about a sourdough pizza chain that be present itself as a casualty of Brexit . David Page , who control Franco Manca , say his staff feel so ` ` bruise ' ' by the vote to leave that they might not return from their summer holiday . ` ` there will be a big competition for a lesser pool of staff , ' ' he warn . and bad : ` ` we may have to increase our bonus package . ' ' Mr Page ' S plight be report as grim proof that the Brexit effect have set in , and be demonstrably bad for business . but to a great many who vote for Brexit , this be precisely what they have hope for . there be a general sense that the EU , and the era of mass migration , be work out a little good for venture capitalist who own pizzeria than it be for those who serve pizza . if Brexit even thing up a bit , and force boss to pay worker more , would this be so bad ? yes , profit might be squeeze . yes , Franco Manca might end up charge more than £6.40 for a margherita . but , on balance , would this be such a disaster for the economy ? Mr Page be far from alone . similar cry of anguish can be hear everywhere , for those with an ear to hear them . the Food and Drink Federation say yesterday that its member will be ` ` unable to feed the nation ' ' without these EU worker who be plan to go home . lush , a soapmaker base in Poole , be offer to resettle its worker in a factory in Germany . it credit its success to the arrival of EU migrant in Dorset a decade or so ago and do n't want to think of a future without them . even the car-makers say they be face a crisis : they need @card@ more skilled staff than they can find ( or import ) . in the Midlands , construction firm complain about a lack of bricklayer , carpenter and plumber . the Royal College of Nursing talk of a @card@ per cent drop in the number of European nurse register since the referendum . there be hardly an industry that be n't raise the same cry : we ' re run out of people - and Brexit be to blame . but this great exodus of EU worker be , as with so much Brexit hysteria , a myth . yes , a lot of migrant do go home but this be always the case . young people move to a country , work hard for a few month or year , save their money and then return . it ' S a basic pattern of migration . most of the Briton who go to find work in America in the 19th century sail back after a while because they do n't want to up stick forever . in fact the late figure show the number of EU national in Britain ( my wife among them ) be at an all-time high and rise all the time . it will continue to rise for the foreseeable future . so the problem be n't Brexit , but something more serious . Britain , as a country , be begin to run out of worker . you can blame David Cameron and Iain Duncan Smith : their welfare-to-work reform be too much of a success . unemployment now stand at the low level in my lifetime , and be fall still . as one minister tell me : ` ` there only be a few hundred people on the dole in my constituency , and I ' ve meet them all . ' ' Britain be approach what economist call full employment : joblessness sinking as low as can be reasonably expect . so if company be panick , this be why . for about a decade , British employer have never have to worry about this because they see migration as the answer to almost any problem . a FTSE @card@ chief executive once confess to me that when he need worker for a new warehouse , he advertise with an agency in Poland and fly them over . other sector have be use similar method : EU national may make up @card@ per cent of worker in food manufacturing , for example , but it be a negligible @card@ per cent before Poland join the EU in @card@ . so the workforce be transform quickly : you can see the same in the change face of warehouse worker , lorry driver , chef and housekeeper . the bottom line be that for a decade and more , a great many industry have expand use immigration . and the result ? it be a stunning success : the influx of industrious , taxpaying , intelligent immigrant that enrich the economy , country and society . but there be side effect : pressure on public service and house , for example . and there be another conundrum : if you can import as many trained worker as you need then why bother to develop your own staff or train new recruit ? ten year ago , a seminal House of Lords report warn that company would grow lazy on immigration , and might not spend as much time or money train their own staff . the update to that report , recently publish , say thing develop just as they fear . nursing be the bad example : the NHS find that they could pay non-European nurse £6,000 less , on average , and fund far few training place than be need . in construction , too , there have n't be anywhere near enough apprenticeship . across too much of the economy , employer have not be invest in people as they should have . and now they ' re panick . company have grow a little too quick to complain about a skill shortage , and be rather slow to do anything about it themselves . now the British workforce have expand to the high number in history and even @card@ immigrant a month be not enough . so it ' s time to think differently . perhaps invest a bit more in machinery , move worker to higherskilled job , increase productivity , spend more on training and increase pay . this be how a healthy economy be suppose to function . a shortage of worker should mean average salary on the rise - something that have n't really happen in Britain for a decade or more . now and again , it ' S argue that we need high-skilled immigration but not low-skilled . now , it ' S become clear that we need both - but neither will ever be enough because there ' s no substitute for a country invest in its own workforce . so this panic be , in a way , a useful panic . employer realise now , more than ever , that people be the great resource of all . all tell , it be not a bad problem to have . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
the anti-Brexit force be gather ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : it have probably not even cross Tony Blair ' s mind that the disenchantment many people feel with mainstream politics owe much to his time in office . he signal in an interview with the New Statesman yesterday that he want to re-enter the political fray after almost @card@ year in exile , possess enough self-awareness to appreciate that he can no longer expect to play a front-line leadership role . rather , he want to become ` ` an agent of influence in British politics ' ' , on issue from Brexit to revive what he describe as the ` ` progressive centre or centre Left ' ' . Mr Blair say he respect the vote in the referendum on June @card@ to leave the EU while at the same time observe that ` ` Brexit can be stop ' ' . however much Mr Blair have be discredit since he leave office by the fallout from the invasion of Iraq and the way he have enrich himself , he remain a formidable political operator and people who believe Brexit could yet be thwart may well look to him for salvation . if so , a storm be brew , something that Nigel Farage , the interim Ukip leader , now anticipate . in a speech on Wednesday he say that unlike in America , where a popular vote lead to a new administration be elect , here in Britain ` ` the same player have just be shuffle around the chess board ' ' . Mr Farage predict ` ` another big seismic shock in British politics ' ' if Brexit be not deliver . we appear now to be move from a position in which politician accept the referendum result and be argue only over the means , to one where the prospect of forestall the outcome be seriously be countenance . part of the problem be the absence of any sense of direction from the government , something apparent in this week ' S Autumn Statement . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , highlight prediction from the Office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) of continued growth in contrast to pre-referendum prediction of calamity . but anti-Brexiters have seize on indication that these be not as positive as have be anticipate before the referendum . this lose output , they say , be the real cost of Brexit even though they be just forecast of something that may or may not happen . part of the problem be that the government have fail so far to make a positive economic case for leave the EU , leave a vacuum that Mr Blair and other will fill use forecast that be almost certainly wrong to boost their case for a rethink of Brexit . as the former prime minister put it , they be the insurgent now . it be their turn to mobilise social medium network and crank up a grassroots campaign against the democratic decision take on June @card@ , thereby perpetuate the uncertainty they blame Brexit for cause . they need to be confront by politician of substance who argue for a Britain outside the EU and can make a consistently optimistic case for leave . one obvious proselytiser be Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary ; yet instead of deploy him in this cause he be constantly belittle , and be even the butt of joke by the Chancellor in his Autumn Statement and the Prime Minister in a recent afterdinner speech . as Paul Goodman note on the opposite page , these doubtless light-hearted aside hardly send out a message of support for Mr Johnson - who be on the winning side in the referendum , unlike Mrs May and Mr Hammond . the anti-Brexit force be gather and the forecast in the Autumn Statement will be their ammunition - even though the economic Armageddon that the very same people predict before the vote have not materialise . Mr Blair want to encourage this counter-revolution on behalf of a political class that think it know all the answer and believe the voter can not understand the consequence of what they do . he fail to see that the backlash against the establish order in Britain , Europe and in America have occur precisely because leader like him ignore what voter want and be indifferent to the promise they break . perhaps he be right to say the force of globalisation can not be reverse and those who think otherwise will be seriously disappoint . but when Mr Blair say in his interview that there have be a ` ` huge misunderstanding ' ' of what he try to do as prime minister , he just might consider that voter understand only too well .
may to reject EU deal that would impose its rule on UK until @card@ ; Politics
Theresa May will reject the EU ' S propose deal on the Brexit transition period and go into battle next week over freedom of movement and socalled ` ` rule taking ' ' . Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say Britain must accept ` ` all decision ' ' of the EU during transition if it want a deal , but would not have a say over any new law . Brussels ' official negotiate stance , publish yesterday , also state that freedom of movement must continue until the end of the transition period , which the EU want to be Dec @card@ @card@ . Eurosceptics insist that would turn Britain into a ` ` vassal state ' ' of the EU during transition . the government ' S negotiator will be tell to reject both idea when talk begin on Feb @card@ . it come as Mrs May face a Commons rebellion from up to @card@ Eurosceptic Tory MP over plan to pass a law allow Britain to join a custom union after Brexit . Jacob Rees-Mogg , leader of the European Research Group of Brexit-supporting Tory MP , will tell Julian Smith , the Chief Whip , that the group will table amendment to the Taxation ( Cross-border Trade ) Bill if the custom union clause be not remove . on a day when the battle over the rule of transition begin in earnest , Mr Barnier set out an uncompromising EU position which be swiftly follow by a flurry of warning against any UK attempt to water down the term of a deal . he say : ` ` [ The UK ] will continue to have all the economic benefit , therefore it must apply all the rule . ' ' the government want the transition period - which will begin when Britain formally leave the EU in March next year - to last for ` ` around two year ' ' but the EU favour a 21-month period , end at the end of @card@ . ` ` during this limited period of time the whole EU acquis [ body of law ] will continue to apply to the UK , ' ' add Mr Barnier , in a move that infuriate lead Tory Eurosceptics . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , tell a Commons select committee yesterday there would be an ` ` argument ' ' when negotiation begin over whether the UK must be a complete ` ` rule-taker ' ' during the transition period . he say : ` ` we take the view that it be not particularly good democratic practice to have your country accept without any say-so anything , and particularly if the EU take it upon itself to do something which be actively disadvantageous to a major British industry , or something like that . ' ' even though Mr Davis concede that the UK ' s post-Brexit relationship with the EU would be ` ` very , very similar ' ' , Mrs May be under rise pressure to win some concession from Europe . Whitehall source say she would not accept full freedom of movement during transition , insist that the EU accept a registration scheme for arrive EU citizen , who would then have no guarantee of be able to stay . Mr Rees-Mogg will tell Mr Smith today the government must remove a clause from the propose bill on crossborder trade that would allow minister to sign up to ` ` a custom union ' ' without a parliamentary vote . Brexiteers fear that membership of any form of custom union post-Brexit would prevent Britain sign trade deal with other country . Mr Rees-Mogg say : ` ` this be more like a plank than a bridge . we be step off without know where we be go . ' ' Mrs May will today lead a trade delegation to China to show how serious the government be about do post-Brexit trade deal around the world . she will be accompany by @card@ business leader , the big trade delegation she have ever take abroad , and meet Xi Jinping , the Chinese president . editorial comment : page @card@ EU ' s offer on transition Britain to be offer a ' status quo transition without institutional representation ' transition period to end on Dec @card@ @card@ , short than the government ' s preferred option of ` ` around two year ' ' ` ` Freedom of movement for EU citizen to continue throughout transition - a rejection of UK ' s registration scheme for new migrantsAll new EU rule and regulation during transition must be adopt with no chance to block them Britain will be able to air its view in EU meeting where its interest be at stake , such as fishing quota , but access will be on a ' limited , exceptional and case by case basis ' Britain can discuss trade deal with other country during transition
Jacob Rees-Mogg be right to fear that Brexit ' S promise may go unfulfilled ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - your interview with Jacob Rees-Mogg be timely ( ` ` ' the Chancellor be try to thwart Brexit ; his priority be perverse ' ' ' , January @card@ ) . this year , we will be approach a watershed in British politics . do we re-mould ourselves into a fully independent nation with the concomitant flexibility to trade freely , or do we become , as Mr Rees-Mogg put it , a ` ` vassal state ' ' with all the obligation but without the executive authority ? the main reason I vote to leave the EU be to take back control of trade . a ` ` Brino ' ' ( Brexit in name only ) outcome will fall far short of that . Stephen Agar Chalfont St Peter , Buckinghamshire sir - Jacob Rees-Mogg be absolutely right that the British people do not vote for management of decline . but Brexit be an act of epic self-harm , and decline be what we shall get , manage incompetently by this government . Peter Knott Kidderminster , Worcestershire sir - thank goodness for Jacob Rees-Mogg . he and other in the Conservative Party who believe in a successful Brexit - such as Boris Johnson , Michael Gove and David Davis - must replace the ` ` Brinos ' ' such as Theresa May , Amber Rudd and Philip Hammond immediately if we be to have any chance of prevent the vindictive neuter of the country by Brussels . Alison Levinson Hastings , East Sussex sir - Mrs May be the weak prime minister that I have experience . she have now only two choice available to her . either she resign as Prime Minister , or she change the balance of her Cabinet and make it a Brexit -friendly one . first to go should be the Chancellor , Phillip Hammond , follow by the Home Secretary , Amber Rudd . for as long as the Cabinet contain more Remainers than those who seek a departure from the EU , Mrs May will never achieve harmony or stop the continued backbite demonstrate by Mr Hammond during his speech in Davos last week . if the Prime Minister continue to do nothing , we will see the EU run ring around us and Jeremy Corbyn slip in through the back door . G R Walder Headley , Hampshire sir - Theresa May be a manager , not a leader . she entirely lack the ability to enthuse or inspire . she be a caretaker prime minister - one whom we can not afford to have any longer . the wolf of Marxist socialism be howl and we urgently need a conviction politician to lead us forward . Mrs May have be dutiful and resilient , both admirable quality , but she be not the right candidate for the top job . this have be clearly prove over a period of time , and the Conservative Party must grasp the nettle by install a credible and determined leader . Jean Chesworth Newcastle upon Tyne
Brexit brief : bank put contingency plan in place ; with little guidance forthcoming from the government , financial firm be factor in a ' no deal ' scenario , report Lucy Burton
as Britain enter a key week in the Brexit negotiation , the country ' s financial sector be lose interest in the Cabinet quarrel that have dominate talk this summer . step back from the chaos and push on with its assumption that the talk will end in a worst-case scenario - no trade deal , or a so-called hard Brexit - the City be become tired of the political to-ing and fro-ing that could see it sting once Britain leave the bloc . ` ` I ' m not quite sure what Philip Hammond and Liam Fox be saying [ on Sunday ] - they appear to be give something without define what that something be , ' ' say a senior executive at a large US bank , refer to the joint Sunday Telegraph article on Brexit , which be widely view as an attempt by the Chancellor and Secretary of State for Trade to put on a unite front . ` ` it do n't matter if they make all sort of nice noise say it ' S not this , it ' S not that , in the absence of any clarity , everyone have to assume the bad , ' ' the executive continue . ` ` go into the election they at least appear to have a position , one we do n't like but at least know where we be head . now it ' s multiple position , which be more unnerving . ' ' in his weekend piece , the Chancellor assure reader that Britain would definitely leave the single market and custom union when it exit the EU . but his word be likely to rattle some of the fund executive who speak to Hammond about their Brexit concern in Downing Street last month . Peter Harrison , the Schroders chief executive , for example , tell the Daily Telegraph shortly after the discussion that Hammond know ` ` the issue very well indeed ' ' . for the big bank , the twist and turn be particularly unhelpful , as they need to act now so that they be ready for whatever the post-Brexit world will look like . Consultancy firm Oliver Wyman believe Britain could lose @card@ sale , trading and investment banking job as a result of Brexit - half of the UK wholesale sector - with its financial service principal Patrick Hunt reiterate that bank can not take a wait-and-see approach , unlike some in the financial sector . ` ` bank have to be put [ contingency plan ] into implementation now , other have more flexibility , ' ' he say . ` ` Asset manager have a lot of challenge , but do n't have the substantial capital migration , number of people in risk and control function , [ and their ] it system do n't require such a long lead time as the wholesale bank . ' ' Brexit preparation be already transform the UK ' s financial service industry . headhunter who have spend their entire career place people in the City be now try to fill spot overseas , while London-based investment banker be talk to their family about move abroad . London ' s lucrative euro-clearing market be under threat as Brussels demand more control . even the sea have come into the debate as tension run high . ` ` Fishermen be not the only one concern about UK water post Brexit , as the sea play an equally important role to the financial sector , ' ' say Fraser Bell , the chief revenue officer of market infrastructure provider BSO . ` ` more than 40pc of euro transaction run through a vast network of undersea cable from around the country , ' ' he continue . ` ` if the EU harbour any hope of take back control of euro trading , a huge network of cable would need to be build on the continent . to reroute these link would prove to be a monumental task - particularly if no transitional agreement be strike . ` ` a rip-and-replace approach would not only be hugely expensive , it would also mean a massive disruption to euro trading , which be the last thing the market need right now . ' ' as Theresa May ' S government try to hash out a deal , more and more corner of the financial service industry be start to worry about their position come March @card@ . the big concern be that the thousand of UK-registered firm that currently rely on passport to service client in the EU , and vice versa , lose that right with no time to adjust . the Bank of England last week back call for some form of implementation period . trade body be also push for a transitional deal , although one banking executive say it feel like their advice be go into a black hole . ` ` all this evidence go in and goodness know what they ' re do with it , ' ' he say . ` ` the most pressing and urgent priority for the industry right now be get a binding agreement between the UK and the EU27 [ the other member of the European union ] on a time-limited transitional period , ' ' say Miles Celic , chief executive of industry body TheCityUK . ` ` without any clear or concrete agreement in place , or on the horizon , firm be reluctantly start to activate contingency plan to ensure they can continue to provide continuity of service to client . ' ' indeed , while the big bank have start their contingency plan , insurer and asset manager have also be force to push on with their planning [ see graph ] . Nicolas Mackel , chief executive of Luxembourg for Finance , say two or three insurance company be about to announce new EU hub in the country , while a number of bank with office in Luxembourg be currently look to expand their wealth management or corporate finance team there as a result of Brexit . the small , UK-focused outfit , which might not have be hash out plan to open EU hub a few month ago , be also mull over option , with many concern that uncertainty will hit investor activity . ` ` the key thing with us for Brexit be n't so much lack of access to market , it ' s investment sentiment , ' ' say Paul Feeney , Old Mutual Wealth ' s chief executive , who will also be steer the wealth manager through an initial public offering in the year ahead . ` ` [ The ] operational impact be fairly modest for us , [ but ] we ' re not complacent - we ' re look at all sort of potential scenario . if it ' S a hard Brexit , would we set up a few more function in one of the EU market ? if we need to , we would . we could put a few more people in Dublin or Luxembourg . ' ' the bank and financial service which have so far confirm expansion out of the UK post-Brexit Dublin Ireland Amsterdam Berlin Brussels Germany Frankfurt Paris Luxembourg France Brussels Lloyd ' S of London QBE Dublin Barclays Bank of America Merrill Lynch JP Morgan Standard Life Aberdeen Frankfurt Citigroup Morgan Stanley Nomura Standard Chartered Sumitomo Mitsui Daiwa Luxembourg Northern Trust 3i RSA AIG FM Global Hiscox M & G Paris HSBC Amsterdam RBS Berlin
Brexit talk will start just @card@ day after the election , warn PM ; Election @card@ Theresa May will reveal negotiation ' start date today , tell voter ' weak ' Corbyn will not be ready
Britain have ` ` no time to waste ' ' in Brexit talk , Theresa May will warn today as she say formal negotiation about leave the European Union will start just @card@ day after the election . the Prime Minister will tell supporter in Wales , which vote overwhelmingly to leave the European union at the referendum , not to risk let Jeremy Corbyn lead these talk . on her first visit to Wales of the official election campaign , Mrs May will stress that she will not take support from Welsh voter ` ` for grant ' ' as she seek to win a Tory landslide on June @card@ . Mrs May will say : ` ` there be just @card@ day to go until this crucial general election . just @card@ day after that , the European Union want the Brexit negotiation to begin . ` ` the UK ' s seat at the negotiate table will be fill by me or Jeremy Corbyn . the deal we seek will be negotiate by me or Jeremy Corbyn . ` ` there will be no time to waste and no time for a new government to find its way . so the stake in this election be high . ' ' she will claim the UK will have a ` ` weak hand ' ' should Mr Corbyn secure power with the help of the Liberal Democrat , Plaid Cymru and Scottish National Party MP as these party ` ` do n't want Brexit to succeed ' ' . the Prime Minister and Conservative leader be expect to say she be ` ` @card@ per cent commit to the cause ' ' while suggest Mr Corbyn be ` ` uncertain or unsure ' ' when it come to deliver on Brexit . Mrs May be expect to say the UK ' s future prosperity depend on ` ` get the next five year right ' ' , add : ` ` that be why we need someone represent Britain who be @card@ per cent commit to the cause . ` ` not someone who be uncertain or unsure , but someone utterly determine to deliver the democratic will of the British people . ` ` because if we do n't get this right , the consequence for the United Kingdom and for the economic security of ordinary working people will be dire . if we do , the opportunity ahead be great . ' ' Mrs May be travel to Wales today to launch the party ' s Welsh manifesto . poll have raise the possibility of significant gain at next month ' s general election . insider believe the party could win nine more seat , give the party @card@ out of the @card@ seat in the principality , and make the conservative the large party . the insider say : ` ` there have be this assumption that Labour ' S support be always there . it be certainly not the case . ' ' Mrs May will use the trip to make a bold plea for support from Welsh voter who feel Labour have take them for grant . she will say : ` ` I ' m back those that want a more secure and full life . I ' m back those whose only wish be that their child will do good than themselves . ` ` and to those that look to their government and their politician for a little help and support , I ' m back you too . ` ` because too often in the past , ordinary working people have find the help and support they need just be n't there . ` ` and I know that sense of disenchantment be particularly acute here in Wales . ` ` we see that when people here in Wrexham and across Wales choose to ignore the hysterical warning of Labour , Plaid Cymru and Liberal Democrat politician in Cardiff Bay , and vote to leave the EU . ` ` we see it now in the way those same politician refuse to respect that vote as they try to find new way to put obstacle in our way . ` ` and the cause of that emerge gulf be clear . it be because the Labour Party have take people in Wales for grant for decade - just as it have in other community across Britain . ' ' in the Conservative national manifesto , which be publish last week , Mrs May pledge to invest in ` ` improve infrastructure ' ' to help Welsh company . she also promise a new North Wales Growth Deal ` ` connect north Wales with northern England ' ' and which would ` ` encourage further crossborder working ' ' . the Tories also say they would ` ` protect the interest of Welsh farmer ' ' and ` ` ensure the strength of the Welsh brand be maintain ' ' . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , also raise concern about the possibility of Mr Corbyn try to negotiate Britain ' s exit from the EU with other EU leader . he tell ITV ' s Peston on Sunday : ` ` they ' re go to look at him , and they ' re go to have him for breakfast . and I think it would be deeply damaging to the interest of this country . ' '
what if ... ? the fate of Brexit in a coalition no @card@ ; Analysis
suppose - just suppose - that Theresa May fail to win a majority in the election on June @card@ , would that mean Brexit be off ? if ` ` off ` ` mean really , definitely off , then the answer be simple : no . Brexit be start by a referendum . only another referendum could stop it . maybe if a party win a majority have say , in term , that it would stop the Brexit process if elect , it could claim a mandate for do so . but no party be go to put that pitch to the electorate : even the liberal Democrats say only that they want a second referendum . in any case , a party could claim a mandate to overturn the referendum result only if it win a majority not just of seat in the Commons , but of vote in the country - something that no party have manage since before the Second World War . without an electoral mandate to halt Brexit , even if some kind of Labour/SNP/Lib Dem government deal be to emerge after the election , the process would continue , and the government would continue to negotiate the term of the UK ' s departure from the EU . we can deduce from past announcement that such a government would pursue a very different kind of Brexit from Theresa May ' S version : it would , for example , probably seek continue membership of the single market . the talk would , nevertheless , go on . but what would happen once the talk have conclude ? if it do n't get a deal that it like , could such a government decide not to pursue Brexit after all ? that depend on three thing : the law ; European politics ; and domestic politics . in term of law , the question be whether it be possible , now that Article @card@ have be trigger , to revoke that trigger . on this , there be no absolute certainty . article @card@ provide no process for reversal . but many lead lawyer think there be an implied right for country to change their mind . at the very least , everyone agree that the trigger of Article @card@ could by some mean be revoke if all the other @card@ member state agree to it . many also think it could be revoke unilaterally - but only the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg can decide on this . that matter because it determine the importance of the second factor - EU politics . if the UK can unilaterally revoke the trigger of Article @card@ , then the process be simple : the UK ' s permanent representative in Brussels just deliver a letter to Donald Tusk , nullify the letter he hand to him at the end of March . if , on the other hand , agreement of the other member state be need , then some of them be likely to seek concession before consent . that could make thing messy and end up give the UK bad term of EU membership than it have have to date . then come UK domestic politics.As I have say , last year ' S referendum can be reverse only by another referendum : it would be politically untenable for any government to do www.otherwise.No government be likely to call another referendum unless it feel pretty confident of win it - unless , that be , it see clear evidence that significant part of the electorate be get cold foot on Brexit . that might happen : the negotiation might go badly , and voter might be persuade that the decision to leave the EU be an error . but there be no sign of any such change of heart yet . the negotiation might go well than many expect , or voter might pin the blame for problem on the EU and become firm in their desire to leave . so the outcome of the election be more likely to determine the form of Brexit than it be to influence whether it happen at all . a reversal be possible , but an improbable victory for Mrs May ' S opponent be only the first of many step need to get there . Alan Renwick be Deputy Director of the Constitution Unit at UCL ' on Article @card@ , many lawyer think there be an implied right for country to change their mind '
fury as Spain use Brexit for Gibraltar ' land grab '
Spain have be accuse of use Brexit to make a ` ` land grab ' ' for Gibraltar under official guideline for negotiation draw up by the EU . the European Council document yesterday suggest that Spain will be give an effective veto on whether the Brexit deal apply to Gibraltar . the draft guideline draw up by EU leader state that the Brexit deal will not apply to Gibraltar without an ` ` agreement between the kingdom of Spain and the UK ' ' . the clause have take British official by surprise . one tell the Daily Telegraph it be ` ` absolutely unacceptable ' ' and give Spain too much power over the future of Gibraltar . ` ` one really wonder why the EU have think it sensible to put in something that ' S a bilateral issue between Spain and the UK , ' ' the official say . earlier this week , Theresa May say that Britain would never put the people of Gibraltar under the sovereignty of another state ` ` against their wish ' ' . Spain have already hint that it will block any agreement on airline landing right after Brexit , with one diplomat tell the Financial Times that a deal ` ` can not apply to the airport of Gibraltar ' ' . Andrew Rosindell , vice-chairman of the all-party parliamentary group for Gibraltar , say : ` ` an agreement without include Gibraltar mean there can be no agreement . British people must and will stand together , we can not be bully by Spain . ' ' the rock , a British Overseas Territory since @card@ with @card@ resident , remain a major source of diplomatic tension . Gibraltar ' s chief minister have warn the territory should not be use by Spain as a bargaining chip .
Scotland SNP rebuke over bid to pin jobless rise on Brexit
an SNP minister be rebuke by economist yesterday after he try to blame a rise in Scottish unemployment on the Brexit vote . the late jobless figure show a rise in unemployment in Scotland , buck the UK trend . Jamie Hepburn , Scotland ' s employability minister , say : ` ` despite the strong performance of the youth labour market , the Brexit vote cause significant economic uncertainty , threaten our economic recovery and the stability of our job market . ' ' he immediately find himself under fire from the independent Fraser of Allander Institute , which say the poor economic condition lead to rise unemployment be in place well before June ' s Brexit vote . Prof Graeme Roy , speak on behalf of the institute at the University of Strathclyde , say the late figure show that the Scottish economy be lag behind the rest of the UK . he say yesterday : ` ` while some may try to infer something about the economic consequence of the Brexit vote from today ' S news , we would urge caution . ` ` while these be the first datum we have about the overall performance of the Scottish economy since the vote on June @card@ , Scotland ' s economic challenge and underperformance predate that vote . ' ' Murdo Fraser , for the Conservatives , say : ` ` Coming on the back of other troubling news on the economy , it make it clear that Scotland be now suffer from an SNP slump , with the cost pay in low job and growth . any normal government would make it its first priority to turn this around . ' ' he add : ` ` instead , the SNP be squander this strong platform and be today seek to blame Brexit . it be a pathetic excuse from a government which appear to have give up focus on the day job . ' ' accord to the statistic , Scotland ' s jobless total rise by @card@ to @card@ in the three month to November . the Scottish unemployment rate be @card@ per cent , above the @card@ per cent figure for the UK as a whole . other figure out yesterday show that the economy in Scotland be only grow at a third of the rate of that of the UK as a whole . the late GDP datum show that Scotland ' s economic output increase by @card@ per cent in the period July to September @card@ , compare to a rise of @card@ per cent for the UK as a whole . there be a similar difference in the annual figure , with growth in Scotland for the @card@ month up to September amount to @card@ per cent , while the UK see a rise of @card@ per cent over the same period . Liz Cameron , chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce , say the continue travail of the North Sea oil and gas industry be at least partly to blame for the ` ` bad news that Scotland continue to under-perform the UK in term of unemployment ' ' . she add : ` ` we be hopeful this decline have begin to bottom out and that an eventual recovery may be on the horizon , but if Scotland ' S business be to invest and grow , then government need to ensure that we have the most competitive business environment in the UK . ' ' @card@ the late unemployment figure for Scotland , take the rate to 5.1pc , above the UK ' s average rate of 4.8pc
Scotland Tory chief ' S aide reveal detail of Brexit ' strategy '
a BREXIT memo which suggest that Britain want to ` ` have its cake and eat it ' ' last night spark speculation over whether the government have reveal detail of its negotiate strategy for the first time . the note , which be carry by an aide to Mark Field , the Conservative Party vice-chairman , after a meeting at the office of David Davis , the Brexit secretary , say it be ` ` unlikely ' ' that Britain will be give the chance to remain in the single market after it leave the European Union . the note suggest that the government be ` ` loath ' ' to introduce ` ` transitional ' ' control after Britain leave the EU which would give the City access to the single market for a limited period . Downing Street insist that the memo be ` ` not a government document ' ' and say it ` ` do not represent the UK ' s position in relation to Brexit negotiation ' ' . however source refuse to say who have attend the meeting . Julia Dockerill , Mr Field ' s chief of staff , be photograph carry the note as she leave the meeting in @card@ Downing Street . it state that the ` ` implementation ' ' of Article @card@ , which will formally trigger Brexit negotiation , be likely to be ` ` difficult ' ' . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , ` ` want to see what deal look like first ' ' but the memo suggest Britain ` ` wo n't provide more detail ' ' . it say that a deal on manufacturing be ` ` relatively straightforward ' ' but an agreement on service , which include the financial sector , be likely to be ` ` hard ' ' . it say that Britain be likely to pursue a ` ` Canada-plus ' ' trade deal with the EU , add that being part of the European Economic Area would be ` ` not good ' ' . the memo state : ` ` Difficult on Article @card@ implementation - Barnier want to see what deal look like first . ` ` get to be do in parallel - @card@ odd negotiation . keep the two year . wo n't provide more detail . we think it ' s unlikely we ' ll be offer single market . manufacturing relatively straightfoward . transitional - loath to do it . Whitehall will hold on to it . we need to bring an end to negotiation . ' ' Whitehall source say the memo be a note of comment make at a meeting between Conservative Party official and representative from the Dutch ruling VVD party .
Scotland Scotland may join legal battle over Article @card@
the Scottish Government will decide within day whether to join the legal action against the UK Government ' s bid to overturn the court judgement that throw Theresa May ' s Brexit plan into disarray . Michael Russell , Scotland ' s Brexit minister , say minister be consider the benefit of intervene and welcome the fact that Gina Miller , the investment manager lead the legal challenge , have say it would be helpful . the Welsh Government have already announce it want the Supreme Court to hear its argument against the UK Government ' s wish to trigger Article @card@ without parliamentary approval . Mr Russell say : ` ` the First Minister make it clear on Thursday that it be under consideration . we have a barrister with a watch brief at the English case , therefore the result of the English case be n't much of a surprise to us . ` ` now we have to consider the benefit of make sure the Scottish government be involve in this case . ' ' he also claim there be a ` ` possibility ' ' the court could be ask to rule that legislative consent from Holyrood be necessary for Brexit , despite legal expert dismiss the idea . Mr Russell say the Prime Minister be ` ` foolish ' ' to try to ` ` bulldoze ahead ' ' after she say she plan to keep to her original timetable of start formal talk by the end of March . the UK Government announce an appeal to the Supreme Court after three judge say Mrs May could not start the process without peer and MP voting , in direct contradiction to her position . Scotland ' s Brexit minister also tell the BBC ' s Sunday Politics Scotland programme , that despite the Scottish government seek ` ` deep involvement ' ' in the Brexit process , he could not imagine any circumstance in which SNP MP would vote in favour of trigger Article @card@ . he claim the party have a mandate to take step to protect Scotland ' s place in Europe , which would justify block the UK Government ' S plan . Mr Russell add that call from other party for the UK to remain in the single market after Brexit - a key Scottish government demand - ` ` bode well ' ' for the SNP working with other . when ask if there be any circumstance in which the SNP ' S @card@ MP would vote to start the exit process , he say : ` ` I ca n't imagine what those would be . ' ' the constitutional expert Jim Gallagher , a visit professor at Glasgow University , say that if the Scottish Government be go to attach itself to the Supreme Court case it should ` ` probably have do so early ' ' . he add that it be ` ` pretty unlikely ' ' the Supreme Court would say that the devolve parliament have any veto of Brexit . meanwhile , Nicola Sturgeon will claim in a speech in Sheffield today that the UK Government ' s austerity agenda be one of the underlie reason for the vote to leave the EU . speak at the Sheffield Political Economy Research Institute , the First Minister will say that the vote for Brexit be also a vote against austerity . she be expect to say : ` ` Austerity have already cause huge social harm and bring no economic benefit , it have fail , categorically and comprehensively , on its own term . ` ` we know that people on low income be more likely to vote to leave the European Union , as be area with low employment www.rates.UK economic policy have just not give enough people enough ground for hope . ' '
Scotland Brexit may be a boon say farmer and fisherman
Scotland ' S farmer and fisherman yesterday say Brexit provide opportunity for their industry to expand as the SNP defend the status quo in the EU . NFU Scotland yesterday stage its first meeting with Andrea Leadsom , the Environment , Food and Rural Affairs Secretary , to discuss the UK ' s replacement of the controversial Common Agricultural Policy . Allan Bowie , the organisation ' S president , say he be confident she could capitalise on the opportunity from Brexit by secure the right trading deal with the EU . the Scottish Fishermen ' S Federation ( SFF ) say last night that Brexit could reinvigorate coastal and island community and turn Scotland into a world-class seafood nation , but only if SNP minister start work with their UK counterpart . but Derek Mackay , the SNP ' S Finance Minister , praise the EU ' s contribution to both industry and say EU funding contract for structural fund , fishery and farming project that be agree before Brexit will be pay in full . the NFUS use its meeting with Ms Leadsom to press for cost , custom control , barrier and tariff to be mitigate in any new trading arrangement , and seek reassurance that Scottish quality will be protect . Mr Bowie say : ` ` we be encourage by her straight talking and willingness to engage . ' ' Leaving the EU will spell the end of the Common Fisheries Policy and enable the UK to assert control over its 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ ) , more than half of which be around Scotland . foreign vessel could not then fish in the zone without consent . a report publish earlier this month find more than half the fish catch in British water be land by trawler from the rest of the EU . speak at the SFF ' s annual dinner in Edinburgh last night , which be attend by Fergus Ewing , the SNP ' s Rural Affairs Minister , the organisation ' s chief executive say Brexit would deliver tangible benefit to coastal community if handle correctly .
Brexit fear rock global stock market ; UK ' s big firm lose £98bn in value in four day as leave camp pull ahead and FTSE @card@ dive
LONDON ' S benchmark index fall through the @card@ level yesterday as Brexit fear shake financial market around the world . investor offload risky equity in favour of safe-haven asset after the late referendum poll show the leave camp pull ahead . anxiety about the UK ' s possible exit from the European Union trigger the FTSE @card@ ' s steep daily fall since mid-February , with the blue chip index drop @card@ point , or 2.01pc , to @card@ . in just four day the value of Britain ' s big company have fall by more than £98bn . European bourse also flounder as volatility spike ahead of next week ' S referendum . Frankfurt ' s DAX and the CAC in Paris both fall 1.4pc . Mike van Dulken , of Accendo Markets , say investor be fearful of the ` ` heightened prospect ' ' of a Brexit , which would ` ` worsen an already fragile global growth situation by deliver an economic and political blow to a struggle eurozone ' ' . as stock market go into freefall , investor seek shelter from the Brexit storm in www.bonds.UK Gilt yield fall to record low yesterday , while Germany ' S 10-year Bund yield skid into negative territory for the first time ever . the negative yield mean investor be effectively pay to lend money to the German government for a full decade . Anthony Gillham of Old Mutual Global Investors say : ` ` in the short to medium term [ after Brexit ] , I think we ' re likely to see concern in the market that some of the other European country might follow suit and that put breakup risk for the eurozone right back on the table . the natural reaction for investor who be pull out of peripheral bond will be to look for safe place to put their money , and we might see UK bond yield fall . ' ' however , he say that yield could increase if a vote to leave start to further devalue the pound . ` ` Brexit be likely to put real pressure on sterling . Sterling have one of the big current account deficit in the develop world , and we be likely to see a lot of downward pressure on sterling , exert inflation pressure . ' ' yesterday , sterling slump to a twomonth low against the dollar , drop by as much as 1pc to $ @card@ , while the cost of insure against volatility in the pound a month into the future soar to its high level since the height of the @card@ financial crisis . the panic selling be also confirm by a Bank of America Merrill Lynch global fund manager survey which find that investor be sit on the big pile of cash since November @card@ . fund manager be now hold 5.7pc of their portfolio in cash , it say . a new poll show more than eight in ten investment professional foresee a drop in the London stock market in the six month after a vote to leave the EU , with 39pc expect a sharp decrease in the wake of a Brexit decision . in a survey of more than @card@ investment staff by the industry body CFA UK , 71pc say they expect UK investment portfolio to suffer in the year after a vote for Brexit , against 8pc who feel the effect would be positive on portfolio and 17pc who think there would be a minimal impact . Market Report : page @card@
the Christmas miracle be that the PM will survive to lead Brexit talk ; Analysis
to lose Damian Green must have be a personal blow to Theresa May . the two MP have be friend since university ; Mr Green effectively serve as her deputy . but a Cabinet Office inquiry have find that he lie about porn be find on his office computer - an inquiry trigger by an account of sexual harassment that it deem ` ` plausible ' ' . the Prime Minister have always put tackle abuse at the top of her agenda . to lose her right-hand man in such a humiliate way , over so sensitive an issue , would at any other time cripple a government . but this be the age of Brexit . the Conservative majority in the commons be tight and Eurosceptics be nervous about do anything that damage the Prime Minister ' S authority further . there be no obvious alternative to Mrs May . Remainers fear a Eurosceptic coup ; the Leavers do n't want Brexit undermine . and the decision of EU leader to allow Brexit negotiation to move on to phase two have give the diplomatic side of thing a whole new momentum . phase two will be difficult and doubt have already be raise about Britain ' s ability to get a bespoke trade deal . but at least progress seem possible after month of inaction , and at least we know what the politics of @card@ will be about . so , yes , Mrs May have have a pig of a year - an underwhelming election result , the bad conference speech in memory . but it ' S hard to imagine the Tory party drop its pilot at this stage in the Brexit talk . and the assumption that Mr Green can go and the PM can remain in power , despite how politically and personally close he be to her , be indicative of how her position have change since the election . it ' s a position that be n't so much strong as miraculously stubborn . that say , with Mr Green go , speculation about a Cabinet reshuffle will only increase . there have already be movement . Gavin Williamson replace Michael Fallon as Defence Secretary after another harassment-related scandal . but even if Mrs May ' S authority have be briefly lift by Brexit , her room to manoeuvre remains limit by it because she have to maintain the appearance ( if not the numerical reality ) of balance within the Cabinet . move Boris Johnson and the Leavers will protest . Sack Philip Hammond and the Remainers will be outrage . what many MP be say be : bring in someone new . there ' s plenty of talent that be n't scar by harassment allegation and be desperate for a shot at ministerial office . why not strong medium performer like Johnny Mercer , an articulate conservative such as Jacob Rees-Mogg or , to combat the appearance of sleaze , an intelligent woman such as Suella Fernandes ? of course , the gap that have to be fill be personal as well as political . the one thing that matter more than anything to Mrs May be loyalty . to have to sack a friend will have be very painful , a reminder that wield authority be rarely a pleasant business and the job of Prime Minister be most time utterly thankless . ' there be no real alternative ; it ' S hard to imagine the Tory party drop its pilot at this stage in negotiation '
Britain question £85bn bill for Brexit divorce as mask of optimism slip ; Davis deny cave in to EU demand to settle money and citizen ' right issue on day one of talk
Britain be question whether it be legally oblige to pay a Brexit divorce bill to the European Union , it emerge yesterday as the first day of talk descend into ill-concealed rancour . the EU be demand that the UK pay up to £85billion to meet outstandbasis ' , ' ' ing obligation after Brexit , a demand that have be heavily criticise by Cabinet minister . Britain reportedly believe it be not legally oblige to make any payment at all . ` ` they question that there be a legal basis for an exit payment , ' ' a senior EU official tell www.Reuters.UK negotiate source confirm that the British side have demand an explanation for the demand , which Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have describe as ` ` egregious ' ' . ` ` we ask them to explain what they see as the legal basis , which be not the same thing as say there be ' no legal a UK source say . ` ` we ask a large number of question on the issue . ' ' the Brexit divorce bill and an agreement on the right of expats on both side of the Channel will be the first two item that will be settle in the talk , which will begin in earnest next month . the two side agree that negotiation will be hold in four-weekly cycle , with one week each month set aside for face-to-face negotiation , with the aim of make ` ` sufficient progress ' ' on these issue to begin trade talk after the EU summit in October . Mr Davis deny that the government have cave in to EU demand to settle money and citizen ' right before talk trade term , even though these will now not be discuss until October at the very early . Britain have want to discuss both the term of leave the EU and the future of any trade deal in parallel , with Mr Davis previously describe the clash as one of the ` ` row of the summer ' ' . Theresa May will use this week ' s European leader summit in Brussels to brief EU leader on how the UK intend to treat the @card@ million EU citizen currently in the UK after Brexit , in an attempt to kick-start the substantive negotiation on a positive note . further detail will be contain in a white paper to be publish by the government on Monday , with the key issue on the EU side being how the UK can legally guarantee those right without submit to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . the formal talk open with attempt on both side to be positive . Mr Davis promise to be ` ` constructive ' ' while Michel Barnier say that there be no intention to punish the UK , but instead focus on arrange an ` ` orderly withdrawal ' ' . the two lead negotiator , who already disagree on many of the fundamental point on Brexit , exchange gift that recognise their shared passion in hike . it do not take long before there be quip on social medium about have ` ` mountain to climb ' ' . Mr Barnier produce a carve walking stick from his native Savoie for Mr Davis , while the Brexit secretary present his counterpart and with a sign copy of a classic mountaineering book Regards vers Annapurna , an account of an epic French expedition to the Himalayas in @card@ . once inside the meeting room , Mr Davis , face his counterpart across a giant horseshoe negotiate table , try to strike a statesmanlike tone , use his open remark to promise that the UK want to remain a ` ` committed partner ' ' to the EU . ` ` this partnership will necessarily look and feel different from membership . but we hope that throughout , our close cooperation on trade and on security will continue as we tackle the the challenge of this and future generation together , ' ' he say . it do not take long for the mask to slip , however , with Mr Barnier strike an exasperate tone at the end of a long day ' S talk , when ask if the EU have make any significant concession to the British - give that the UK have agree to all the EU ' s demand over the schedule for the talk . ` ` I be not in a frame of mind to make concession , or ask for concession , ' ' he say tartly , add that the EU be only follow through on the UK ' s own decision to leave , which would have ` ` substantial ' ' consequence . ` ` it be not about punishment , it be not about revenge , ' ' he say . but it be clear emotion be run high on both side . ` ` I will do all I can to put emotion to one side and stick to the fact , the figure , and the legal basis , and work with the United Kingdom to find an agreement in that frame of mind , ' ' Mr Barnier add . Mr Davis , repeat the UK position that any final deal would have to include the outline of a future relationship as agree under Article @card@ , choose to quote Winston Churchill in sum up the prospect for a mutually beneficial deal . ` ` there be no doubt the road ahead will be challenging , but as Winston Churchill say ' the pessimist see difficulty in every opportunity . the optimist see the opportunity in every difficulty . ' and I be certainly an optimist . ' '
Brussels want EU citizen in Britain to live under EU law
European citizen live in Britain after Brexit should remain under the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , accord to proposal table by senior European Commission negotiator , the Daily Telegraph have learn . the idea - certain to be reject by Britain - be set out at a meeting between Michel Barnier , the chief European Commission negotiator , and official from the @card@ other EU member state , accord to a diplomat . ` ` the European Commission legal service be of the view that a political declaration on the right of EU citizen in the UK would not be enough and that EU law must be available to EU citizen after Brexit , under the jurisdiction of the ECJ , ' ' say the source . Mr Barnier and official from the @card@ country meet to talk over Brexit tactic and discuss at length how the right of the estimate three million EU citizen in the UK should be protect . European negotiator be concern British citizen in Europe after Brexit will have right guarantee under EU law to third-country national , but that these might not be reciprocate . Europe have refuse to enter into any negotiation with Britain over the status of EU expats ahead of the declaration of Article @card@ and the start of formal negotiation . attempt by Theresa May to cut an early deal on allow expats in the EU to keep their right to residence , work and health care after Brexit be rebuff last month . several EU member state at the meeting question whether it be ` ` realistic ' ' to expect the UK to agree to ECJ jurisdiction , but the Commission insist it be paramount to protect EU law and the court ' S jurisdiction . official in Whitehall with knowledge of the UK negotiating position describe the proposal as ` ` pie in the sky ' ' , but indicative of the ultra ` ` theological ' ' thinking of part of the European political establishment . under reciprocal plan be consider in Whitehall , EU citizen who have live in the UK for more than five year will be grant ` ` equal treatment ' ' and guarantee right equivalent to those under the old EU system . yesterday British Future , a think tank , publish the result of an inquiry into the position of EU national in the UK after Brexit . it urge the government to guarantee right and not use them as bargaining chip . Prof Stephen Peers , an EU law expert from the University of Essex , who sit on the inquiry panel , say the idea of retain ECJ jurisdiction be a ` ` a nonstarter ' ' give that Mrs May have already rule out ECJ jurisdiction for the UK post-Brexit . he say Mr Barnier ` ` should instead focus on get a simple deal ensure both side guarantee the acquire right of each other ' citizen ' ' . editorial comment : page @card@
judgment day for Brexit saboteur ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : technically , the vote in the House of Commons today over a Labour motion on Brexit be symbolic , their result have no concrete effect on the law or government policy . but as so often in politics , symbol matter , since they show the electorate something about the people who wield power in their name . Labour MP believe they have be rather clever in table a motion call for the government to publish a ` ` plan ' ' for Brexit , attempt to exploit unease on the Conservative bench about the Prime Minister ' s approach of not give away precise detail about her plan before enter exit negotiation with the EU . the government have respond with a ruse of its own . Mrs May will set out her thinking on Brexit in Parliament in due course , as she be no doubt always intend to . more immediately , she will ask MP to support an amendment confirm that the House of Commons will respect the view of the British people express in the EU referendum and call on minister to start the Article @card@ process of exit by the end of March . how could any MP reasonably refuse to vote for that amendment ? the referendum result be clear : the British people , in a democratic vote , express their desire for Britain to leave the European Union . the government , in turn , have say that it will act on that instruction by invoke Article @card@ . see in that context , the content of the government amendment be such an uncontroversial statement of the obvious that one might expect the Commons to accept it unanimously . yet in the curious , twisted world of post-referendum politics , there be indeed question about whether politician elect by and answerable to the people will actually do something that those people have clearly tell them to do . Labour shabbily seek to use parliamentary chicanery to delay , dilute and even derail Brexit : laughably a party lead by business-hating Marxist say it want assurance on access to the EU ' s single market before it will endorse Article @card@ . that claim reveal Labour ' s Brexit stance as deceitful opportunism . the Lib Dems be a little more honest , make no secret of their desire to deny the electorate what it vote for with a commitment to the failed ideology of European integration that be neither liberal nor democratic . most Conservative MP vote to remain , but most have sensibly accept the referendum result and , like Mrs May , be commit to make the good of Brexit . a few , include several former minister , persist in try to make trouble for the woman who sack them . such attitude among MP have help sustain a fundamental division in British politics between Parliament and the people . for many year , large number of people in the country have deep reservation about the EU and its development . yet those reservation be generally ignore by a political class that generally embrace the EU and in some case believe it right to impose on Britain policy the electorate be simply too stupid to accept or appreciate . the result of that arrogance be spell out clearly at the referendum . it be to David Cameron ' s credit that he hold that referendum and finally give the people their say on Europe , and it be to Mrs May ' s credit that she be work so hard to enact their decision . the vote today give MP a chance to show that they too acknowledge the primacy of the people on Europe . those who refuse to back the amendment will be make a public declaration of contempt for the voter . for those intent on resist Brexit , much hope hang on the case before the Supreme Court , which could rule that minister must pass legislation in Parliament before invoke Article @card@ . whether the government amendment pass today will have no direct bearing on that case , but if it be indeed endorse by the Commons , the judge might want to take account of it . a vote for the amendment would make it hard to argue , as some Remainers do , that Parliament be ` ` silent ' ' on what should follow from the referendum . as we have say before , the court ruling can not change the basic fact of Brexit : the people vote for it and it will happen . all that remain to be establish be how many misguided Remainers in Parliament try to stand in the way . such MP be entitle to their view , but they must also expect to be challenge to justify those view , and to account for them . with this move to call the bluff of Brexit ' s parliamentary saboteur , Mrs May have show her quality , demonstrate just the boldness many of her friend have be ask for . and when the vote be count , we will see how many MP be willing to reveal their true colour by refuse to declare , clearly and openly , that they will accept the choice of the electorate on Europe . they should know that the people they work for will be watch , and will judge them accordingly . Labour shabbily seek to use chicanery to delay , dilute and even derail Brexit the vote give MP a chance to show that they too acknowledge the primacy of the people on Europe
Brexit ' threaten ' UK ' s top spot for tech start-up
the UK ' s lead position in the European tech start-up industry could be threaten if Brexit make it hard to attract foreign employee , a new study warn . the UK currently boast almost a third of all tech start-up employee in Europe , ahead of France on 19pc and Germany on 18pc , accord to research by venture capital firm Balderton . but tech company , which have high level of foreign worker , fear this position could be at risk as the fall in the pound make UK salary less competitive and the government consider curb on free movement of people . official figure suggest technology be one of the UK sector most reliant on foreign worker , with more than a fifth of employee hail from overseas . Balderton analysis also find that 42pc of new tech start-up in the UK in @card@ have at least one foreign founder . a survey of chief executive and senior staff find that 82pc of UK start-up be worry about continued access to talent post-Brexit . Balderton claim that ` ` the attractiveness of the UK to this highly mobile workforce could decline rapidly and that the high cost of hire staff who need visa could become a significant issue , should policy towards skilled worker change significantly post-Brexit ' ' . currently , company be able to hire new skilled talent from elsewhere in Europe without a visa within three week , it find . while it be unclear what arrangement will apply post-Brexit , the average time take to hire those from elsewhere in the world that need Tier @card@ visa be @card@ week . ` ` Tech company hire very quickly and grow quickly , ' ' James Wise , a partner at the firm say . ` ` Hiring in a couple of week be the norm , so have to go through visa system that would take @card@ week would severely diminish our ability to be competitive . ' ' he add : ` ` London in particular have benefit significantly from migration . but the relative weakness of the pound since the referendum vote could reduce the advantage the capital enjoy without proper policy support post-Brexit . ' ' 82pc the number of UK tech start-up that be worry about continued access to talent post-Brexit
May tell boss : we will set our own rule for new international trade deal ; US election : the aftermath ; PM warn that Britain must once and for all deal with immigration and our forgotten community
Britain will use the freedom of Brexit to ` ` set our own rule ' ' as it negotiate new international trade deal , Theresa May tell company boss last night as she deny that she have an ` ` anti-business agenda ' ' . in her first major foreign policy speech since become Prime Minister , Mrs May say that the UK will ` ` forge new and dynamic trading agreement ' ' as it leave the European Union . she also use the speech to respond to Donald Trump ' S election , say that it show that Britain must once and for all deal with immigration and the community across the country that feel forget by successive government . she warn that a failure to deal with the ` ` downsides ' ' of globalisation could lead to its ` ` ruin ' ' . in her most significant comment yet about what Britain ' s trading relationship will look like after Brexit , Mrs May say : ` ` as we leave the European Union , we will also use the strength and size of our economy to lead the way in get out into the world and do new business with old ally and new partner alike . ` ` we will use the freedom that come from negotiate with partner directly , to be flexible , to set our own rule and forge new and dynamic trading agreement that work for the whole UK . ' ' Mrs May also reject claim that there be a choice between ` ` hard ' ' and ` ` soft ' ' Brexit . ` ` that be also why ... we be not try to replicate the deal that any other country have with the EU , ' ' she say . ` ` and we be not go for an offthe-shelf solution . ` ` all of us here tonight know that there be not some choice between hard Brexit and soft Brexit . it be about how business and government work together to get the good deal ; the right deal for Britain and the right deal for business work across the continent . ' ' Mrs May attack business leader who ` ` game the system and work to a different set of rule ' ' , in a thinlyveiled attack on boss such as Sir Philip Green and Mike Ashley . however , she attempt to reach out to business leader , who have in recent month criticise her over policy plan that have be describe as punitive . the government have say that it want to force company to put worker on board and curb executive pay . address the Guildhall in London , Mrs May say : ` ` I know many of you ... recognise this responsibility , but other have voice their suspicion of what they see as a grow anti-business agenda . I do n't agree . it be because I believe so passionately in business that I say this . ` ` asking business to work with government to play its part be profoundly pro-business , because it be fundamental to retain faith in capitalism and free market . ' ' Liam Fox have warn that the EU will be force to compensate its trade partner unless the UK be give access to the single market after Brexit , it be report . a leak memo of a meeting with Irish politician Mary Mitchell O'Connor detail the Trade Secretary ' s belief that the threat of compensate country which would no longer have access to the UK ' S market will force the union to rethink its stance on single market access . ' there be no choice between hard Brexit and soft Brexit . it ' S about how business and government work together to get the good deal for Britain '
Scotland Brexit risk young generation ' S future , say Morgan
parent who vote for Brexit be ` ` gamble with their child ' S future ' ' and risk create a ` ` lost generation ' ' of young people , the Education Secretary warn today . Mrs Morgan will say that the economic shock of Brexit would ` ` damage the ability of young people to get on in life ' ' in an intervention that will be label by Eurosceptic Conservative MP as ` ` scaremongering ' ' . her comment be likely to deepen Conservative division over Europe , which intensify at the weekend amid accusation that David Cameron be ignore Eurosceptic minister . in a speech in London , Mrs Morgan will also suggest that Britain will vote to leave the European union unless young people get out and vote and convince their parent and grandparent that Britain should stay in the European Union . she will highlight new research by Adzuna , a job search website , show a drop in the number of vacancy be advertise as evidence that employer be concern about the impact of Brexit . young people , she will warn , will ` ` suffer the most ' ' from an economic shock of a Brexit because company will cut back on entry-level job . in a speech in London she will say : ` ` it ' s clear , that if Britain leave Europe it will be young people who suffer the most , leave in limbo while we struggle to find and then negotiate an alternative model . in do so we risk that lose generation become a reality . ` ` at a time when people be rightly concern about intergenerational fairness the most unfair decision that the old generation could make would be to take Britain out of Europe and damage the ability of young people to get on in life . ' '
UK face traumatic ' no deal ' decision soon ; if UK play the no-deal card , it must be ready to see it through
if the European Union will not take ` ` yes ' ' for an answer on Brexit , this country face a traumatic decision very soon . should the European Council refuse to endorse talk on future tie with Britain next week in Brussels , we may indeed be force to depart without a deal , on minimalist term and in acrimony . one lose count of Theresa May ' S concession , all seemingly to no avail . there come a point in diplomacy when a sovereign nation must stand its ground . this decision can not be put off for much long . ` ` time decay ' ' be poisonous . it be work remorselessly against British economic interest . the Bank of England warn that bank and city finance house will activate their contingency plan and start to decamp en masse by Christmas unless they know where Brexit be head . Sir Howard Davies , RBS chairman , say American and Asian bank be all shift part of their operation out of London . the question be whether City loss will be in the thousand or the ten of thousand , and the timing be ` ` very tight indeed ' ' . the German industry federation ( BDI ) say it be work on the assumption that Brexit talk will break down . its Brexit ` ` task force ' ' be take step to replace British subcontractor and reorganise their supply chain . every week that go by in this purgatory mean Britain suffer the irreversible effect of a hard Brexit , yet without be able to negotiate new trade deal . it be drag out the ordeal . it risk turn into the bad of all world : a hard Brexit by default . the Brexit mandate impose on EU negotiator by the EU Council be legally dubious . article @card@ do not stipulate that all divorce issue must be settle before there can be any talk about trade tie . it state that the EU should work out the arrangement for withdrawal while ` ` take account of the framework for its future relationship with the Union ' ' . Britain have go along with the EU ' s sequence framework nevertheless . it have do so even though the three chapter on Ireland , citizen ' right , and the alimony bill can not logically be separate from longer-term trading and security link . the Prime Minister have largely sign off on citizen ' right . it be a fudge , of course : a legal mechanism will be find to lock in the privilege of EU national in Britain , with UK and EU judge work in concert . ` ` the British have basically give in , ' ' say Charles Grant from the Centre for European Reform . ` ` the Germans be block everything until they be offer more money . but they have well be careful because if this lead to the downfall of Theresa May , they will come to rue the consequence . ' ' Britain face a corrosive state of affair . the EU power be ` ` shake the tree ' ' , delay talk even as they plot to snatch British spoil . Lord Owen , the former foreign secretary , say the time have come for a ` ` unilateral declaration ' ' state how the country will proceed . brinkmanship be a part of every EU summit . Germany and France may be play a tactical game to wring out a few more concession . by the same token , the British government be hope to concentrate the mind by float contingency plan for ` ` no deal ' ' . I have no objection to such plan . what bother me be that this be suddenly come to the fore just day before the summit seemingly as a negotiate ploy to call Europe ' S bluff . this be a dangerous gamble . never try to bluff the EU . it be an error to try to play the ` ` no-deal ' ' option as if it be a card , not least because it misread the European landscape . two year of ultra-easy money and fiscal loosening have together generate a boom . if we be go to talk about a ` ` no-deal ' ' rupture , we must be willing to see it through . here we confront the original Sin of the Brexit ` ` cake and eat it ' ' movement : they never admit that Brexit mean blood , toil , sweat and tear . they never tell the British people that there might be a stiff price to pay for restore the supremacy of Parliament , or that it would be a logistical nightmare to extract ourselves after over @card@ year enmesh in the EU system . they have no political mandate for the hair shirt sacrifice that a walkout may entail . it be time to tell the British people now what those sacrifice would be . ' bluff the EU be a dangerous gamble . never try to bluff the EU ' ' it be time to tell the British people what the sacrifice of ` ` no deal ' ' would be '
HSBC chairman warn of a Brexit ' Jenga tower ' of City job loss
BREXIT could trigger a ` ` Jenga tower ' ' of job move out of the City , accord to the chairman of HSBC , who have warn MP that some bank could start to act on their contingency plan in a matter of month . Douglas Flint tell the Commons ' Treasury select committee , which be investigate the impact of the UK ' s decision to leave the EU , that secession could spark an unpredictable number of job loss from the capital into Europe or elsewhere . ` ` the ecosystem in London be a bit like a Jenga tower , ' ' Mr Flint say , refer to the game in which player have to avoid topple a tower of wooden block . ` ` we do n't know if you pull one small piece out , whether nothing happen or indeed there be a more dramatic impact . ' ' it come as Xavier Rolet , chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , give his bleak forecast yet for the magnitude of job loss if the enormous clearing industry leave the UK . some @card@ role up and down the country be at risk if Britain be no longer the centre for euro-denominated derivative clearing , he caution , cite research from EY commission by the LSE , which own the world ' s large clearing house . that figure be more than double the @card@ estimate Mr Rolet give in September and be accompany by a warning from the LSE chief yesterday that the financial consequence of Brexit could have a ` ` systemic impact ' ' . Labour have suggest the government will seek a ` ` banker ' Brexit ' ' for City firm , which have be vocal about the threat pose to job by EU secession , especially if the UK lose access to Europe ' s single market in a socalled ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . but Mr Flint reject those claim yesterday when ask by MP whether the financial service industry be simply seek to secure ` ` a good deal ' ' for the City . the government have so far be tight-lipped about what sort of future relationship it will try to negotiate with Brussels for the UK . put pressure on the government , the HSBC chairman warn that financial firm will quickly start to implement Brexit contingency plan if minister do not give them guidance on the deal the UK want from the EU . ` ` for those business that do n't have infrastructure already in place in Europe it will start , I think , pretty much immediately on the trigger of Article @card@ , ' ' he say . the banking veteran add that some firm may simply decide to cut job , rather than move role elsewhere . HSBC have previously warn that it could shift @card@ job to France , where it already have a sizeable operation , although Mr Flint stress that it be City firm ' preference to maintain the ` ` status quo ' ' follow Brexit . both City figure - along with Allianz Global Investors vice-chairman Elizabeth Corley , who also face MP - urge the government to secure a transition period from Brussels last beyond the two year the UK have under Article @card@ to negotiate the term of Brexit , to help with financial stability . Mr Flint say that two to three year follow the end of Article @card@ might be sufficient , while the LSE boss call for a ` ` grandfathering ' ' of exist arrangement for a ` ` limited period ' ' .
Royal Bank of Scotland plunge further after downgrade
Royal Bank of Scotland plunge to the bottom of the blue-chip index after Morgan Stanley downgrade the stock amid fear ` ` a prolonged , convoluted and costly ' ' Brexit would weigh on earnings . the British bank be among the big Brexit casualty and be still nurse a 34pc loss since the result be announce on Friday . in the late blow to its share price performance , analyst at Morgan Stanley downgrade its rating to ` ` equal weight ' ' from ` ` overweight ' ' and revise its price target down to 210p . the investment bank say it view the ` ` seismic ' ' Brexit shock as one of ` ` earnings and heightened uncertainty ' ' , before add it be ` ` not systemic ' ' . although it think UK bank be in dramatically good funding position than they be in @card@ , it warn the weak outlook will ` ` aggravate those bank with capital gap ' ' . they believe Britain ' s divorce proceeding with the EU will hurt bank earnings , particularly through rate and volume . ` ` for RBS , the net profit impact be higher owing to high operate leverage , ' ' Morgan Stanley say in a note . furthermore it caution : ` ` a bad rate outlook will be a big hit on both UK but also eurozone bank , as the ECB may reopen what we ' ve call the ` ` dangerous experiment ' ' of negative rate ' ' . as a result share in Royal Bank of Scotland tumble 8.6p , or 4.8pc , near @card@ level of 171.6p . Morgan Stanley also downgrade Clydesdale to ` ` underweight ' ' , send share 1.4pc lower to 232p . for the remainder of the sector , Morgan Stanley also slash earnings per share forecast for @card@ by @card@ to 27pc . in its wake , share in Lloyds fall 2.6pc to 54.1p . however , share in Barclays rise 0.5pc to 138.6p , HSBC climb 2.9pc to 465.9p and Standard Chartered add 1.3pc to 564.6p . on the wide market , the FTSE @card@ charge ahead to a 10-month high , close up @card@ point , or 2.27pc , to @card@ . the blue-chip index have now make gain of 2.8pc since Brexit . the remarkable surge come as Bank of England Governor Mark Carney say that more stimulus be ` ` likely to be require ' ' in the summer month . elsewhere , private equity firm 3i take the FTSE @card@ top spot after it say it have no plan to dispose of its investment in Dutch discount retailer Action , even though it have receive a number of approach for its stake . separately , Barclays name 3i as its top pick in the European diversified financial sector after it reshuffle the sector on the back of increase macro uncertainty follow Britain ' s vote to leave the EU . share leap 8.5pc to 547½p . mining stock be also among the riser as the sector continue to benefit from a weak pound in the Brexit aftermath . Antofagasta and Anglo American also benefit from rating upgrade from Haitong Research , who say the sell-off across the sector have become ` ` more constructive ' ' . share in Antofagasta rise 5.1pc to 465.6p , Anglo American climb 4.3pc to 726.9p , Glencore advance 4.2pc to 152.9p , and Rio Tinto edge up 3.5pc to £22.94 . utility company SSE also make gain , up 5.6pc to £15.54 , on the back of rating upgrade . RBC Capital Markets hike its rating to ` ` outperform ' ' from ` ` underperform ' ' . on the other side , Berenberg take an axe to Travis Perkins , lower its rating to ` ` hold ' ' , cite Brexit uncertainty . although the broker still believe the FTSE @card@ builder merchant still have a ` ` sound long-term strategy ' ' , it be unable to maintain its ` ` buy ' ' rating in light of the risk to UK construction activity result from the Brexit vote . Michael Watts , of Berenberg , say : ` ` we do not foresee a @card@ scenario but a more moderate contraction in activity , which mean that the group ' s midterm growth ambition will not now be achieve . ' ' in its wake , share fall 23p , or 1.5pc , to £14.74 . property group Zoopla also slump into the red after a rating revision from Panmure Gordon . the broker cut its recommendation from ` ` buy ' ' to ` ` sell ' ' as it think the stock have further to fall in the Brexit aftermath . Jonathan Helliwell , of Panmure Gordon , caution : ` ` we fear the uncertainty create by the surprise Brexit vote could push an already weaken housing transaction market over the edge , into a prolonged period of torpor . ' ' Shares dip 0.7pc to 266p . away from Brexit , JP Morgan slash Reckitt Benckiser ' s rating to ` ` neutral ' ' despite believe the FTSE @card@ have ` ` strong business fundamental ' ' . Celine Pannuti , of JP Morgan , say : ` ` we expect underlie momentum will be hit in the shortterm by the boycott of Reckitt Benckiser product in South Korea , lead to a group like-for-like slowing to 4pc . ' ' the consumer good maker have be blame for sell fatal disinfectant that cause around @card@ death five year ago . investor appear to shrug off the rating downgrade as share rise 2.9pc to £74.90 . on the mid-cap index , bid speculation lift share in insurer Esure . despite the group confirm ` ` no approach have be receive ' ' , the FTSE @card@ stock close up 9.8pc at 286.1p . transport group Go-Ahead drive 3pc high to £19.56 on the back of a rating upgrade from Investec . the broker say only about one-third of the business be directly expose to GDP change . on Aim , share in Venn Life Sciences enjoy a bounce of 14.3pc to 28p after the Dublin-based group say its revenue for the six month end June @card@ will exceed ( Euro ) 8m .
May bow to the ' mutineer ' ; Rebels embolden after EU state take legal advice over extension to negotiation
Theresa May be poise to bow to the demand of the Brexit ` ` mutineer ' ' by drop Britain ' s EU exit date from legislation govern the UK ' S withdrawal . David Lidington , the Justice Secretary , say ` ` various constructive suggestion ' ' have be make to the Prime Minister and that the government ` ` will listen ' ' to call for the exit date to be remove from the Bill . another senior Cabinet minister tell the Daily Telegraph the government be consider remove the controversial amendment after a series of tight vote earlier this week signal Mrs May might lose if it be put to the vote . Dominic Grieve , the leader of the Tory rebel , say that as many as @card@ Tory MP be prepare to oppose Mrs May ' S amendment which propose to set a legal date and time for leave the EU . the rebel be embolden last night by the news that EU member state have seek legal advice from the European Commission over a possible extension of the two-year negotiation period set out in Article @card@ . Pro-Brexit minister have already warn Mrs May to back down over the plan to enshrine the Brexit date in law after it become clear that the government would face defeat in the commons when it be put to a vote . speak at a Press Gallery lunch in the Houses of Parliament , Mr Lidington say : ` ` as the PM say , various constructive suggestion have be make during the committee debate about how the bill might be improve and obviously we will listen to idea come from colleague across the House during the Bill ' s progress in both Commons and Lords . ' ' Reacting to the news that the EU27 have seek legal advice , Tom Tugendhat , one of the Tory now threaten to vote against the amendment . he say : ` ` it put control in their hand , not ours , and what we have to maintain as much control as possible and flexibility in the negotiation . this be about leave as quickly as possible but on our term . ' ' Mr Grieve tell today ' s ` ` Chopper ' s Brexit Podcast ' ' the amendment to enshrine the Brexit date in law be ` ` completely idiotic ' ' because it do not allow ` ` for last minute change or adjustment ' ' to the timetable for Brexit . he say that if the amendment be put to a vote ` ` I will vote against it ' ' . a Government source say : ` ` what the European Commission do be totally up to them , but any legal advice they give be totally irrelevant because we will not be extend Article @card@ , we will have leave at the end of March @card@ , and whatever happen , Article @card@ can only be extend with the unanimous agreement of all @card@ member state . ' ' last night David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , warn the EU not to allow its demand for more money from Britain to scupper a deal . at an economic summit in Germany he refer to the £157billion of trade between Britain and Germany as he say : ` ` I know that no one would allow short-term interest to risk those hard-earn gain . ' ' before Mr Davis deliver his speech , Hans-Olaf Henkel , the former head of the Federation of German Industries , say Germany expect Mr Davis to offer his ` ` unconditional surrender ' ' to the EU ' S term . it emerge as EU official say that Ireland will not be able to block Britain from open trade talk with the EU if it can not resolve an ongoing row over the future status of the Northern Ireland border . ` ` there ' s a risk of separation talk not make sufficient progress on Ireland , not a risk of Ireland block on its own the advancement of Brexit talk , ' ' a senior EU official tell reporter in Brussels .
Boris and May in Brexit bill showdown ; Foreign Secretary to tell PM £30bn ' divorce ' settlement be not acceptableBoris ' not think of top job '
Boris Johnson will use a showdown meeting with Theresa May this week to demand reassurance from the Prime Minister over how much she be prepare to pay to the EU after Brexit . the Foreign Secretary be concern by report that Mrs May be prepare to announce that she will carry on pay up to £10billion per year to the EU during a transition period , which could be as long as three year . he use an article in Saturday ' S Daily Telegraph to insist that Britain should only pay ` ` what be due ' ' and should pay nothing to access the single market . Mr Johnson have be tell he will not be sack over the article , which have not be authorise by Downing Street and be regard by some as a deliberate attempt to undermine Mrs May . however , there be fear among some Tory MP that Mr Johnson could take the ` ` catastrophic ' ' decision to resign within day if Mrs May fail to appease him in a key speech on Brexit to be give in Florence on Friday . Senior conservative be nervous that the maverick Mr Johnson could ` ` explode the fragile unity of the party ' ' by quit the Cabinet if Mrs May signal she be prepare to pay ten of billion in an EU ` ` divorce ' ' deal . minister be also brace for a possible Cabinet reshuffle after next month ' s party conference , at which Mr Johnson could be demote if he do not step into line . as well as be attack by some Tory colleague over his Brexit essay , Mr Johnson have be embroil in an extraordinary spat with a senior civil servant over his claim in the Telegraph that Britain would be £350 million per week well off outside the EU . in a series of increasingly testy letter and phone call , Sir David Norgrove , chairman of the UK Statistics Authority , say he be ` ` surprised and disappointed ' ' that the £350million claim - first make during last year ' s referendum campaign - have be revive . Mr Johnson hit back , accuse Sir David of ` ` wilfully distort ' ' his word . Mr Johnson will accompany Mrs May to the United Nations General Assembly meeting in New York this week , where she be to address delegate , and where she will privately discuss her Florence speech with him . he will seek reassurance that Mrs May be not about to agree to keep pay £10billion a year to Brussels in any transition period after March @card@ . those concern will not have be allay by Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , tell Sky News that Britain would continue pay the EU to access Europol and other body post-Brexit . he also twice refuse to rule out pay to access the single market during any transition period and say the @card@ remain capital of Europe would ` ` welcome ' ' what Mrs May say on Friday . ask if Mr Johnson be go to be sack , Mr Green say : ` ` no , he be n't and the reason be , he , like the rest of the Cabinet , like the Prime Minister , be all about want to get the good deal for the British people . ' ' he suggest ` ` people should calm down ' ' after a ` ` weekend of excitement ' ' and say he do not think there be anything in Mr Johnson ' S article that be surprising or contradict Mrs May . Mr Johnson ' s Brexit blueprint reopen Cabinet split that appear to have heal over the summer , with Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , accuse him of be a ` ` backseat driver . Sir Vince Cable , the Lib Dem leader , say Mrs May ' S decision not to sack Mr Johnson show she be ` ` paralyse and impotent ' ' , but friend of Mr Johnson have say his article be intend to set out concern he and fellow Cabinet minister Michael Gove and Priti Patel have about what might be in the Florence speech , but be not a leadership bid . however , one veteran Tory MP say : ` ` this be a dangerous moment ... he be light a blue touch paper that risk explode the fragile unity of the party and the government . ' ' ` ` the Prime Minister need to be tough ... if we have a leadership contest in the middle of Brexit the wheel be go to come off everything . ' ' Mr Johnson insist Mrs May retain his full support as leader and in the Brexit talk , and he be on record as say that he would not contemplate a leadership bid before the Brexit date . one friend say yesterday : ` ` all he be think about at the moment be his conference speech , not the leadership . there be no question of him resign . ` ` he be enjoy the job of be Foreign Secretary and all he be do with his article be try to put some ' va-va-voom ' back into the Brexit process , as he feel there be too much negativity . ` ` he have never suggest he would die in a ditch fight any attempt to pay money to the EU , and if he do start to talk about resign I think his close friend would lock him in a room and tell him to keep his eye on the prize , which be Britain leave the EU . ' ' Jacob Rees-Mogg , who have himself be talk of as a possible future Tory leader , back Mr Johnson ' s ` ` magnificent ' ' vision of Brexit in the 4,000-word article , and say in today ' S Daily Telegraph that Britain must not agree an ` ` unnecessary divorce payout ' ' .
it ' s clear the great Brexit betrayal have begin ; an out-of-touch elite be fail to accept that the issue which win Brexit be open-door immigration
when I hear that the government minister Lord prior have tell a meeting of tech and insurance leader last week that they should n't worry about barrier to entry for future employee from the EU , I think he ' d go too far . how could a Brexit administration elect on a promise of reduce net migration to the ten of thousand tolerate such behaviour ? surely Lord prior would be sack ? instead , it get bad . a new Cabinet consensus around transitional arrangement have be unveil . under it , open border will be maintain for a minimum of two year after we finally leave the EU in @card@ . Britain will have to wait until at least @card@ - five year after the Brexit referendum - to take back control . million who vote leave will feel cheated , and rightly so : it ' s clear the great Brexit betrayal have begin . although the modern Tory party have a dreadful track record when it come to immigration , last summer thing look bright . Boris Johnson and Michael Gove even advocate an Australian-style point system . that message undoubtedly help to secure Brexit . thing have now change . Gove argue that future migration policy should be shape by the interest of our economy . unsurprisingly , our Remain Chancellor , Philip Hammond , agree , while also apparently believe Britain should stay in the single market post-Brexit . the old alliance of big business and a Tory government be booming again . meanwhile Tory supporter , who have vote loyally in successive election for manifesto that promise to drastically cut number , have be sell out . daily , we be spoon-feed argument about the need for a transitional period after leave the EU , allegedly in the interest of the economy . in reality , this be just a re-run of an argument advance by the Remain side last year , which be dramatically reject by the electorate . apart from a few delusional Westminster MP , everyone know that the issue which win Brexit be open-door immigration . large number of people who have never previously vote turn out on June @card@ last year believe that Britain could reclaim its future if this irresponsible policy be jettison . not only do voter regard this as a vital matter in a democracy , it be also about trust . that sense of trust be fall away rapidly . the irony be that the government ' s decision to keep the border open come as the migrant crisis in Italy be intensify . even the most optimistic measure of the ` ` new consensus ' ' will mean that , one year on from the historic vote , all of the problem cause by the UK ' s rise population - which be set to hit @card@ million by @card@ - will continue to worsen . every week Britain ' s national debate focus on the lack of available school place , shortfall in NHS funding , overcrowd on our railway , or on the housing crisis . but rarely , if ever , do any member of the political class dare to voice the undeniable truth that immigration lie at the root of these difficulty . the talk be always of the economic benefit , never the capital cost of the infrastructure require . the Brexit-voting public be not in denial over immigration . many now want a total stop to it . for a nation to rise up against the establishment and secure a historic victory , only to have its hope thwart by an out-of-touch elite , be a recipe for dangerous division . it be strange to think that Jeremy Corbyn be now offer a tough line than the government when he say he would ban the wholesale importation of low-skilled EU worker . be this a ploy to damage Theresa May , much as the late Labour leader John Smith cynically oppose the Maastricht treaty in @card@ ? even the shadow trade secretary and staunch Remainer , Barry Gardiner , acknowledge that a ` ` key objective ' ' of Brexit be to ` ` have control over our border ' ' . he say that unless this objective , and other , be meet , ` ` we will find it difficult to justify the final result to the @card@ per cent who vote leave ' ' . Mr Gardiner be absolutely right . my hope that this government have learn the lesson of the referendum , and understand that open-door immigration and its effect matter more to voter than any other issue , have for now evaporate . the ` ` new consensus ' ' must be break . follow Nigel Farage on Twitter @ Nigel_Farage ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
what to watch Body : after Brexit : the battle for Europe BBC TWO , 9.00PM ? ? hard Brexit . soft Brexit . as Britain continue to prepare for withdrawal from the EU , the BBC ' S Europe Editor Katya Adler present this special investigation into the rise of populist Eurosceptic movement and ask whether the union itself can survive . Adler begin in Sicily , where she chart the conflict between Ukip-like movement Five Star and pro-Euro centrist Matteo Renzi , who recently resign as Italian prime minister . she then travel across the continent , meet the politician pose a major threat to the EU establishment , as well as ordinary voter disfranchise by year of Eurozone turmoil and the migrant crisis - from France , where the Front National ' S Marine Le Pen be in contention for the country ' S presidency , to Hungary , where prime minister Viktor Orban be launch his own counter-revolution against Brussels . Adler also meet top Eurocrats include Germany ' S Martin Schulz and Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian PM charge with negotiate Brexit on behalf of the European Parliament . can the 60-year old union survive or will it be sweep away by a populist revolution ? Michael Hogan
attempt to set aside the Brexit referendum ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Tom Brake ( Letters , January @card@ ) deny that liberal Democrats want to block Brexit by any mean possible , state that his party simply want to grant the people a say on the government ' s final deal with the European Union - through a further referendum . if a middle-of-the-road Brexit deal be put to the people , many might reject it for not be hard enough . yet Mr Brake and other might reject it for not be soft enough . thus the majority could reject the deal , but for oppose reason . Tim Farron have say that , in such circumstance , Britain would remain in the EU despite this being the will of the minority . be this another example of shallow thinking by the Liberal Democrats or proof of their desire to block Brexit at any cost ? Christopher Healy North Ferriby , East Yorkshire Sir - Mr Brake ' S condition that would see the Liberal Democrats vote in support of invoke Article @card@ remind me of the demand Austria issue to Serbia in @card@ . he know the government be very unlikely to agree to a second referendum on the final Brexit deal . if the Liberal Democrats ( like the EU ) can not accept a referendum result , I suggest their title need update . Henry Ireton Hordle , Hampshire Sir - the treatment of the people ' S decision in the EU referendum be nothing short of a scandal . before the referendum , the government deliver a brochure to every house in the land extol the benefit of stay in the EU . it say nothing in favour of leave , and its whole campaign be one of threat and warning . yet most people vote to leave . on the 14th page of the brochure , it be clearly state : ` ` this be your decision . the government will implement what you decide . ' ' the brochure do not add ` ` unless you vote to leave ' ' . nor do it say : ` ` whatever the result , Parliament will need to ratify it . ' ' the subsequent attempt to subvert the people ' S decision will have grave consequence for the future of democracy in this country . a J Brooks Swindon , Wiltshire
Scotland EU ' have more to lose from Brexit ' ; Carney admit British economy be do good than Bank expect in wake of referendum
the EU have more to lose from Brexit than the UK , the Governor of the Bank of England have say as he admit that Britain ' S economy will defy his own gloomy forecast and grow at a fast rate than expect . Mark Carney concede that Brexit be no long the big domestic risk to Britain ' s economy after issue a series of dire warning about the consequence of a leave vote in the run up to the EU referendum . the Bank of England be now ` ` very likely ' ' to improve its economic forecast next month , Mr Carney say , add that he be ` ` surprised ' ' that the economic slowdown which he forecast have not materialise . ` ` in the run-up to the referendum we feel that it be the large risk [ to the economy ] , ' ' he say . ` ` there be a series of thing that could have happen that would have have financial stability consequence . ' ' he say that have get this far , ` ` the scale of the immediate risk around Brexit have go down ' ' . during an appearance before MP , he say that a hard Brexit would pose a great threat to the financial stability of the European union than to the UK because of the strength of Britain ' s financial service sector . ` ` I be not say there be not financial stability risk in the UK , and there be economic risk to the UK , but there be great short-term risk on the continent in the transition than there be in the UK , ' ' he say . however , he insist that the Bank of England be right to be pessimistic in its forecast . ` ` as you ' d expect a bunch of dour central banker to be , we ' re focus on the downside and less focused on how everything could turn out well , but what could go really wrong ... and where can we potentially mitigate that , ' ' he say . ` ` we do n't have to see a ghost behind every corner , but we do have to ask ourselves what could go wrong . ' ' Eurosceptic Conservative MP say that Mr Carney should apologise for the forecast during the referendum campaign . Peter Bone say : ` ` I do n't think expert ever say sorry . they just say they get their forecast wrong due to unexpected circumstance . it prove that the British people be right and the banking expert be wrong . ' ' Oxford University ' s head of Brexit strategy say yesterday that British university will establish global network and recruit the world ' s ` ` good and bright ' ' student outside of the EU . Prof Alastair Buchan tell the education select committee that EU membership have ` ` sideline ' ' Canadian and US researcher who use to work at UK university . he tell the committee : ` ` we have really good collaboration , which hopefully in this Brexit climate might be reinvent , because that movement of English-speaking medicine be actually a casualty of join Europe . ' ' Yesterday Robert Goodwill , the immigration minister , suggest that business could be hit with a £1,000 annual charge for every skilled European worker they employ after Britain leave the EU . however , Downing Street say it be ` ` not on the government ' S agenda ' ' . Sturgeon plan ' impossible ' : page @card@ business : page @card@
city boss face grill over Brexit doomsaying ; Douglas Flint , Xavier Rolet and Elizabeth Corley to be quiz by MP over pessimistic EU forecast
three of the City ' s most powerful figure face question from MP over suggestion bank and other financial service firm exaggerate the threat pose by Brexit . Douglas Flint , chairman of HSBC , London Stock Exchange boss Xavier Rolet and Elizabeth Corley , vice chairman of asset manager Allianz Global Investors , will appear before the Treasury Select Committee ( TSC ) tomorrow . the influential panel of MP have launch an inquiry into the future of Britain ' s economic relationship with Europe once it leave the EU . it be understand MP will investigate whether City firm have embellish the likely impact of Brexit on the Square Mile , in an attempt to pressure the government into prioritising the financial service industry during negotiation with Brussels . it come after the chief economist of the Bank of England concede that the warning of an economic downturn forecaster sound before the EU referendum have be a ` ` Michael Fish ' ' moment - the infamous episode in @card@ when the BBC weatherman say there would be no hurricane the night before the Great Storm . Andy Haldane admit that some of the bleak Brexit forecast might transpire to be ` ` just scare story ' ' and that economics be now in ` ` crisis ' ' . Mr Rolet ' S prediction have be among the most doom-laden . in the run-up to the referendum he tell the Sunday Telegraph that Brexit would lead to ` ` implosion ' ' of the continental bloc . in September , the stock exchange boss claim that as many as @card@ job across the country be at risk if exit the EU result in the loss of the clearing industry from the UK . the clearing of some £460bn of euro-denominated derivative a day be set to be one of the main financial battleground in negotiation between London and Brussels . European city such as Paris and Frankfurt be vie to take over the industry , although Mr Rolet have suggest most clearing will move to New York after Britain ' S exit . HSBC say it could move about @card@ employee from London to Paris if the UK leave the EU , although Mr Flint appear to row back on that claim follow the EU vote , say that such a move would be an ` ` extreme ' ' scenario . one of the main worry for executive at bank , asset manager , and insurer with European operation base in the UK be that their firm will lose access to the EU ' s single market . they say this would force firm to move employee on to the continent to sell service to European client . many be push for a lengthy transition period .
Scotland ' Brexit be n't a vote to shut down the economy ' ; Philip Hammond warn that immigration control must not come at expense of growth
Philip Hammond be keen to point out that his relationship with the Prime Minister be very different from the one George Osborne have with David Cameron . in the three month since Theresa May make him Chancellor , there have be report of strain . go be the day when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne govern almost as one . the new Prime Minister prefer to make decision alone or with only her most trust adviser , it be say . it have even be report that Mr Hammond be no longer a guest at her daily morning meeting , something that would have be unthinkable when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne occupy Downing Street . but Mr Hammond suggest that the nearsymbiotic relationship maintain by his predecessor and the former prime minister be not necessarily conducive to good government . ` ` George Osborne have a very close personal and political relationship that go back a very long way with David Cameron and they work together in a certain way , ' ' Mr Hammond say . ` ` Theresa May and I work together in a different way - [ though ] we ' ve also know each other a long time . ' ' he add : ` ` the most important thing be that we share clear objective . that we understand each other ' S priority , we know how each other work and we have a channel of ready communication between us and I ' m quite satisfy with the arrangement that Theresa May and I have get . ' ' Brexit and the Single market in recent day there have be report that Mrs May be seek a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , which would mean Britain relinquish its membership of the single market so that it can have full control of its border . Mr Hammond be dismissive of attempt to characterise exit negotiation as ` ` soft ' ' or ` ` hard ' ' . ` ` we ' re the world ' s fifth-largest economy and create a relationship between the European Union and the world ' s fifth-largest economy be go to be a complex process for which there be no model , ' ' he say . ` ` so it will be a bespoke model . we should be look for a good Brexit - not a hard Brexit or a soft Brexit . ' ' there have be report that he be concerned that the desire among some in Government to control immigration could lead to economic harm , with the European union deny access to the single market if Britain do not accept the free movement of migrant . but Mr Hammond insist that any migration control must not come at the expense of economic progress . the Chancellor say : ` ` we ' ve get to be clear about one thing - there ' s an implicit term of the mandate we receive from the British people . it may not have be state explicitly but it ' s implicit . and that be that they do not want to see the economy suffer . ` ` they do not want to see job lose , they do not want to see standard of live decline . so they will expect us to negotiate a solution which deliver the key element of leave the European union - regain our sovereignty , get control over our border - but they will expect us to do all of that in a way that allow the UK economy to go on grow . ' ' Immigration Mr Hammond have make clear that whatever immigration control be enforce , ` ` highly skilled ' ' worker will never be ` ` shut out ' ' of Britain . he have already say that key worker in the financial service industry will be exempt , but appear to suggest that other sector will get similar freedom . ` ` whatever solution we end up with , whatever control power we have over immigration into the UK , we will use them responsibly , ' ' he say . ` ` we will use them in a way that support the UK economy and we will certainly not use them to shut out highly skilled people - whether they be banker or software engineer or manager in global company - from the UK when their presence be support inward investment and growth . ' ' responsible capitalism Mrs May have face criticism from the country ' s big firm by demand ` ` responsible capitalism ' ' . the Prime Minister want to put worker on company board and also rein in excessive pay . he insist the measure , particularly plan to put worker on board , be ` ` something that responsible business will recognise can be positive for them ' ' . he also suggest large company will not want to risk a backlash from angry customer . ` ` Business need to understand - and I think business do understand - in the wide context it be n't sustainable to have large household brand-name business anger their consumer . their consumer , our voter , must be important to them and their reputation , their image with their consumer must be important . ' ' amid grow concern about the German lender Deutsche Bank , Mr Hammond be quick to reassure voter that the British - and global - banking system be more ` ` resilient ' ' than before the @card@ financial crash . he say that if a big bank be in trouble ` ` the world ' s central bank would cooperate together to resolve it in a way that do n't contaminate the wide system ' ' . he add : ` ` I have a high degree of confidence that those mechanism that we now have in place be effective and will work if call upon . ' ' the tech industry Mr Hammond will use his speech to the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham to announce a huge cashinjection for hi-tech company . as well as £100 million for life science , there will be £120 million to research artificial intelligence and nanotechnology . Mr Hammond say he want to make Britain a ` ` global capital ' ' of ` ` innovation ' ' . what ' S on when conference agenda ? Tomorrow Theresa May ; David Davis , Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union ; Liam Fox , International Development Secretary ; Boris Johnson , Foreign Secretary ; Sir Patrick McLoughlin , party chairman ? Monday Philip Hammond , Chancellor ; Greg Clark , Business Secretary ; Sajid Javid , Local Government Secretary ; Chris Grayling , Transport Secretary ? Tuesday Amber Rudd , Home Secretary ; Michael Fallon , Defence Secretary ; Liz Truss , Justice ; Jeremy Hunt , Health ; Justine Greening , Education ; Damian Green , Work and Pensions ? Wednesday Theresa May
the IMF be miss the point on Brexit ; Comment
there be two way of look at the IMF ' s pronouncement on the economy , Brexit and all other matter . the first be to dismiss everything it say as irrelevant : after all , it have regularly change its mind in recent decade over central issue of economic policy and utterly fail to predict or understand the bubble of the 2000s and the subsequent crash and financial collapse . it also prove unable to properly predict the eurozone crisis , or to be sufficiently objective about the launch of the single currency . it get it wrong on austerity , or at least on the impact of the version practise by George Osborne , force a rare apology . time and again , its prediction or prescription turn out to be want . I would n't go as far as to claim that it be a contrary indicator - it be right on some major question , such as the desirability of globalisation and free trade - but its record be poor when it matter . like almost all international organisation and institution , it buy into the current ( and everchange ) ' the status quo itself be unstable : the EU will receive economic change over the next few year ' wisdom . international bureaucracy support other international bureaucracy ; and the IMF , all too predictably , back the EU . Christine Lagarde argue that the referendum on Brexit could create uncertainty , whereas she believe that certainty would be preferable ( sadly , bureaucrat never like the fact that democracy actually imply a choice from empower voter ) . despite all of that , I prefer the second option , which be to take all argument seriously , even if their source be suspect and have a terrible history of get it wrong . the IMF be engage in what could be a six-month project to write a report on how Brexit would impact the economy , the conclusion of which be likely to be predictable ; but when it be publish , it will deserve to be take seriously even by those of us who already suspect that they wo n't be convince . the real debate to be have within the business community be slightly different , however . I have speak to several anti-Brexit CEO in recent week , who have make the same point : they believe that the EU be procapitalist and those who oppose it be not . I have also speak to pro-Brexit business people and economist who have argue the exact opposite : it be the EU that be anti-capitalist , its centralise , harmonise and regulatory instinct inherently at odd with real free market . it be a fascinating divide : two group of intelligent people be look at the same organisation , and come to radically different conclusion . one group be right , and the other wrong . in a variation on the same theme , one prominent chief executive tell me that his own decision as to whether or not he would back Brexit would boil down to whether he think that an independent UK would be more protectionist and inward-looking - or whether Brexit would make us more global in outlook and more likely to embrace pro-growth reform . the truth be that we can not know for sure . it be possible that we would become a lot more protectionist if we be to leave the EU , or at least loosen our tie with it ; in particular , there be a good chance that the labour market will become less liberal ( though more barrier to EU migrant might be cancel out by few barrier for certain non-EU one ) . but it be equally possible that the rise of Marine Le Pen in France and other factor will make the EU far more interventionist and illiberal than it be today , impact us , too . the status quo itself be unstable : the EU will change over the next few year and us with it . my own guess be that the sort of constitutional and cultural shock that a Brexit /proper renegotiation would guarantee would jolt Britain out of its current complacency . paradoxically , trade and life would continue unchanged for the first few year at least ; but it would nevertheless be a seismic event for Westminster elite . attitude would change very quickly . they would become far more aware of the need to attract capital and talent ; the pressure to allow the construction of new airport capacity would be great ; we would finally sort out our domestic political institution ; we would have to fight harder and be good in every way , focus on education , investment and competitiveness . the artificial European cocoon would be go , if only psychologically ( in practice , the UK and the EU would probably remain just as economically integrated as they be today ) . far from retreat into protectionism and nimbyism , I suspect that we would become even more open . it ' S just a guess , of course - but contrary to what the IMF seem to believe , certainty be n't possible in the real world . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk ' The status quo itself be unstable : the EU will change over the next few year '
UBS to start move City job to Europe ' early this year '
Swiss investment bank UBS have reveal it will start to implement Brexit contingency plan early this year , in a move that could see hundred of the firm ' s London staff move to continental Europe . in full-year result publish yesterday , UBS - which employ @card@ people in London say it would begin ` ` implementation of contingency measure in early @card@ ' ' in preparation for Brexit . some @card@ role be expect to leave the UK , accord to report , compare with @card@ initially fear . UBS have strike a more upbeat tone on Brexit in recent month , say it be ` ` more and more unlikely ' ' it will have to move as many as @card@ staff from London due to ` ` regulatory and political clarification ' ' it have receive . however , the speed with which international bank be enact contingency plan will add to concern about the City of London ' s global status . the Bank of England and consultancy EY have warn that as many as @card@ City job could go by March next year without a Brexit trade deal . city boss and the UK Government be press the EU for a Brexit trade deal that include financial service . Axel Weber , chairman of UBS , be among the finance boss make the case at a summit with Theresa May , the Prime Minister , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , at Number @card@ earlier this month . however , the EU have insist Britain ' s financial service industry will not be include in any agreement . UBS post pre-tax profit of Swiss franc 5.4bn ( £4bn ) for @card@ , narrowly above analyst expectation of Sfr5.3bn . the strong profit come despite a Sfr2.9bn one-time hit in the fourth quarter from Donald Trump ' s US tax reform . UBS also announce plan to merge its global and US private bank and a Sfr2bn share buy-back programme in a boon for investor . Sergio Ermotti , chief executive at UBS , say the merger of the group ' S two wealth management division would help to low cost and increase profit .
we should all be optimistic about Brexit - here ' S why
the Treasury want to keep the lid on public spending and limit tax giveaway until UK public finance be sound . this be a good aim , since the government ' S debt be about 80pc of our national income when you strip out the effect of the Bank of England ' s operation in the money market and the debt of RBS . but in March @card@ we formally leave the EU ; and probably by mid @card@ we be out of the transition period . we must have the right policy to make sure the economy thrive . for that the Treasury need to have a positive mindset . unfortunately , it seem quite determine to take the gloomy view possible . the Treasury have not retract the assessment of Brexit it make before the referendum : long-term , that GDP would be reduce by any Brexit , most of all ( 7pc ) by a clean Brexit with no EU trade deal , and short-term , that there would be a sharp and immediate recession . the short-term one have already be contradict by event : the UK be still grow well . the long-term assessment have come under widespread attack ; its protectionist assumption be contrary to the government ' s trade policy , and its empirical work be largely base on non-UK experience . neither the Treasury nor the Chancellor have reply to these crucial criticism . against this depressing background the economist for Free Trade group have feel it necessary to do its own assessment of the budget outlook up to and after Brexit . there be four main reason why we take a much more upbeat view of the future for the economy and the public finance . first , there be the current economic fact : the economy be do well . growth accord to the ONS be run at just below 2pc per annum.We think that when all the data be in the final revised GDP growth rate will be see to have be run at 2pc-plus since the referendum . that would fit with the datum from the purchasing manager indices , CBI survey and robustly grow employment . it also fit with the steady improvement in the public finance . you would hardly think from all the report hand-wringing that public borrowing be run below the OBR ' s forecast for this financial year . the money come in from revenue be grow more strongly , at 4pc , than the money go out in spending ( at 3pc ) . it look as if borrow this year will be around 2pc of GDP . second , that steady trend in revenue growth look set to continue up to Brexit as growth in money GDP stay around the 4pc mark , so that by @card@ , borrowing will have get close to zero . when borrowing be this low , debt fall as a percentage of grow GDP . by @card@ , regardless of Brexit , debt would have reach 75pc of GDP , well on its way towards the safe target level of 60pc , where the risk of a sharp interest rate rise cause a crisis become manageable . third , the official gloom about UK productivity growth stall be mislead . there be a huge measurement problem for the quality , and so the productivity , of service . it be easy to measure the number of plate roll off a production line ; but how to measure the service you get from your mobile phone or your computerise booking agency ? for example , accord to ONS figure , productivity in education , healthcare and social service have be fall since @card@ at 4pc a year ; this be an absurdity . unfortunately until we can get some grip on the measurement issue the only reliable figure for the economy ' S growth be money GDP - the money value of what we spend and produce . fourth and finally , there be Brexit and the massive boost that its economic revolution will provide by bring free trade and world competition , home-grown pragmatic regulation and an end to subsidise , unskilled EU immigration . in the long term this raise our GDP by 7pc , bring down consumer price by 8pc and boost the live standard of the low income group by 15pc . from @card@ , it take gradual effect because of the usual time lag ; by @card@ about 2pc of the full 7pc will have come through , with the rest due by @card@ . the total effect on government revenue will be a rise of about 10pc , worth £80bn in today ' S economy but of course much more by @card@ . when you feed Brexit into the public finance , two thing happen . first , the future path of debt be much lower relative to GDP , as the finance improve sharply with no change in assumed public spending ; this permit the UK to get the debt/GDP ratio to 60pc faster and indeed below 50pc by @card@ . second , there be a policy need to support the change Brexit economy , to make the most of our new opportunity . face with chance to grow faster and penetrate new market all around the world , UK competitiveness should be reinforce : tax rate should fall , infrastructure be improve , and public service make fit for a strong economy . if you put these thing together , Brexit create a dividend or fiscal fund that can satisfy this policy need while still bring the public finance to a safe debt/GDP ratio in the 2020s . we show that we can afford to spend another £25bn a year from @card@ , top up by a further £40bn a year in @card@ . this will be enough to spend another £33bn a year on public service and infrastructure by @card@ , a lift of about 4pc in public spending ; and also to cut corporation tax to 14pc , the top rate to 36pc with no additional rate above it , and the standard income tax rate to 18pc . this be truly a future to be optimistic about . Professor Patrick Minford be the chairman of the economist for Free Trade group ' sadly , the Treasury seem quite determine to take the gloomy view on Brexit possible '
Scotland Osborne be ' too gloomy ' about Brexit , say his former aide
George Osborne be ` ` too gloomy ' ' about the progress be make by the government on Brexit , his former aide have say . Rupert Harrison , who serve as Mr Osborne ' s chief of staff when he be chancellor , insist that once the ` ` dust settle ' ' the ` ` outline of the UK position be pretty clear ' ' . it come after an editorial in the London Evening Standard , edit by Mr Osborne , suggest that little progress have be make on key aspect of Brexit . Britain will have to ` ` cough up ' ' a £36billion Brexit divorce bill if it want to conduct talk on its future deal with the EU , the editorial say . it say : ` ` the sensible thing for the Prime Minister to have do would have be to say : ' I never make these stupid claim we ' d get money back ; I ' m just settle the bill everyone know we ' d have to pay if we leave ' . ` ` instead , Downing Street dig itself into a new hole by claim that the £36billion bill be talk about over the weekend be ' inaccurate speculation ' - when the truth be the opposite . but the inability of our leadership to think more than one step ahead should n't obscure the fact that a deal on the money will be do , and we will cough up . ' ' Mr Harrison , who be now a manage director at global fund manager Black-Rock , respond on Twitter : ` ` my old boss [ be ] part of [ the ] consensus that be too gloomy on Brexit progress - once dust settle we will see outline of UK position be pretty clear . ' ' he add : ` ` what I do take issue with at the moment be this over the top critique of everything the UK do - mistake poor comms for lack of progress . ' ' the Sunday Telegraph disclose at the weekend that minister be consider pay a £36 billion Brexit divorce bill in a bid to break the deadlock in negotiation . the scale of the divorce bill have infuriate eurosceptic Cabinet minister and Tory MP , many of whom believe that Britain be under no legal obligation to pay anything when it leave the EU . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , tell MP that European leader can ` ` go whistle ' ' if they expect Britain to pay an ` ` exorbitant ' ' divorce bill .
Scotland Leading Nationalists challenge to back fisherman on Brexit
Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond be urge yesterday either to sign up to a Brexit fishing pledge , or tell their MP who have already do so to withdraw . the Nationalist MP Eilidh Whiteford ( Banff and Buchan ) and Mike Weir ( Angus ) , whose seat be under threat from the Tories accord to poll , sign the Scottish Fishermen ' s Federation pledge last week . the pledge support the UK ' s withdrawal from the EU and the Common Fisheries Policy . the move contradict the stated SNP position of maintain full membership of the EU , which also mean sign up to the widely hate CFP . the pledge claim that Brexit present the industry with a ` ` sea of opportunity . ' ' Dr Whiteford ' S seat include the major fishing port of Fraserburgh and Peterhead and be one of the few area of Scotland that vote for Brexit . Mr Weir have an @card@ majority , but Angus be formerly a Conservative stronghold and the Tories be confident of make major gain . Ross Thomson , the Tory candidate for Aberdeen South , say : ` ` the Scottish conservative be fully behind the Scottish Fishermen ' s Federation aim of exit both the EU and the CFP to make the most of the opportunity afford by Brexit . ` ` Today every Scottish Conservative candidate in the North East be sign their pledge . Alex Salmond and Nicola Sturgeon must come clean with people in the North East . ` ` either they commit to sign it too or Nicola Sturgeon should tell the MP who do to remove their name . ` ` as thing stand , the SNP want to drag our fisherman back into the disastrous CFP and Brussels control of our water . ' ' speaking in Aberdeenshire , Ms Sturgeon say the SNP always have , and always would , stand up for Scottish fishing . she add : ` ` we have be longstanding critic over many year and many election of the Common Fisheries Policy . ` ` it ' S the Tories who have repeatedly sell out Scottish fishing , they once describe them as expendable and the Brexit white paper make clear that they want to bargain over other European country ' access to Scottish fishing water . ` ` it ' S the SNP who have stand up for Scottish fishing and it will be the SNP who continue to stand up for Scottish fishing . ' '
Scotland Chancellor ' s call for ' soft Brexit ' threaten Cabinet unity
Britain be not able to carry out a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' in only two year , Philip Hammond suggest last night , as he risk a Cabinet split by say ` ` thoughtful politician ' ' would agree . the Chancellor say that a transitional deal - under which Britain would pay to have access to the single market for about @card@ month after leave the EU - would help to ensure a ` ` smooth ' ' Brexit . his intervention throw new light on difference of opinion in the Cabinet . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , and Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , be both thought to oppose a transitional deal . Mr Hammond also suggest that leave the European custom union , which set EU-wide tarriffs on good , could cost hundred of million of pound a year . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , want Brexit to be deliver ` ` as soon as possible ' ' and have say that the UK be likely to have to leave the custom union so it can strike its own trade deal with the rest of the world . Mr Hammond insist that control on European migration , which will be possible after Brexit , would not ` ` choke off ` ` the supply of high-skilled worker . he say : ` ` just because you have a system of control immigration do not mean you have to use it to slam all door shut . ` ` I ca n't conceive of any circumstance in which we would want to impede or prevent the flow of highly skilled , highly pay people . ' ' SNP ' clear as mud ' : Page @card@ Michael Deacon : page @card@
more than Brexit at work in large market movement
there have recently be large movement in the price of three major financial asset - share , bond and the currency - that , it be alleged , derive directly from the Brexit vote . but have these change really be cause by the referendum result ? it do n't take long for market operator to work out that the price of many of the share quote on the London Stock Exchange should rise , not directly because of the Brexit vote , but rather because of the associate fall in the pound . many of our large company have substantial overseas interest , range from investment and significant business operation abroad to simply sell a large part of their output overseas . if the dollar ( or euro ) value of these activity or investment be unchanged , then the sterling value must rise by the extent of the pound ' S depreciation . these company will have enjoy a substantial boost to their income and net asset value in sterling as a result of the exchange rate fall . accordingly , their share price should be high . so it be no surprise that the FTSE @card@ have recently be trade at about 11pc up from its level just before the referendum . interestingly , since the pound have fall by more than this , in dollar term , the FTSE @card@ be down by 8pc.Meanwhile , the share of company not involve in international trade or investment be generally lower even in sterling term . much more significant than share price movement have be the change in the government bond market . during the referendum campaign , some prominent Remainers argue that if we vote to leave the EU the UK would face a funding crisis . after all , they argue , the government be run a large budget deficit of about 4pc of GDP and , alongside it , we have a very large current account deficit of more than 5pc of GDP which require capital inflow of that amount to finance it . the Governor of the Bank of England , Mark Carney , say we be rely on ` ` the kindness of stranger ' ' . actually , it be n't kindness that persuade foreign capital holder to pour money into the UK , but rather their perception of significant prospective return . more importantly , whether you call it kindness or self-interest , their money do not help but rather hinder our economic progress . it serve to keep the pound at a very high level which thereby exacerbate the very current account deficit that the capital inflow be finance . nevertheless , you can see that the worrier have a point - and not only with regard to the currency . in principle , it be possible that if we vote for Brexit the market would take fright about the UK ' s fiscal prospect and accordingly drive the yield on British government debt appreciably high . on a casual inspection , they seem to have be vindicate . the yield on 10-year gilt have recently just about double from 0.5pc to 1pc . yet this be no cause for alarm . this rise come after an earlier sharp drop . far from there be panic about hold British government bond , the initial reaction after the Brexit vote be to pile into them . accordingly , the recent rise in bond yield have still not take them back to where they be before the Brexit vote . indeed , exclude the recent ultra-low level , they remain the low British yield on record . what ' s more , if you look at the credit default swap market - which give a measure of the market ' s anxiety about default risk - you see a small spike immediately after the Brexit vote follow by a return to previous level . so the market do n't seem to be alarm about the UK ' s fiscal health . so what do explain the recent pick-up in gilt yield ? I think this can be explain by a change in economic and financial circumstance which be only partly and indirectly due to Brexit . the fall of the pound have already increase inflation and it be likely to go on rise for the next couple of year . in the financial market , expectation of future inflation have pick up . other thing equal , this should push bond yield high as investor seek protection from the erosion in real value that inflation cause . yet the recent rise in gilt yield be not a uniquely British phenomenon . government bond yield have pick up from their ultra-low level in the eurozone , the US and just about everywhere else . surely that can not be due to Brexit . what explain this , I think , be a change in the medium-term outlook for short-term interest rate and in the prospect for quantitative easing ( QE ) . if short-term rate be ultra-low and be expect to be ultra-low for as long as the eye can see , then long yield will be low - even if inflation prospect suggest a loss of real value . equally , more QE , involve central bank buying of bond , will tend to depress yield . but the intellectual climate , not just here but globally , be shift against monetary stimulus - both low interest rate and QE . this be partly because the deflation danger no longer seem so threatening and indeed high inflation be in prospect , and partly because further monetary stimulus seem unlikely to do much good . turn to the pound , its huge fall this year be widely attribute to the Brexit vote . in one sense , this be right . Brexit be certainly the trigger . but I feel sure that it be not the underlie cause . the UK have be run a current account deficit of more than 5pc of GDP , which have result in a loss of net national wealth of that same magnitude per annum . this could not continue . so the underlie cause of sterling ' S fall be Britain ' s woeful balance of payment position and the fundamental need for a low exchange rate . the extraordinary thing that need to be explain be not why the pound have recently drop so sharply but rather why it be so strong for so long . Roger Bootle be chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com ' the thing that need to be explain be why the pound be so high for so long '
nothing to worry about when it come to Brexit
adopt the brace position , folk , here come the late Brexit bad news . employment ? up . Manufacturing and Services ? up , sharply . the pound ? it be go down , after all our ` ` expert ' ' prophesy doom , but be now climb back up again . unsurprisingly , the majority of British people be feel pretty chipper follow the vote to leave the corrupt , bully and economically stagnant EU . accord to a poll for BBC Radio @card@ Live , six out of @card@ adult in the UK now say they be positive about Britain ' s future after Brexit . but , wait a minute , not so fast . the BBC ' S Brexit Balance reporter , Mick take , have manage to track down two people in Dunstable who be very worry . here come Pete , the Lettuce Grower ... Reporter : so , Pete , on a scale of nine to @card@ , how worry would you say you be about Brexit ? Pete : er , seven . reporter : but it be very worry , be n't it , that you wo n't be able to recruit a load of Eastern Europeans to pick your lettuce ? Pete : I be for Romaine , Cos we need the workforce . my contact , Miss Lollo Rosso , in Brasov , say they do n't want to take the risk hide @card@ picker in the back of a van no more . reporter : quite . and that could be a very worrying consequence . far few illegal migrant . and maybe have to pay British people a living wage to pick lettuce ? Pete : it ' S a big worry for me personally , yes . reporter : well , we ' ll be back for some more Little Gems from Mike later . I ' m join now by Julie who be worry about the possible fallout from Brexit on her beauty salon . this be a scary time in the lash-extension business , be n't it , Julie ? Julie : I ' m not worry no more . reporter : ( laugh nervously ) ah , but surely you be worry . with people feel nervous about spending on luxury like beauty treatment . Julie : we ' re fully book till the end of October . never see nothing like it . have to take on two new therapist . reporter : well , that be in itself a worry . as we ' ve just hear from Julie , people be so worry that they be spend to forget their trouble . thing be still deeply uncertain out here in Brexit Britain . back to you in the studio , Sophie .
Rudd call no-deal Brexit unthinkable after Davis say UK can ' walk away ' ; the path to BrexitRemain-supporting Home Secretary contradict her Cabinet colleague ' s stance on discussion with EU
a NO-DEAL Brexit be ` ` unthinkable ' ' , Amber Rudd say yesterday , contradict the Brexit Secretary hour after he say the UK have ` ` the right to walk away ' ' . speak in the Commons , David Davis say the prospect of no deal should be on the table ` ` for negotiate reason ' ' as he reiterate the importance of be able to leave talk if the only deal on offer be bad for Britain . he tell MP the government be ` ` strain every sinew ' ' to secure a comprehensive deal but it be vital that in a negotiation ` ` you always have to have the right to walk away - if you do n't , you get a terrible deal ' ' . however , during a select committee appearance just an hour later , the Home Secretary say such an arrangement would be ` ` unthinkable ' ' because it would be bad for both side . the prominent Remain campaigner later deny claim she have contradict her Cabinet colleague , but her remark spark outrage and one Con-servative MP publicly tweet his frustration . James Duddridge say : ` ` Far from be unthinkable , a no deal would be my preferred [ option ] to achieve a fast , clean and boring Brexit . the sooner we get on with it the well . ' ' the prospect of leave the union without a deal have become more realistic in recent week after talk stall and pro-Brexit MP make public call to leave without pay a large bill . however , source believe moderate Tory who do not want to crash out of the union could work with Labour to block it use a parliamentary vote , secure via an amendment to the Brexit Bill . meanwhile , the head of the Home Office admit the army could be deploy to protect the border if Britain leave the EU without a Brexit deal . Philip Rutnam say he could not rule out use the military if no deal be agree because the government do not employ enough staff to cope . his remark come as Ms Rudd tell MP on the Home Affairs select committee that there would be a deal strike between the UK and the EU , particularly on security matter , because ` ` it be so much in their interest as well as ours to have something in place ' ' . the Home Secretary and her most senior civil servant be be quiz by the group of cross-party MP over the preparation for leave the union . ask by Labour ' S Yvette Cooper whether he could guarantee the Border Force be ready for the UK to leave the EU without an agreement , Mr Rutnam say : ` ` we will continue not only to seek to reach a deal but keep our contingency planning under review . ' ' he add : ` ` I think it would be unwise to rule anything out but it seem to me clear that any use of the military would be a last resort . ' ' the government be hope to strike a deal with the EU so that current trading arrangement could continue and want a new system of immigration that account for EU national who want to visit the UK for short period of time . Ms Rudd tell the committee that all three million EU national who live in the UK would be free to stay after Brexit , but refuse to give the same guarantee if no deal be strike - simply state it would be ` ` unthinkable ' ' that they would be ask to leave .
Scotland Former SNP deputy claim Sturgeon lack ' strategic nous ' ; Ahead of party conference , veteran nationalist say leader have make error in tie referendum to Brexit
a VETERAN nationalist and former deputy leader of the SNP have launch a stinging attack on Nicola Sturgeon on the eve of the party ' S conference , claim she be ` ` out of her depth ' ' and guilty of a ` ` monumental political misjudgement ' ' over Brexit . Jim Sillars say the First Minister have make a major error in tie the prospect of a second independence referendum to the issue of Brexit . he also suggest the independence movement should distance itself from the SNP to avoid support for separation be drag down by an unpopular party , and in a separate broadside describe the Scottish Government ' s decision to ban fracking as ` ` cowardice ' ' . Ms Sturgeon announce in March that she plan to call a fresh vote on break up the UK by spring @card@ . the move be blame for the party lose @card@ MP in the general election in June and she later ` ` reset ' ' her timetable on a new vote , but insist Brexit mean it be still likely before the next Holyrood election in @card@ . Mr Sillars , who vote to leave the EU - a position think to be favour by up to a third of SNP supporter - say his public attack be prompt by the first resolution at the SNP conference , which begin in Glasgow tomorrow , describe it as an ` ` unthinking paean of praise for the EU ' ' . write in the Daily Record , he criticise the ` ` error-strewn course ' ' take by the party ' S leader , claim they have ` ` no strategic nous ' ' and be ` ` out of their depth ' ' . he add : ` ` they lunge into an exercise in monumental political misjudgement , the demand for a premature second referendum , lead to loss of majority at Holyrood and a near wipeout in the North East , Borders and Galloway in the Westminster election . ` ` the independence movement need their own guiding resolution - one welcome Brexit as free us from EU one-size-fits-all rule that be inimical to the need of small nation , which require maximum flexibility in a world dominate by economic giant . ' ' he claim that Brexit be , in fact , the ` ` perfect template for harmoniously and civilly dismantle a UK union no longer fit for purpose ' ' . Mr Sillars also ridicule the SNP ' s ` ` comical ' ' position on Brexit , which demand that Westminster should surrender repatriate power to Holyrood , to make Scotland more successful , while at the same time the party be happy for an independent Scotland to ` ` hand them all back to Brussels on reenter the EU ' ' . in a separate broadside , Mr Sillars attack the SNP ' s ` ` cowardly ' ' decision this week to ban fracking in Scotland , describe the move as ` ` madness ' ' . he tell the Daily Mail that thousand of family across Scotland would suffer a freezing winter to cut their energy bill , now the new source of gas have not be embrace . ` ` I think it ' S cowardice . they ' re not prepare to stand up against the green agenda , even though they have evidence that it be safe , ' ' he say . an SNP spokesman say Mr Sillars have contradict himself as he back an independence referendum at the last Holyrood election in advance of Brexit , add : ` ` now he find himself against the majority of Scottish opinion , which be firmly oppose to the Tories ' extreme Brexit plan . ' ' ' they lunge into an exercise in monumental political misjudgement ... lead to a loss of majority '
foreign criminal will stay post Brexit ; Brussels try to block blanket check that would ensure EU convict be deport EU oppose criminal record check of its citizen in UK
foreign criminal will be allow to remain in Britain after Brexit , it emerge last night , as a fresh row break out over the UK ' s right to deport European Union convict . Brussels be try to prevent Britain from root out and deport EU citizen with serious criminal conviction by claim that blanket criminal record check be unlawful . in a major clash over citizen ' right , the EU have demand the government drop plan to vet all three million European citizen who be expect to apply for the right to remain in Britain after Brexit . it would mean thousand of foreign criminal be allow to stay in the UK . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , have insist the check will go ahead , but concede that some EU citizen who have serve jail sentence would be allow to remain , because Britain will use a ` ` soft ' ' European standard to decide who can stay , rather than a strict British standard . it come as the late round of Brexit talk end in deadlock , with both side refuse to budge over the socalled ` ` divorce bill ' ' and the future role of the European Court of Justice . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , say talk could not move forward until Britain have set out exactly how it intend to calculate the size of the Brexit bill . British negotiator say it be their EU counterpart who be at fault by fail to provide enough detail on what they think Britain owes.Mr Barnier say there be ` ` fundamental ' ' disagreement between the two side and a clarification of Britain ' s position on the Brexit bill be ` ` indispensable ' ' to any progress be make . it raise the possibility of the two side fail to meet the October deadline for agree on finance , citizen ' right and the northern Irish border , which would delay a trade agreement and potentially put at risk the chance of wrap up a deal by March @card@ . the government ' s offer on citizen ' right would allow EU national resident in the UK for five year to apply for ` ` settled status ' ' - effectively guarantee them indefinite leave to remain in the country once Britain be out of the bloc . as part of that process , Mr Davis have promise that all three million applicant would be subject to a criminal record bureau ( CRB ) check , and that anyone convict of serious crime would be deport . however , EU negotiator have argue that CRB check be only lawful if there be reasonable ground to suspect someone of a criminal past . the issue of criminal check have become a major sticking point in the second round of monthly face-to-face negotiation in Brussels , which start on Monday and conclude yesterday . Mr Davis be insist the check will go ahead , but have agree that criminal would only be deport if they pose a ` ` present and sufficiently serious threat ' ' to society , the standard set out in the EU ' S Free Movement directive , rather than use the UK test which require that deport someone would be ` ` conducive to the public good ' ' . the Brexit department confirm last night that all three million applicant would be assess under the EU test . only those who apply for citizenship after Brexit will be assess under the tough UK standard , which usually apply to anyone who have be sentence to @card@ month or more in jail . the EU have also object to the tough British rule be apply to EU citizen after Brexit . MP last night express dismay at the prospect of foreign criminal escape criminal record check . the Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` even the strong advocate of the free movement of people have never be in favour of freedom of movement for criminal . ' ' Sir Bill Cash , the Eurosceptic Tory MP , say : ` ` we have a massive problem with EU national who be in prison who ought to be deport but they ca n't be because of human right legislation . we have to protect our border but also our citizen from criminal activity . ' ' even if Britain go ahead with blanket CRB check , people who have commit murder , rape and other serious crime abroad might be allow to stay , as they will only be check against the UK police database . many European country do not have centralise police database , make it impossible to carry out EU-wide check . in a further rift , Brussels insist British expats would not have the right to move to other country in the EU under free movement rule and would only be guarantee the right to remain in the country in which they be settle . the position appear to contradict Mr Barnier ' s insistence that right should not be water down after Brexit .
close EU integration ' shatter by Brexit '
BREXIT have ` ` shattered ' ' the principle of ever close union in the EU , accord to the Belgian finance minister , who warn that the bloc must now transform itself if it be to survive . Johan Van Overtveldt say there be ` ` clearly a problem ' ' with the European Union and he call for a quick , comprehensive trade deal with the UK while warn that try to punish Britain for leave would be futile . Mr Van Overtveldt say a ` ` different ' ' and ` ` good ' ' EU , that focus on key area such as security , migration , job and trade instead of police trivial policy would help boost prosperity and remove the widespread discontent . ` ` Sixty year after sign the Treaty of Rome , and @card@ year after the Maastricht Treaty , the European Union be in trouble and be certainly in need of new inspiration and new direction . the EU can not continue operate the way it do today , ' ' he say at an event organise by the European Economics and Financial Centre in London . he urge policy-maker to take a new approach to integration and say the idea of an EU , forge in crisis , that be put forward by Jean Monnet - dub the father of Europe - be ` ` dead ' ' . ` ` this principle have now be shatter by the Brexit vote , and the fact that one of the large and most prominent member state will be leave the union mean the so-called Monnet doctrine of continuous step towards further European integration , most of the time through crisis , seem dead . ` ` one should not underestimate the psychological effect the Brexit vote have have , not just in Britain but in other European capital , ' ' he say . ` ` long time achievement of European integration such as free movement be be fundamentally call into question . ' ' he also call on the rest of the EU to be pragmatic about Brexit , add that small state such as Belgium , Ireland and the Netherlands have much to lose from a so-called hard Brexit . ` ` Everything in my way of thinking argue to get a good deal for the British and not have as an ultimate objective to punish them , ' ' he say . ` ` this be democracy . we should respect that . we should strike a good deal and be reasonable . ' ' Mr Van Overtveldt say secure a quick deal be also crucial to secure the confidence of investor , producer or consumer . and , ask to comment on report that European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker believe Theresa May be ` ` delude ' ' over Brexit talk , he suggest that it be part of political game playing . ` ` it ' S very common in Belgian politics to say you only have an agreement when you have an agreement on everything , so in that sense Theresa May sound very much like a Belgian politician , ' ' he add . he say it would be ` ` sad ' ' if the only way the EU could remain attractive to its member be ` ` by show them you be able to punish the UK ' ' .
Scotland Swinney promise to continue subsidise EU student ' tuition ; SNP conference ; Education minister deny discriminate against English even though they must continue to pay
john Swinney yesterday deny unfairly discriminate against the English after announce that EU student who win a place at Scottish university next year will have their tuition fund by the taxpayer even after Brexit . the education minister tell the SNP conference that youngster from the rest of Europe who enrol for the @card@ academic year will have their fee pay for the full four year of their degree even if Brexit happen in the interim . SNP minister be currently force by European anti-discrimination law to offer ` ` free ' ' tuition to EU as well as Scottish student but this requirement will end after Brexit , which be expect to occur in spring @card@ . while they be choose to provide free tuition to German , French and Spanish student after this date , those from England , Wales and Northern Ireland will continue to pay £9,000 a year . ask whether it be unfair to provide Estonian student with free tuition but not the English , a spokesman for Mr Swinney say he be maintain ` ` the current system ' ' . press again whether it be discriminate against the English , he say : ` ` you have your view , we have ours . ' ' with @card@ EU student at Scottish university last year , the policy be estimate to cost Scottish taxpayer more than £75 million in tuition subsidy . the announcement come after Scotland ' s university this week demand that minister make clear whether EU student who win a place next year would get their tuition fee fund by the taxpayer after Brexit . Jo Johnson , the UK university minister , announce that European student apply for place in England next year will continue receive loan and grant for the duration of their study , even if Brexit happen sooner . principal be worry they could face legal action as prospectus pub-lished before the Brexit vote in June guarantee that EU student start in @card@ would not have to pay fee . they be also concern that they face have to plug a financial gap of around £60 million if Brexit mean they be force to provide ` ` free ' ' tuition for two year without Scottish Government funding . Mr Swinney say : ` ` I be proud that Scotland be a destination of choice for EU student . therefore I be please to give them further reassurance . ` ` EU student will rightly have concern about any change in their status half way through a course . these student deserve certainty . ' ' Mr Swinney announce in July that EU student start university this year will not pay tuition fee for the duration of their degree but have not previously make clear the status of those apply for place in @card@ . Alastair Sim , director of Universities Scotland , welcome his announcement , say it provide the certainty student and university require . ' I be proud Scotland be a destination of choice for EU student . therefore I be please to give them further reassurance ' £75m estimated cost to the Scottish taxpayer of the pledge to continue pay European student ' fee after Britain leave the EU
politician must stand firm and capitalise on Brexit
Ihave always be strongly in favour of Brexit for logical reason . be free to negotiate trade deal with the rest of the world without interference from Europe give us a very clear advantage over our EU neighbour . then there be the matter of the £8bn per year net contribution into Europe that could be use to bolster Britain ' S economy . cut out all the bureaucracy be another major advantage . but talk of a £40bn-plus Brexit divorce bill and significant cut to the UK ' s growth forecast have dampen the spirit of even the most optimistic Brexit voter . the price tag place on break the deadlock in negotiation be proof that Theresa May and key Cabinet figure have succumb to EU bully tactic . politician must regain their backbone to deliver the benefit of Brexit . the UK should have the upper hand in the exit negotiation because of our £70bn trade deficit with Europe . logically it follow that their pain would be great than ours , and that if they be commercially , and not just politically , motivate they should be desperate to do a trade deal . our leadership have fail to make it clear that Britain be prepare to walk away from negotiation . the lack of courage show by our elect official during the negotiation have put key benefit at risk of be water down at the expense of a true free trade deal . we have be tell by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , in January that Britain would not take Brexit lie down . but where be the evidence ? the term of our exit be be set not by the politician vote for by you and me - nor even by the elect head of our allied state in the EU - but by a small number of unelected bureaucrat , lead by the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier . Barnier ' s recent comment be a clear threat to the economic freedom of the UK post-Brexit . he state that the European Union would reject any future free trade agreement with Britain if we slash regulation and red tape . his disregard for the UK ' s desire to retain its sovereignty and its determination to frame its own law and economic policy after leave the EU be frightening . the EU ' s chief negotiator also hypocritically choose to overlook the activity of several key member state , who themselves have begin take step to cut regulation and lure business and high net worth individual to their shore in anticipation of the post-Brexit era . a race to the bottom be already under way ; France have reduce corporate tax , give tax break to the wealthy , and even offer international school place to the child of CEO and lead banker . and it be not just France - Germany , Ireland and Luxembourg have all find their sweet spot in bidding to be new hub for UK company as people and capital look to relocate . we need to recognise our new reality ; we be compete with our European neighbour not just to retain our wealth creator and high net worth individual , but to also win their business from abroad . regulation and government policy must keep up , as the UK will fall behind if it continue to sing to the tune of the EU in the negotiate process . a £40bn divorce bill , compound by the loss of bank , multinational business and high net worth individual who pay million of pound worth of tax be the stark reality be offer to us by the politician who have promise the UK public a Britain-first approach . I worry that we do n't have leadership strong enough to fight for the future of the UK and our national interest - strong enough to say no to a deal that be not fit for purpose and would not deliver the potential benefit of Brexit . a free trade agreement with the EU be only worth it if we do not have to sacrifice billion , remain tethered to restrictive legislation and continue along the same line as before . a real free trade agreement with the EU should not in any way resemble membership of the EU . as David Davis have always stress , it would be perfectly possible to leave the EU with no deal and trade with it on WTO term , and it would certainly be preferable to do so than to adopt a deal that do n't allow us to take advantage of the opportunity present by vote to leave in the first place . if our politician be brave enough to take back control , we can create an economy which be competitive on the world stage , open to business and free from the shackle of European financial and employment regulation . a deal with Brussels and Barnier be the easy option for Westminster politician , buckle under the pressure of the European machine . the Prime Minister must consider the possibility that be within reach . a messy divorce be far good than a disastrous marriage , and May would do well to encourage her fellow politician to stand firm and deliver the benefit of Brexit . John Caudwell be the founder of Phones4U ' I worry that we do n't have leadership strong enough to fight for the future of the UK and our national interest '
MP accuse of ' witch-hunt ' after ask for list of Brexit lecturer
a conservative MP have write to all university ask for detail of their teaching on Brexit amid fear student be be brainwash by Remain-supporting lecturer . Chris Heaton-Harris , a government whip , ask all vice-chancellors if they would supply the name of professor teach European affair ` ` with particular reference to Brexit ' ' , together with copy of their syllabus and link to online lecture . he have face accusation of ` ` McCarthyism ' ' from some academic , but supporter say vice-chancellors be guilty of ` ` false outrage ' ' after be ` ` rumble ' ' for indoctrinate student with their anti-Brexit view . Mr Heaton-Harris insist he be not try to stifle free speech , but Downing Street distance the Prime Minister from his action , say Theresa May be ` ` very clear ' ' about the importance of university ' independence . the MP write to university vicechancellors on Oct @card@ saying : ` ` I be wonder if you would be so kind as to supply me with the name of professor [ ... ] who be involve in the teaching of European affair , with particular reference to Brexit . ' ' he also ask for copy of syllabus and online lecture . Lord Patten , former Conservative Party chairman who be now chancellor of Oxford University , say it be ` ` an extraordinary example of outrageous and foolish behaviour , offensive and idiotic Leninism . but Philip Davies , the Tory MP for Shipley , say Mr Heaton-Harris be perfectly within his right to ask for the information . he say : ` ` Everybody know university be not open the mind of their student ; they be just indoctrinate them with the Left-wing political propaganda of the lecturer . ` ` I suspect what have get them irritated be that they ' ve be rumble . this false outrage do n't wash with me . ' ' Mr Heaton-Harris , the MP for Daventry , be appoint Vice-Chamberlain of the Household by Theresa May in June , make him the third most senior whip , but the Liberal Democrats have call on Mrs May to sack him for ` ` engage in a witch-hunt ' ' . Andrea Leadsom , Leader of the Commons , say she be ` ` surprised ' ' at the reaction of university to the letter , which contain ` ` nothing sinister ' ' .No @card@ have refuse to give Mr Heaton-Harris any backing . ' I suspect what have get them irritated be that they ' ve be rumble . this false outrage do n't wash with me '
Scotland UK seek custom deal to avoid border chaos ; Britain seek agreement to avoid chaos at the border
Britain will seek to retain a temporary custom union with the EU for at least two year after Brexit to prevent border chaos , David Davis will announce today . the Brexit Secretary will today publish a paper in which he will agree not to implement any free trade deal during an ` ` interim ' ' period . the document state that Britain be seek the ` ` free and most frictionless possible trade in good between the UK and the EU ' ' . the move be intend to reassure business that they will not face tariff on good and new custom check when the country leave the EU in March @card@ . however , Mr Davis will insist that Britain can use the time to negotiate formally and sign free trade deal with nation outside the EU that will be implement after exit . it be likely to lead to an argument with Brussels , which have say that Britain should not be allow to do so . the UK be also face opposition from Ireland , which have threaten to block a transition deal amid concern about custom arrangement on the border with Northern Ireland . the continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ border with Northern Ireland . the dispute will deepen tomorrow when James Brokenshire , the Northern Ireland Secretary , publish a paper set out plan for ` ` light touch ' ' custom check on the border between the North and the South . it will also lead to question from pro-European MP over why Britain be leave the Customs Union at all during the transition period . Brussels be refuse to engage in discussion about its future relationship with the UK until after ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make in divorce talk , include the £36 billion Brexit divorce bill . Mr Davis want talk about the future relationship in tandem with divorce talk amid fear that fail to do so could see Britain leave the EU without a deal . the government say that set out its position demonstrate the UK ' s ` ` desire to ensure our exit from the EU be smooth , orderly and successful ' ' . a source close to the European Parliament ' s Brexit team say Brussels be likely to fight Mr Davis ' S plan . the source say : ` ` any request for a bespoke arrangement would be certain to throw up legal and political hurdle . a transition deal must preserve the integrity of the EU ' s legal order . any sense Britain be get a special deal because of Brexit be anathema to many MEPs . they believe , rightly or wrongly , Britain have a special deal before Brexit . ` ` it be hard to see them accept , without a fight , a bespoke deal that give Britain the ability to strike free trade deal while benefit from the advantage of custom union membership . ' ' the government be put forward two option for custom arrangement after Brexit . one would see the UK manage a new custom border with a ` ` streamlined ' ' administration ; the other would be a custom partnership with the EU that would mean there be no need for a custom border between the UK and the rest of the bloc . ' any sense that Britain be get a special deal because of Brexit be anathema to many MEPs '
Robert Walters profit jump , with firm ' bore of Brexit '
company have become ` ` bored ' ' with the Brexit negotiation and be hire staff as normal , the chief executive of recruitment firm Robert Walters have say . Robert Walters , the boss of the eponymous firm , say there have be strong growth in financial service , it and small business in London , as well as in regional market such as St Albans and Milton www.Keynes.UK profit jump 13pc to £24.3m in the second quarter , in contrast to rival PageGroup which report a slump in UK hire yesterday . Mr Walters say of the UK market : ` ` I think there ' s a decent amount of confidence because I think everyone be bore of Brexit . ' ' there have be concern that firm would freeze hire in the wake of the Brexit vote , while negotiation about the shape of the country ' s exit from the bloc be negotiate . a key concern for some London firm have be the issue of ` ` passporting ' ' , whereby financial firm can operate easily across the EU area . but Mr Walters say that even if financial firm be to leave the City of London follow the UK ' S exit then Robert Walters would still benefit . ` ` we ' re in Frankfurt , Amsterdam , Paris and Dublin so if and when they do move we ' ll be earn money in euros , and so that will have a currency benefit , ' ' he explain . the firm ' s total profit , that be income it get from fee , jump 25pc to £86.3m , help in part by the weakened pound . almost three quarter of its earnings come from international market . across Europe , its profit rise 30pc to £20m , and in Asia it jump 21pc to £35.8m . share in the recruitment company close up 9.4pc at 465p on the back of the result . Mr Walters say he expect profit for the full year to be ahead of market forecast .
tusk tell Britain to pay up for a ' good basis ' for future
Donald TUSK have tell Britain to pay its Brexit divorce bill for the sake of ` ` future relation ' ' with the EU as he rubbish suggestion that Brussels might end up owe money to the UK . the president of the European Council pour cold water on suggestion by minister include David Davis and Boris Johnson that Britain will be in credit when the final bill be work out , say : ` ` it ' S not about money , it ' S about rule . ' ' he also say President Donald Trump have agree with him when he tell him the remain @card@ EU member state be ` ` strong after Brexit than before ' ' . Mr Tusk , who be attend the G7 summit in Sicily , be ask by the Daily Telegraph whether he agree that Britain be owe money by Brussels , rather than the other way around . he say : ` ` no , we have to respect our obligation and I think it ' s not about money , it ' S about rule and also it ' S about a good basis for our future relation . ' ' Mr Tusk say : ` ` I be positively surprise by President Trump ' s comment on Brexit , because it be clear for both of us that in fact the EU as @card@ be more unite after Brexit than before Brexit and it be also his opinion . ' ' he add : ` ` counter-terrorism be one of the main topic during our discussion with President Trump . I be impress by the determination and toughness of President Trump when it come to counter-terrorism . ` ` I totally agree with him when he say that the international community , G7 , the United States , Europe , should be tough , even brutal vis a vis terrorism and Isis . ' '
finance firm ' have spring in their step ' as fear of Brexit wane
bank and finance firm have a new spring in their step as Brexit fear have dissipate and the strength of the economy reassert itself , boost business confidence . building society , investment manager and insurer be all particularly upbeat as business level be increase and profitability be rise , a study from the CBI and PwC have find , overcome concern last year that the EU referendum would hold back growth in the UK . in contrast manufacturer be increasingly worry that Britain ' s post-Brexit arrangement with the EU could undermine their success , leave industry worry about the future . the idea that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' could mean leave the EU with no free trade deal in place , trash company that rely on trading part and good across the EU which could end up face tax on those movement , accord to the manufacturing group EEF . it be crucial that Britain have a say in set rule across the EU even after Brexit to help keep trade go , the EEF say , while border tax should remain at zero and custom rule should enable ` ` frictionless trade ' ' . ` ` a loss of access to both the single market and the custom union would condemn the manufacturing sector to a painful and costly Brexit , ' ' it say . ` ` any suggestion that ' no deal be good than a bad deal ' be simply unacceptable to an industry that account for 45pc of all UK export . ' ' Manufacturers be experience an upturn in profit as foreign earnings be worth more in sterling because of the fall in the pound . but last week the Bank of England deputy governor Ben Broadbent warn this may be a short-lived ` ` sweet spot ' ' if border tax go up , or if the pound rise once more . financial service firm , on the other hand , have already be through a period of gloom and be now recover their confidence . the CBI ' s chief economist , Rain Newton-Smith , say : ` ` it ' S great that financial service firm have begin the year with a spring in their step , notwithstanding Brexit uncertainty , with volume expand at a robust pace , profitability improve and hire on the up . ` ` underlying business in the sector be hold up well , and optimism about global market , along with strong global growth , be have a positive knock on effect . however , whilst demand in the wide UK economy have prove resilient , growth be likely to slow as the year go on , amid broad uncertainty and high inflation . ' ' the law firm Baker McKenzie say that Brexit could result in a new wave of red tape hit business if it make trade and hire across border more difficult . ` ` the change involve will require significant additional bureaucratic SHUTTERSTOCK REX/ ROUTLEDGE/ mechanism and will add cost to the business of many of our client , particularly those who move good between the UK and EU @card@ , ' ' the firm say . it say most free trade deal focus on the movement of good across border , but 80pc of the UK ' S economy be base on service , so a radical new type of deal will be need . Hugh
Deloitte make amends with government for memo leak
one of the world ' s big have agree not to bid for central government contract for six month follow a furious row with Theresa May over a Brexit memo . last month a consultant work for Deloitte claim in a two-page memo that civil servant be struggle to cope with more than @card@ Brexit-related project amid Cabinet split . the memo prompt a wither response from Downing Street , which dismiss the memo as ` ` unsolicited ' ' and accuse Deloitte of ` ` tout for business ' ' . Deloitte last night say it have put forward ` ` a plan for work with central government to put this matter behind us ' ' . it say : ` ` Deloitte regret the publication of the two-page note , and have apologise for the unintended disruption it cause the government . the note be intend for internal audience and be not a Deloitte point of view . ' ' the leak memo , write on Nov @card@ by Keith Leslie , a partner at Deloitte , suggest @card@ more civil servant may be need to cope with Brexit . the memo say : ` ` Every department have develop a ' bottom-up ' plan of what the impact of Brexit could be - and its plan to cope with the ' bad case ' . ` ` although necessary , this fall considerably short of have a ' government plan for Brexit ' because it have no prioritisation and no link to the overall negotiation strategy . ' ' at the time the memo be leak , former work and pension secretary Iain Duncan Smith say the consultancy should be strip of government contract , while other Eurosceptic Conservative MP suggest the document have be release in an attempt by Remain campaigner to frustrate Brexit . ' Deloitte regret the publication of the two-page note , and have apologise for the disruption it cause '
Scotland Sturgeon say Scotland be pay ' true cost of Brexit ' ; Autumn Statement @card@
the Chancellor ' S Autumn Statement expose the reality of the ` ` Brexit con ' ' , the First Minister have say . Nicola Sturgeon say drop the leave campaign ' S £350 million a week NHS funding boost pledge and the increase in borrowing show the ` ` true cost ' ' of the vote to exit the European Union . speak at First Minister ' S question , she say : ` ` the Autumn Statement starkly set out the cost of Brexit to the UK economy and public finance , with economic growth and tax revenue revise downwards and borrowing and inflation sharply up . ` ` in respond , the UK Government have the opportunity to end its fail austerity policy , instead the Chancellor have continue with the cut that be reduce the budget for public service and cut the income of family across Scotland . ' ' she welcome the ` ` small increase in capital investment ' ' , but say by @card@ the capital budget would be around @card@ per cent low in real term than when the Tories take office . she add : ` ` the Tory do n't like to hear this because what we be hear now be the reality of their recklessness on Brexit - £100 billion of additional borrowing , debt increase by around £200 billion , debt-to-GDP ratio hit @card@ per cent , low growth and low real wage , a real squeeze on live standard . ` ` yesterday we start to see , perhaps for the first time , lay bare the true cost of Brexit . rather than there be the promise of £350 million extra a week for the National Health Service , what we see yesterday be that the additional borrowing , just the additional borrowing , cause by Brexit will amount to £225 million a week . ` ` that ' s the Brexit con that so many people in the Conservative Party have preside over . ` ` that ' S why I ' m so determine that we continue to explore every option to protect Scotland ' S interest and in particular to protect our place in the single market , because that ' S how we minimise the cost of Brexit that be be impose on us by the Conservative Party . ' ' Tory MSP Murdo Fraser say the Chancellor have announce £800 million extra capital spending for Scotland , £74 million extra resource spending , £3.3 million extra for Scottish charity , a freeze in fuel duty , an increase in the personal allowance to help the low earner , an increase in research and development spending , and a new City Deal . he say : ` ` why ca n't the First Minister for once stop be so miserable and just welcome this good news ? ' ' Scottish Greens co-convener Patrick Harvie say the Autumn Statement have contain a ` ` great deal more good news for the wealthy ' ' , and call for the Scottish Budget to include ` ` progressive ' ' tax policy as well as to go further on issue such as the live wage , energy efficiency and top up benefit . he say : ` ` do the First Minister agree that the Scottish Budget must not only avoid reproduce the same unjust policy that be be pursue south of the border but must result in a cumulative benefit to Scotland that close the inequality gap and leave far few people in Scotland genuinely struggle ? ' ' Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` the Autumn Budget statement yesterday be a case of take money away from the poor to give it to the rich in our society . I think it be us see the Tories show their true colour . ' ' she say the Scottish Budget would not pass on the tax cut to the @card@ per cent top-income earner . ' this be the Brexit con that so many people in the Conservative Party have preside over '
grassroots Tories be head for the Brexit ; Europe @card@ ; major blow to Cameron ' S attempt to win over his party as 42pc of Conservative local chairman back out , new poll show
just one in four Conservative local chairman will vote to stay in the European Union , accord to the most extensive survey of Tory grassroots since the referendum be call . in a major blow to David Cameron ' S attempt to win over his party , @card@ per cent of constituency chairman be find to back Brexit while just @card@ per cent support retain EU membership . the rest be undecided . the survey , conduct by BBC Radio Four ' S World This Weekend , talk to around a third of all local Tory head in seat with a sit Conservative MP and reveal the full scale of Euroscepticism in the party . chairman say that Britain have lose control of ` ` our destiny and law ' ' be in the EU and that immigration be drive down pay for low-skilled worker . far more also say they be dissatis-fied with the Prime Minister ' s renegotiation deal than those who say they be please with it . the finding boost the leadership prospect of Boris Johnson , the London Mayor backing Brexit , who be say to be battle pro-EU George Osborne to take over as party leader when David Cameron step down before @card@ . of the @card@ Conservative local chairman who agree to reveal their voting intention , @card@ say they back Brexit , @card@ say they would be support membership and @card@ be undecided . that mean far more grassroots Tory be back an Out vote than MP - who be roughly split @card@ - and Cabinet minister , a clear majority of whom back the Prime Minister . one chairman support Brexit say : ` ` we be not in control of our own destiny and law . we lose a lot of money to the EU and would be good off keep it for ourselves . I be surprise my MP be vote to remain . he consult no one and be wrong . ' ' another say : ` ` I do n't like the argument put forward for Remain . the fact that Cameron have enshrine our exemption from ' ever close union ' do not address the impact of that ever close union on the UK . ' ' of those who respond just one third say they be satisfy with the quality of Mr Cameron ' s EU renegotiation deal . one critic say : ` ` it be n't a deal . if you ask for nothing and you get even less then it ' S less . why would anyone want to stay ? I hate all the scare story put about by Remain . it suggest the country be full of incompetence and that ' s appalling ' ' . however , separately @card@ Conservative council leader urge Briton to stay in the EU in a letter to today ' S Daily Telegraph . the letter , sign by the leader of , among other , Oxfordshire , Essex , Monmouthshire , Surrey , Suffolk and Somerset county council , say : ` ` the EU be , of course , far from perfect . but that be why the UK need to continue sit at the table , influence the future direction of the single market and ensure that British interest be protect and promote . ` ` Our local community be the lifeblood of our economy : and our continued membership of a reform EU help them to prosper . ' ' they add : ` ` we take a hands-on role in promote the economic wellbeing of our local area . that be why we support Britain ' s membership of a reform EU . ` ` the special status that David Cameron have secure for Britain - particularly in continued access to the single market and protection for the City of London as the world ' s financial centre - will help to ensure prosperity . ' ' Brandon Lewis , the pro-EU local government minister , say : ` ` there be clearly lot of the conservative grassroots that want to fight back and help David Cameron . they know that he ' S secure a good deal for Britain and that being part of a reform EU bolster their local economy . ' ' Letters : page @card@
the lady ' S not for turn ... so be this the package May plan to deliver all along ? ; Brexit deal
history will not remember Theresa May as one of Britain ' s great prime minister . nor as one of its lucky . but posterity might , just , afford her a place in the pantheon of most resilient leader . retrospect might even suggest she be more calculating than anyone suspect . the Brexit deal set out in Brussels yesterday be testament to Mrs May ' s extraordinary toughness , a willingness to endure public abuse , collegiate acrimony and private despair , yet not give up . her predecessor may have run away from the scale of the Brexit challenge he give Britain , but Mrs May have stay at her post . whatever you think of it , whatever question it leave unanswered and whatever trouble it store up for the future , remember this : many of those now pass comment on the deal be six month ago convince that Mrs May would not be in office by now . her capacity for pain and ability to survive apparently mortal wound - include self-inflicted one - be the foundation of this deal . the great of those wound , the botched election , be perhaps key . for when Mrs May lose her Commons majority , she make compromise on Brexit inevitable , since she ( or any other Tory PM ) would lack the vote - and authority - to drive through the hard form of exit seek by purist Leavers . look back , it be hard not to wonder whether , within hour of the June @card@ disaster , she have already calculate that only by make the subsequent negotiating process look unendurably hard might she be able to placate those purist during the inevitable climbdowns to come . anyone pay close attention to the election result or Mrs May ' S word since would have pick up on her real intention . her pre-election claim that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' , for example , vanish from her Brexit script . the truth be that , whatever the political window-dressing and charade , she ' s be tell us this be where she would go for month now - even if some do n't want to listen . Mrs May make an explicit acknowledgement of this reality in Florence with a speech confirm she be willing to accept a transition period after Brexit , a potential role for the ECJ , and to pay billion in a divorce settlement , if that ' s what be need to start trade talk . colleague line up to take a shot at her . Mrs May , like a boxer on the rope , absorb the blow but do not hit back . yet nor do she change course . her offer to Brussels remain on the table , only more extensive . such tolerance may good be ascribe to a post-election decision to play the long game and suck up the punishment . if she have make such a decision , by December it be pay off . for who be it who really back down ? why do MP who once feel they could use Mrs May as a punching bag over Brexit fall meekly in line behind her compromise ? the answer be supply on Sunday by Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , whose influence be quietly grow beyond his department . he publicly warn Tory Leavers to back Mrs May because without her , there might be no Brexit . and so May ' S calculation have become the Leavers ' calculation : collapse her deal might collapse her administration , unleash political chaos in which the Article @card@ process might just be put on hold . still Mrs May have more to suffer . the election failure cause this week ' s spectacle of a British prime minister seeming to dance first to the fiddle tune of the Irish Taosaich and then to the flute of the DUP . again she soak up the humiliation and scorn . do the deal secure her in power for the foreseeable future ? do it resolve the big question at the heart of Brexit ? will it unite the Tory around a single European position ? no , no , and no . there will be more trouble ahead , more drama and more torment for Mrs May . she may yet succeed and she may yet fail . but the endurance - and calculation - she have show in the last six miserable month surely suggest she will stick at the job of Brexit through whatever it throw at her next .
Scotland Mundell challenge Sturgeon to rule out indyref ' once and for all ' ; Mundell want a ' more mature approach ' from ' reject ' SNP
David Mundell will today challenge Nicola Sturgeon to drop ` ` once and for all ' ' her view that Brexit could justify a second independence referendum - and claim her administration be secretly cooperate with the UK Government . speak on the third anniversary of the @card@ referendum , the Scottish Secretary will state the SNP ` ` deliberately conflate ' ' last year ' s EU vote with independence in the hope of re-opening the issue . but he will argue their gambit be ` ` roundly reject ' ' when the nationalist be maul in June ' s general election , and conclude the issue of Brexit and independence must now be ` ` decouple for good ' ' . in a keynote address during a trade mission to Paraguay , Mr Mundell will urge Ms Sturgeon to put the link ` ` to bed ' ' permanently by rule out a second referendum at next month ' s SNP conference . he will also claim that the UK and Scottish government be make ` ` serious and constructive progress ' ' behind the scene on prepare for Brexit but this have continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ be overshadow by the Nationalists ' ` ` public rhetoric ' ' to the contrary . in a pointed intervention suggest they be behave childishly , he will urge them to adopt a ` ` more mature approach ' ' and argue that both side need to ` ` pull together ' ' to get the country ready for leave the EU . however , Keith Brown , the SNP ' s economy minister , describe the speech as ` ` ramble ' ' and claim it expose ` ` the UK ' s own confused and chaotic approach to Brexit ' ' . the row break out ahead of a meeting this week between senior SNP minister and Tory MSPs in an effort to resolve a row of over the UK Government ' S EU Withdrawal Bill and avoid a constitutional crisis . the Scottish Government have threaten to withhold its consent for the legislation , claim it will result in a Westminster ` ` power grab ' ' of responsibility repatriate from the EU that should be pass to Scotland . Ms Sturgeon last week urge Holyrood ' s opposition leader to ` ` put aside party interest ' ' and unite with her on the issue . however , she refuse to abandon plan for a second independence referendum , and still intend to set out a new timetable in autumn next year . Mr Mundell be expect to use today ' s speech to argue that have UK framework for some repatriate power be ` ` common sense ' ' , as the alternative be create trade barrier within the UK that ` ` would be extremely damaging for Scottish firm ' ' . urge both government to work closer together on Brexit , he will say : ` ` behind the scene , that work have be happen and I be please to report we be make progress . ` ` but frankly , up to now , private progress have be overshadow by public rhetoric . ' ' the Scottish Secretary will reject the ` ` power grab ' ' accusation , say that he want post-Brexit devolution to be deliver in a way that ` ` strengthen our United Kingdom not undermine it ' ' . argue that this be ` ` the heart of the matter ' ' , Mr Mundell will say : ` ` the fact be , until the recent election in June the Brexit debate in Scotland be deliberately conflate with the question of Scottish independence . ` ` despite the passage of only three short year - and despite the decisive result - the Scottish National Party seek to use Brexit to reopen the issue that divide our country so badly . ` ` their attempt be roundly reject in the recent general election so we now need the issue to be de-coupled for good . ' ' Mr Mundell will add : ` ` I look forward to the autumn herald the start of a more mature approach , where public rhetoric on all side reflect the serious and constructive work achieve in private . ' ' the Scottish Secretary ' s trip to Paraguay be the first by a UK government minister in @card@ year and he will describe it as ` ` part of a fundamental stepchange in the UK ' s global trade policy ' ' after Brexit . leave the EU will be ` ` transformative ' ' , he will say . but Mr Brown say Mr Mundell ' S visit highlight the fact the UK currently have no trade deal with other country , include Paraguay , and ` ` the ridiculous position that his party have leave Scotland in and the damage that could be do to our export ' ' . he add : ` ` Mr Mundell ' s obsession with independence and failure to understand the impact of the EU withdrawal bill be at odd with the grow consensus across Scotland that we must protect the power of the Scottish Parliament from this legislation and that any UK wide framework must be mutually agree , not impose by Westminster . ' ' ' frankly , up to now , private progress have be overshadow by public rhetoric '
business and minister must unite to make a success of EU deal
with every pass day , it become ever clearer that make a success of Brexit will require a deep , sustained partnership between government and business . over the come month , we must work tirelessly together at both a strategic and a technical level - to achieve both the good possible overall deal , and to deliver the answer to the practical , real-world question that firm pose each and every day . many of the business community I repreRsent see the Westminster and medium debate on Brexit as something occur on a far-off planet , far remove from their day-to-day concern . in truth , only a minority of firm be actively think about Brexit at all - with a majority far more concerned about the impact of government policy and decision close to home . yet for those that see Brexit as a clear and present danger , the basic must come first . ` ` will our good get stick at border crossing or delay at the quayside ? who can we hire , and from where , and for how long ? who do we pay VAT to ? whose regulation do we need to comply with ? will change hit me all at once , or over time ? ' ' and so on . these vital and basic question must be answer , along with the technical and legal issue affect specific sector . from aviation to agriculture , there be complex and detailed discussion on regulation , standard , and institution that be vital to the UK ' s future economic interest . our business community want clear answer . they want the UK ' S negotiator to have the maximum flexibility possible to go out and secure those answer . and they tell us repeatedly that they have no appetite for a parting of way with the European union that do not include a deal . to be sure , individual business impact by Brexit have a range of opinion on what our final deal with the EU should look like . yet they be all clear that they only want to have to make one big adjustment to the condition of that deal . ask firm to incur the cost of one adjustment in @card@ , only to be follow by another a few year later , risk make UK business uncompetitive in an increasingly cut-throat global marketplace . for that reason , the British chamber of Commerce and other business organisation have call on the government to seek to maintain the economic benefit of the single market and the Customs Union , until a comprehensive final settlement between the UK and EU be agree and implement . this would also mean that business only face one set of adjustment cost . this sort of pragmatism , focus on real-world economic risk and opportunity , must be at the heart of the UK negotiator ' thinking . business I speak with on both side of the Channel would like to see flexibility not just from the government , but from the EU27 as well - so that the trade element of the talk can begin as soon as possible . the sooner Brussels agree to discuss the outline of the UK ' s future relationship with the European Union , and the length and scope of any transition period , the strong business confidence , investment and hiring be likely to be - both here in the UK and among our trading partner . attention be require away from the negotiation , too . unless our firm have the well possible environment for business here at home , even a great Brexit deal will have little impact . business community want to be reassure that government will also be focus on other issue that impact their competitiveness and their bottom line . that mean bring forward infrastructure project that have already be approve , give work to supplier and confidence to wide business community . it mean do more about the intermittent mobile and broadband connectivity that handicap firm ' ability to do business . and it mean a continued focus on training and export . yet a great business environment be about more than infrastructure alone . it ' S also about the tone of our political debate . in recent week , our business community have become increasingly concerned that politician and a segment of the public believe that significant tax rise on both business and individual be acceptable and even desirable . call for additional tax on business to pay for politically-expedient spending must be resist , particularly in the context of a Brexit transition . a high-cost , high-tax Britain with patchy infrastructure and serious skill gap would be no recipe for post-Brexit success . firm be already buckle under the weight of the cost they bear before they turn over a single pound . many have be hit by the impact of low sterling , business rate , the Apprenticeship Levy , the Immigrant skill Charge and pension autoenrolment - to name just a few . any politician who seek to raise the cost of do business in the UK at such a critical moment will have to explain to the electorate why few job be be create , why investment originally slate for the UK go elsewhere , and why the tax receipt flow into the Exchequer be low than originally anticipate . maintain a strong environment for business in the UK be just as important as achieve a businessfriendly outcome to Brexit negotiation . all who care about business , whatever their perspective on how we leave the EU , must make this point loudly and clearly . Dr Adam Marshall be director general of the British chamber of Commerce ' a high-cost , high-tax Britain with serious skill gap would be no recipe for post-Brexit success '
tusk say he ' s a dreamer about Britain stay - but it look like he ' S the only one ; Brexit negotiation
Donald TUSK yesterday invoke John Lennon as he say he ` ` dream ' ' that Britain could still stay in the European union . the president of the European Council say it be not ` ` impossible ' ' that Brexit could be abandon , add : ` ` you may say I ' m a dreamer , but I ' m not the only one . ' ' it come on the day that Theresa May make a ` ` fair and serious offer ' ' to give EU citizen live in the UK the right to stay permanently after Brexit and be treat like British citizen . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , say that as a committed Anglophile he ` ` hate Brexit from every possible angle ' ' . Mr Tusk say : ` ` you can hear different prediction come from different people about the possible outcome of these negotiation - hard Brexit , soft Brexit or no deal . some of my British friend have even ask me whether Brexit could be reverse and whether I could imagine an outcome where the UK stay part of the EU . I tell them that , in fact , the European Union be build on dream that seem impossible to achieve . so , who know . you may say I ' m a dreamer , but I ' m not the only one . ' ' however , he be almost immediately contradict by other European leader include Jean Claude-Juncker , the president of the European Commission , who say : ` ` in Europe I never have illusion because I do n't want to lose them . ' ' Charles Michel , the Belgian prime minister , say : ` ` I be not a dreamer . and I be not the only one . ' ' it come as Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , say that Brexit be less of a ` ` priority ' ' than the future of the European Union . she say : ` ` I want to say clearly that , for me , shape the future for the @card@ take priority over the negotiation with Great Britain over withdrawal . naturally we will conduct these negotiation quickly and we will conduct them intensively . we will do everything to ensure that - as have be successfully do so far - the @card@ state stick together . ` ` we want this negotiation to take place in a good spirit . we know that we will want to work with Great Britain later . but the clear focus must be on the future of the @card@ , so that we have the good result . ' ' Emmanuel Macron , the French president , say he prefer to talk about Europe ' S ambition and plan than get involve in ` ` discussion last day and night on its dismantle ' ' . Mr Macron repeat his position that the door remain open for a U-turn on Brexit , but warn that it will be-come more difficult the long talk between David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Michel Barnier , the EU negotiator , continue . ` ` the door be open until the moment you walk through it . it ' S not up to me to say it ' S close , ' ' Mr Macron tell the Guardian . Mr Rutte suggest that he respect the outcome of last year ' S referendum , even if he regret it . ` ` I be an Anglophile , ' ' say Mr Rutte . ` ` you be one of our most beloved partner , so I hate Brexit from every angle . but you ca n't argue with democracy . ' ' Arriving at the European Council summit for the first time since this month ' s snap election leave her in a weakened position at the head of a minority government , Mrs May insist that talk on withdrawal have begin in a ` ` constructive ' ' way . ` ` what I be go to be set out today be clearly how the United Kingdom propose to protect the right of EU citizen live in the UK and see the right of UK citizen live in Europe protect , ' ' she say . ` ` that ' s be an important issue . we ' ve want it to be one of the early issue to be consider in the negotiation . that be now the case . that work be start . ' ' the Prime Minister also urge European leader to put pressure on social medium websites such as WhatsApp and Facebook to give security service access to encrypt message so they can tackle terrorist . Mrs May call on the EU to help ` ` rid terrorist material from the Internet in all our language ' ' in the wake of the Manchester , London Bridge and Finsbury Park terror attack . speak at the European council she say that the terror threat be ` ` evolve quickly ' ' , highlight the fact that in Manchester an improvise explosive device be use while in London the attack involve vehicle and knife . she say that technology company must ` ` fulfil their responsibility ' ' and automatically remove extremist content instead of act ` ` reactively ' ' once they be notify by user . she say that ` ` concerted pressure ' ' be need to stop end-to-end encryption , where even the social media company themselves can not access the content of message . Mr Juncker yesterday hail a new deal on EU defence co-operation which will see Europe sharing defence procurement and work together on small project such as logistic and officer training . he say : ` ` what be start in @card@ be happen now ... I say this be ' the sleeping princess ' of the Lisbon Treaty . well , the Princess be now awaken . ' ' up in the air unanswered question on migrant plan the cut-off date Mrs May do not clarify the date from when EU citizen will qualify for the offer to obtain settle status in the UK , instead she set a range - March @card@ @card@ to Brexit-Day , March @card@ @card@ . ECJ v UK Supreme Courts Mrs May be explicit that any commitment to EU citizen ` ` will be enshrine in UK law and ... enforce through our court . ' ' the EU say the European Court of Justice should have ` ` full jurisdiction ' ' . spouse and family at present EU national can bring non-EU spouse and family member here more easily than British national and the EU want such right to continue . it be far from clear if Britain agree . benefit and welfare the British offer be to treat EU citizen live here equally with UK citizen , but it be unknown if , for example , EU citizen will continue to be able to send child benefit back to child not live in the UK . reciprocal deal while say reciprocity be ` ` vital ' ' , Mrs May be not prepare to make a unilateral offer to EU citizen , leave open the question about what happen if the talk break down .
opposition call for a soft Brexit only make no deal at all more likely ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the opposition party accuse Theresa May of opt for a so-called hard Brexit as her ultimate choice . they ignore her need to use the threat of a hard Brexit in order to win concession from the EU . to set your sight on a so-called soft Brexit would only encourage the EU to make no concession at all . the more the opposition party fail to back Mrs May in this , the more likely Britain will end up without a deal of any sort . that be hardly what the opposition party and Remainers , let alone the rest of the British electorate , want . Major David Riddick ( retd ) Cranbrook , Kent sir - ` ` Senior Whitehall source ' ' ( report , April @card@ ) say that Britain will have to pay billion into the EU budget . yet Article @card@ say nothing about an exit bill . the £50 billion demand be invent by the European Commission to solve a critical EU budget problem . lose the British contribution will leave a large hole . government legal adviser say we owe the EU nothing . a major concession at the start of negotiation would signal to EU leader that they can walk all over us . Ken Worthy Esher , Surrey sir - you report Sir Keir Starmer as say that Labour would ` ` not accept ' no deal ' as a viable option ' ' . this imply that Labour would accept whatever ` ` deal ' ' the EU negotiator have decide to impose on Britain . this in turn be an inducement to these negotiator to impose a settlement probably quite unacceptable to the majority who vote to leave last year . not a very clever approach to negotiation . Dugald Barr London W8 sir - British Remainers often complain that fair attention should be pay to the view of the lose @card@ per cent in the EU referendum . the number of vote for anti-EU party in the first round of the presidential French election exceed this percentage , very narrowly fall short of a majority . how , then , should Emmanuel Macron , if he win on Sunday week , accommodate the view of such a sizeable minority , rather than simply press ahead on a ticket of ` ` hard EU ' ' ? Quentin Skinner Hopfgarten im Brixental , Tyrol , Austria sir - Jean-Claude Juncker , the President of the European Commission , talk about the ` ` march of history ' ' , and seem to think that the EU be somehow in step with it . actually , no such march exist . some historical event appear to follow a pattern ; many other do not , as be show conclusively by Isaiah Berlin @card@ year ago in his short demolition of historical inevitability . later , he adopt another more convincing historical theory that ` ` from the crooked timber of humanity nothing straight be ever fashion ' ' - especially , perhaps , the EU . John Jolliffe Mells , Somerset
grasp opportunity to sweep away Brussels red tape , urge Boris ; Brexit Telegraph Campaign Red Tape Cut EU Foreign Secretary hail Telegraph call to rid UK of @card@ year of ' burdensome ' rule afflict business
Boris Johnson have call for more than @card@ year of ` ` burdensome ' ' EU regulation to be sweep away after Brexit as he back a campaign by the Daily Telegraph to cut red tape . the Foreign Secretary say that Brexit will provide the UK with an ` ` opportunity ' ' to axe needless regulation that have ` ` accrete ' ' since Britain join the European Union . this newspaper have call on the Conservative Party to promise a bonfire of EU red tape in its @card@ manifesto to put Britain on a radically different course . the proposal already have the backing of Iain Duncan Smith , a former Conservative leader , Lord Lawson , a former Tory Chancellor , and business leader . government source say the pledge be likely to win the backing of most of the Cabinet , add that they expect it to form a central part of Theresa May ' s vision for Britain after Brexit . accord to a House of Commons report , minister will have to import up to @card@ EU rule and regulation as part of the Great repeal Bill , which will take the shape of a white paper publish tomorrow . EU regulation be estimate to cost Britain a total of more than £120billion per year . the Common Agricultural Policy alone reportedly cost £10billion in direct cost and by inflate food price . Mr Johnson tell the Commons yesterday that he ` ` applaud ' ' the Telegraph ' s campaign to axe red tape as he respond to a question by Michael Fabricant , a Conservative MP . he say : ` ` it [ Brexit ] will be an opportunity to get rid of some of the burdensome regulation that have accrete over the past @card@ year , and I applaud the campaign that I know he support and which have be outline in the page of this morning ' S the Daily Telegraph . ' ' Mr Fabricant say : ` ` as someone who run a business in @card@ country worldwide , I know how burdensome legislation can be in the EU compare with that of the US and Australia . I fully support the Daily Telegraph ' s campaign to take full advantage of Brexit by cut back on unnecessary red tape , hold back British competitiveness - though this do not mean endanger employee by reduce their right and safety at work . ' ' it come as an analysis by Thomson Reuters find that more than @card@ law and regulation have be introduce in the UK as the result of EU red tape since @card@ , include those which be no longer in force . it say that EU regulation and directive have have a direct influence on swathe of British law include trade , agriculture , financial service and the environment . since @card@ alone , @card@ new EU law have be introduce to the UK . business leader and doctor have call for the end of the work time directive , which impose such strict condition on shift pattern that workforces can not be as flexible as they need to be , and surgeon say it prevent them get vital training . builder have be frustrate by rule on preserve newt , which be class as ` ` endangered ' ' in Europe even though they be relatively common in the UK . consumer have also be anger by rule that have ban the most powerful vacuum cleaner and force householder to use dim energy-saving lightbulb . Open Europe , the think tank , have previously highlight official figure show that the top @card@ EU regulation cost the economy £33.3billion a year - more than the government raise in council tax . it say that the benefit of many of the regulation have be ` ` vastly over-stated ' ' . Henry Newman , the director of Open Europe , say : ` ` ultimately , the win argument for leave the EU be for the UK to regain control over its own destiny . ` ` although the first priority must be to give business certainty by protect the legal status quo , the government will need a careful process to review what be on the statute book . ` ` rather than rule design in Brussels to suit a union of @card@ state , we can have regulation tailor to our own economy ' S need , design to support growth and prosperity for all . ' ' the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman say : ` ` the point of the great repeal bill be that we will transfer all the existing European Union law into British law . that obviously mean that in future decision about those law will all be make in Westminster , Cardiff and Belfast . ' ' during the EU referendum , Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptics who be now in the Cabinet raise repeated concern about the impact of red tape . Mr Johnson say during the campaign : ` ` you can not sell banana with abnormal curvature of the finger . why should they tell us how powerful our hairdryers should be ? this be not a matter for an international , supranational body to dictate to the British people . ' ' ' rather than have rule design in Brussels , we can have regulation tailor to the need of our economy '
EU want Britain to keep pay billion @card@ year after Brexit ; France and Germany fear UK would not pay its debt if trade negotiation turn sour
the European Commission want Britain to be pay into EU project for four year after it have sign a Brexit deal , with final payment continue up until the end of @card@ , the Daily Telegraph have learn . the plan be part of a EU demand that Britain settle a ( Euro ) @card@ billion ` ` Brexit bill ' ' before be grant a deal that will govern future trade relation . the demand emerge after Theresa May appear at the House of Lords in person as peer begin a two-day debate on the government ' s Article @card@ Bill . the suggestion that Britain should pay instalment until @card@ be make at a meeting earlier this month between Michel Barnier , the European Commission ' S chief Brexit negotiator , and senior official from the @card@ remain EU member state . the payment would to help smooth over the ( Euro ) 10billion-a-year hole leave in the EU budget by continue on Page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ Britain ' s departure from the EU , which could see rich country like Germany and France pay more , or poor country , like Poland and Hungary receive less . ` ` the Commission want the UK to pay instalment from the day of departure in @card@ up until @card@ , which be when the financial demand of the EU ' s seven-year budget cycle be at their high , ' ' say an EU diplomatic source with knowledge of the meeting . Theresa May promise that Britain would stop make ` ` vast contribution ' ' to the annual EU budget after Brexit , but the EU will demand that Britain keep make payment to honour commitment already make in the @card@ budget round . the payment will reflect the reality that EU project Britain agree to support prior to departure in @card@ will not require fund to be actually disburse until up to four year later . the prospect of pay into Europe for so long present a political headache for Mrs May and have raise fear among major EU country , lead by France and Germany , that the Britain will not honour its side of the bargain if relation . subsequently sour . the meeting between Mr Barnier and the EU member state also reveal a deep split between France and Germany and the European Commission ' over how to calculate what Britain owe prior to departure in March @card@ . the EC believe Britain should be allow to offset its share of the EU ' S ( Euro ) 154billionassets against what it owe in annual budget commitment , pension obligation and other long term liability . ` ` both France and Germany object , but the Commission'said it be hard to argue that Britain must pay up for its outstanding commitment while refuse to recognise its share of the EU ' S asset , ' ' the source say . accord to plan lay out in the meeting , the European side want Britain to sign up an agreement in principle on how its owings should be calculate , before open discussion on a future trade deal . Germany and France again raise question about whether such an agreement on methodology would be ` ` write in stone ' ' or would be something loose that the British side would later seek to amend . in a hint of a possible compromise , EC official tell the meeting that while they would not bend on the principle that Britain must settle its bill , it could be flexible on how those owings be present .
servant of the European Union seek its interest in Lords Brexit debate ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - do Lord Mandelson and the other peer who have serve the European union in various office declare their financial interest in the Brexit debate ? they be pensioner of the EU , and as such they have a lifelong obligation of loyalty to the EU . the Department for Communities ' guide to councillor advise that , if one have a pecuniary interest relate to any business under consideration , one must not participate in the discussion or in any vote take on it . do this rule not apply to the Lords ? Tom Bliss Fulbeck , Lincolnshire Sir - to overturn the referendum result , thereby defy democracy , Tony Blair seem happy to use the Lords , the very chamber he seek , in the name of democracy , to abolish . Georgina Stanger Caerwent , Monmouthshire Sir - Mr Blair hold a referendum when he be prime minister on whether there should be a Welsh assembly . the vote be @card@ per cent in favour and @card@ per cent against . that result be not contest and an assembly be form . if that be enough for Mr Blair then , why be @card@ per cent in favour of Brexit not enough for him now ? Roger J Arthur Pulborough , West Sussex Sir - Tony Blair ' S judgment be that Brexit be a mistake . would this be the same Mr Blair whose judgment be that we should sign up to the euro ? Michael Knight Ascot , Berksire Sir - the breathtaking arrogance of Tony Blair never cease to amaze me . he really seem to believe that those of us who campaign and vote for Brexit be thick , delude or bad . from February until referendum day last year I hammer my poor , knacker knee daily , spread the gospel of liberty , democracy and the rule of law . both side emphasise that Brexit mean leave the single market and custom union . people understand these implication . I only mention immigration in response to direct question and refer only to the pressure of mass migration on the country ' S infrastructure . maintain liberty , democracy and the rule of law have always cost : it be a cost usually measure in blood . if there be a cost this time , it will be measure in term of a few pound a week in beer money.John Hay-Heddle Sawley , Derbyshire Sir - you publish a letter of mine in July @card@ . in it I point out that shortly after the @card@ election Mr Blair say that Labour ' s lurch to the Left after Margaret Thatcher win the @card@ election be prompt by ` ` the theory that the electorate be stupid ' ' . he also say at the time that he be not in favour of an EU referendum , as people might not make the ` ` reasonable and sensible ' ' choice . Geoff Riley Saffron Walden , Essex
MP have no right to try to thwart Brexit ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : to most people , the result of the referendum on the European Union be clear and easy to understand : Britain will leave . yet the suspicion linger that some of those on the lose side still do not accept that . prominent Remainers , include Ed Miliband , be call for Parliament to vote before Theresa May begin the process of make Brexit a reality by invoke Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty . Mrs May have reject this suggestion . she be quite correct to do so , and well within her right . parliamentary vote before Article @card@ could delay or even halt Brexit , something clearly at odd with the referendum result . Britain will leave , and neither MP nor peer have any right to try to keep the country in the EU . constitutional purist will argue that Parliament be sovereign and should be give the chance to make the major decision on Brexit . yet the constitution do not exist solely in the textbook and seminar of the purist ; Britain ' s system of governance be a live thing , constantly evolve in the light of political reality . that reality include not just the big single popular vote in British history but the parliamentary failure that precede it : parliament for many year ignore the will of the people it be suppose to represent on the European issue , fuel the resentment that contribute to the Brexit vote . it be , therefore , reasonable for Mrs May to hesitate before give Parliament an opportunity to derail or delay the process of exit . the process that will take Britain from EU membership to independence will be long and could be complex . many of the detail should be work out carefully over the come month and year , not rush or force for reason of shortterm partisan politics . when the outline of Britain ' s exit agreement emerge , MP will doubtless express a view , a view that minister may well wish to take account of . Parliament will also scrutinise and vote on the great repeal bill that will , in due course , abolish the @card@ European Communities Act that make Britain an EU member . but that be for the future . for now , Mrs May have offer clarity on the element of the Brexit process that need clarity : Britain will indeed leave the EU , and Article @card@ will be invoke next spring . that be the basis of a sensible plan for Brexit and Mrs May should be allow to get on with it , without interference from Parliament .
personal account ; Brexit and your pension : the importance of do absolutely nothing
one of the problem with the Brexit debate have be the reduction of complex issue into ` ` binary ' ' outcome . with pension , for instance , the Treasury paint a Brexit scenario where pensioner ' income ` ` would be erode by high inflation ' ' and their ` ` asset and investment would decline ' ' . the underlie argument be that Brexit would result in a plunge in sterling , lead to a rise in the cost of live and high interest rate . whether you subscribe to this or not , what be more certain be that the impact would differ widely by group . those already take pension it ' S hard to see why many pensioner would suffer especially from the effect of inflation , if it arise . the government ' s triple-lock pension promise - to grow the state pension every year by the high of inflation , earnings growth or 2.5pc - would protect this group from rise price perhaps more than any other . since the state pension be predict to make up an increase portion of retiree ' total income over time , this protection be go to be even more encompass . many existing pensioner have a salary-linked work pension in addition to their state one , and these , too , tend to be inflation-proofed . could the latter payment be at risk ? as lawyer Allen & Overy have tell their client business , EU and UK pension rule be currently largely align , so , ` ` to the extent that Britain be no longer bind by EU law , we do not anticipate any immediate change ' ' . it be true that annuity and other pension payment that be not index-linked would lose spending power if inflation take hold . but that ' s quite an if . and it also discount the potentially positive effect that a return to moderate inflation could have on pensioner ' other investment . those with a long way to retirement the Treasury ' S forecast here be base again on the assumption that weak trade link will affect the economy and cause ` ` a long-term fall in income and profit would mean future pensioner be able to save less and would earn low return ' ' . the Treasury put a figure on this , say : ` ` an individual currently age @card@ on median earnings and with median pension saving could lose between £3,800 and £5,800 from their saving by @card@ ' ' . arrive at such precise outcome be ambitious where the timescale be @card@ year . anything could happen in that period , irrespective of the referendum outcome , which be my point : if you have more than @card@ year to go to your likely retirement age , you have more room for manoeuvre . excellent reason to sit tight . those hope to retire in the immediate future this final group be arguably most at risk from the effect of the referendum , whatever its outcome . if they need to encash pension asset to supplement an income or buy an annuity they could be vulnerable to volatile stock market , currency and interest rate . for them , even more than the other group , the need be to do absolutely nothing . that could even include resist , where at all possible , take your 25pc tax-free lump sum . Stuart Bayliss , a pension expert at Better Retirement Group , put it this way : ` ` people anywhere near retirement age should ask themselves : how can I avoid make any particularly significant decision for as long as possible ? ' ' the danger of take the tax-free lump sum - which as Mr Bayliss say have for many become a ` ` knee-jerk reaction ' ' when retirement age be reach - be not only that you encash share or other investment at an inopportune time . it ' S that you ' ll then need to take other decision about where to invest it . and you ' ll probably be invest it in a tax environment , rather than leave it where it be grow tax-free . and annuity rate ? even if inflation be to take hold as the Treasury warn , it be unlikely that annuity rate would recover substantially . as the yield on UK government bond fall to record low this week , major annuity provider cut their rate . that be not promising . sit on your hand .
Labour bench cheer with delight ; Reconstruction
for Labour , it be a moment of raucous celebration . hour after Tory rebel help them inflict an historic defeat on the government over Brexit , the Christmas Party in Jeremy Corbyn ' S office be in full swing with music so loud it could be hear reverberate outside the building . for the Tories , however , it be a moment of bitter recrimination . while the @card@ pro-European rebel boast that their rebellion have enable Parliament to ` ` take control ' ' of Brexit , many of their colleague be absolutely furious . the rebel further incense their Eurosceptic colleague when they take to the Pugin room in the Commons and drink a bottle of white wine . Nadine Dorries , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , call for her colleague to be deselected while other accuse them of hand a major ` ` victory ' ' to Labour and diminish Britain ' s negotiate hand with the EU . as the dust settle on a disastrous defeat for the government , the Prime Minister , her Cabinet and Chief Whip be leave ask the question - where do it go wrong ? the danger be obvious from the start . in September Dominic Grieve , a pro-European Tory and former Attorney General , table an amendment demand that the government should give Parliament a legal guarantee of a final vote on the Brexit deal . with the support of nine other Tory MP , the ` ` meaningful vote ' ' amendment soon draw the support of Labour and the Liberal Democrats . in a bid to defuse the rebellion David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , make clear in the commons that the government be prepare to offer a binding vote on the final Brexit deal . the concession , however , be not enough and after week of fruitless negotiation , matter come to a head in the most brutal fashion yesterday . shortly after 5.30am David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , write to Tory MP give them an assurance that there would be a vote in Parliament as soon as possible . his commitment to the deal do little to placate the rebel . in a bid to make a breakthrough , the Prime Minister take to invite the Tory rebel into Downing Street for one-to-one discussion about the bill . ` ` they be try to pick us off , ' ' one rebel say . ` ` it do n't work . ' ' by the time it come to Prime Minister ' S question shortly before lunchtime , it become clear that the government be not go to back down . accept the amendment , the Prime Minister tell Tory rebel , would put a ` ` smooth and orderly ' ' Brexit at risk . by the time the debate on the amendment start at 1pm , the mood be toxic . Pro-European Tory MP accuse Julian Smith , the Chief Whip , of attempt to bully a female Tory MP into back down and claim she be leave in tear . the claim be strongly deny by Mr Smith , who in turn threaten to sue the rebel for make ` ` defamatory ' ' comment about him . the debate itself be just as bad temper . when Bernard Jenkin , a senior Eurosceptic Tory MP , make an intervention he find himself heckle by pro-European Tory MP on all side . ` ` read it [ the bill ] and sit down , ' ' they shout at him . as rebel after rebel make clear that they be not back down , the government attempt one last climbdown . less than half an hour before the vote be due to take place Dominic Raab , the justice minister , pledge to include a commitment to a legally binding vote at a late stage in the passage of the bill . of the @card@ Tory poise to rebel , some be sway . Paul Masterton and George Freeman both abstain from the vote on the basis of the pledge . Vicky Ford , the Tory MP for Chelmsford , appear in two mind and seem on the verge of tear when it come to the vote . in the end she be usher inside the Noe lobby by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who put his arm around her back and smile at her warmly as they walk inside . it be not enough . Mrs May lose the vote by @card@ vote to @card@ with the result be greet with cheer from the Labour bench as it be announce . rebel roll call the @card@ Tory MP who defeat Mrs May Heidi Allen South Cambridgeshire Ken Clarke Rushcliffe Jonathan Djanogly Huntingdon Dominic Grieve Beaconsfield Stephen Hammond Wimbledon Sir Oliver Heald North East Hertfordshire Nicky Morgan Loughborough Bob Neill Bromley and Chislehurst Antoinette Sandbach Eddisbury Anna Souby Broxtowe Sarah Wollaston Totnes
Thatcher would have fear for deal , say Lawson
Margaret Thatcher would have be ` ` deeply concerned ' ' by the concession hand to the EU by Theresa May , who have ` ` lose her nerve ' ' on Brexit , Lord Lawson , the former chancellor , have say . deliver the annual Margaret Thatcher lecture , Lord Lawson condemn the government for ` ` waste precious time ' ' on try to achieve an unnecessary trade deal . speak at the Carlton Club yesterday he say : ` ` we find ourselves quite unnecessarily as a supplicant , in a humiliate state of cringe , beg for what be unnecessary and unattainable . the time have come to call an end to this demean process . we must get up off our knee . enough be enough . ' ' the peer , who have previously say Brexit be a chance to ` ` finish the job ' ' that Baroness Thatcher start , say the former prime minister would have be ` ` deeply concern at the current state of so-called negotiation ' ' . Lord Lawson suggest the UK should leave the EU without a deal and revert to World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rule . he describe Friday ' s deal as ` ` just about acceptable ' ' , but emphasise that the UK ' s regulatory autonomy must be free if it be to achieve the national sovereignty and economic benefit that Brexit can deliver . ` ` [ Mrs May ] appear to have lose her nerve , and - no doubt encourage by the bureaucracy , who be horrify by the idea of Brexit - have allow herself to be manoeuvre into imagine that no trade deal would be a disaster . this be manifest nonsense . it be also the cause of most of her current difficulty . ` ` the provisional agreement that Mrs May secure last Friday be just about acceptable so far as it go . but let us be quite clear . the UK ' s regulatory autonomy , post-Brexit , must be unfetter . it be an essential attribute of national sovereignty , which be what Brexit be all about . ' ' ' the time have come to call an end to this demean process . we must get up off our knee '
Davis back a ' Canada plus plus plus ' deal
David Davis say Britain will strike a ` ` Canada plus plus plus ' ' Brexit deal as Labour signal it want to keep the UK tie to the single market forever . the Brexit Secretary say he believe a substantive deal could be strike with Brussels within a year , while Sir Keir Starmer , his opposite number , set out a blueprint which could result in the UK continue to pay into the European Union ' s budget after withdrawal . Sir Keir also refuse to rule out call another EU referendum which could reverse the @card@ result . the emergence of the party ' oppose Brexit vision come ahead of a statement from Theresa May in the House of Commons this afternoon when she be expect to stress that there be now a ` ` new sense of optimism ' ' in talk with the EU . Mr Davis ' s backing for a Canada-style trade deal appear to place him on a collision course with Remain-supporting colleague , and come just over a week before the Cabinet be due to hold a crunch discussion over what it want the ` ` end state ' ' of Brexit talk to be . Mr Davis say he want to see an ` ` overarching trade deal ' ' base on the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) which grant Canada increase access to the European single market and eliminate the vast majority of tariff on good trade with the EU . he suggest it could be use as a start point for a wider-ranging EU/ UK deal which he describe as ` ` Canada plus plus plus ' ' . he say : ` ` we will probably start with the good of Canada , the good of Japan and the good of South Korea and then add to that the bit that be missing - which be the service . ' ' the Brexit Secretary claim the odd of a no deal Brexit have ` ` drop dramatically ' ' , and rebuke Mr Hammond over the Chancellor ' s recent suggestion the UK would pay its multi-billion pound Brexit bill even if a trade deal be not agree . Mr Davis insist pay the bill would be ` ` conditional on a trade outcome ' ' . meanwhile , Sir Keir set out a Labour vision for Brexit which would see the UK remain closely align to the single market and continue to pay into the EU ' S budget . it would also include ` ` easy movement ' ' for EU citizen while business would have to comply with Brussels ' rule despite Britain no longer have a say when they be write . he say he want the UK to strike a Norway-style deal with the EU . the Scandinavian country be a member of the European Economic Area which mean it have full access to the single market but must accept freedom of movement and EU rule . Norway also contribute to the EU ' S budget , and research undertake by the House of Commons Library in @card@ show that in @card@ it pay in £106 person while the UK ' s net contribution be £128 per capita . Sir Keir suggest the UK could follow the same path . ` ` there may have to be payment - that would have to be negotiate , ' ' he say . on immigration , Sir Keir say ` ` the end of free movement do n't mean no movement ' ' , and when ask if he be advocate ` ` easy movement ' ' for EU and UK citizen , he say : ` ` Yes of course . ' ' Labour ' S plan would also result in the UK have to adhere to EU regulation to maintain a ` ` level playing field ' ' . Mr Davis seize on Sir Keir ' S comment and say : ` ` a Labour Brexit would betray voter and leave this country in the bad possible position . ' ' Sir Keir also refuse to rule out call a second EU referendum . ` ` thing be move so fast it be hard to know what be go to come next but we be not call for it , ' ' he say Editorial Comment : page @card@ what ' s good for Britain ? how the possible deal compare Canada plus the EU-Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( CETA ) promote free trade and take seven year to agree . it be view as a potential start point for a UK/EU deal but the UK would want it to go much further . CETA eliminate @card@ per cent of all Canadian tariff between the EU and Canada but the service sector be only partially cover . Canada do not have to pay for its increase EU market access and do not have to accept freedom of movement . the UK would want zero tariff and special arrangement to allow the UK ' s financial service sector to maintain its current access to the European market . it would also want the right to diverge from EU regulation in the future . Labour ' s Brexit policy Sir Keir Starmer say he want the UK to strike a Norway-style deal with the EU . Norway be not an EU member but be part of the European Economic Area . it have access to the single market but must accept freedom of movement and EU rule . under Sir Keir ' s plan the UK would be very close to the single market and custom union and would accept the ` ` easy ' ' movement of EU citizen . Britain would likely continue to pay into the EU ' S budget and UK business would have to accept EU regulation .
belief in Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the flaw in Christian Froggatt ' S analogy - that he and his wife do n't believe in Father Christmas , yet deliver gift to their child on his behalf every year ( Letters , October @card@ ) - be that he and his wife be loyal to the concept , even though it be fictitious . Nigel Farage ' s criticism of the Prime Minister be base upon fact . during a pre-election speech in June this year , Theresa May say : ` ` you can only deliver Brexit if you believe in Brexit . ' ' when ask recently on LBC about how she would vote on Brexit now , her response lead many to believe that she do not believe in it . Eddie Hooper Gravesend , Kent sir - Brexit : cometh the hour , cometh the man ( woman ) . where the hell be he ( she ) ? Philip Congdon La Bastide-d'Engras , Gard , France sir - since the EU referendum , our company ' s non-EU sale have rise from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent of our annual turnover - which have also grow by a quarter . it be high time the Treasury catch up with Britain ' s small exporter - we be not only ready for a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit , we be look forward to it . Peter H Jackson Castle Douglas , Dumfries and Galloway sir - Imagine if the EU negotiator be car dealer : EU : ` ` so you wish to purchase a car ? please give me ( Euro ) @card@ . ' ' UK : ` ` but what will I get for my money ? what size be the car ? will it be automatic or manual ? new or second-hand ? ' ' EU : ` ` give us the money now and then we will talk about it . ' ' if the customer pay upfront , he would get a seven-year-old Peugot @card@ . Steve Cartridge Bolton , Lancashire sir - for major change to happen in an organisation there have to be enough of a disturbance to galvanise people into action - what be usually describe as a ` ` burning platform ' ' situation . healthy organisation will act accordingly . the propose Brexit transition period be simply another form of procrastination , give opportunity for Remainers to sabotage the process . it be counterproductive and to be regret . Dr Peter Grey Hurley , Berkshire
Tories must make Brexit plan clear Body : with the Prime Minister holiday abroad , Britain appear to be under new management . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , speak like a man who be bid to take over - and who be cook up a soft form of Brexit , describe as transitional , to be put to the public at the next election . if this be the case , the government need to be more honest about what be go on . and those minister who oppose Mr Hammond ' S plan - for they must exist - must be weigh up whether to speak out . the EU referendum be an exercise in democracy . it would disappoint many voter if we return to the politics of backroom deal . the case for Mr Hammond ' S approach would be easy to make . the Chancellor have say that people do not vote to drive off a fiscal cliff in the @card@ referendum . even if the Tories do think they be empower to crash out of the EU , the general election have since clip their wing . a divide Parliament , an uncertain economic picture and a bullish EU bolster the argument for a transitional deal that result in the soft Brexit possible : leave the EU but remain within the single market and custom union for two or three year . thus , by the time of the next general election , Britain will be half-in and half-out . the voter can then decide if they want to complete the exit , maintain their position or even , for nothing can ever be rule out in politics , vote to go back in . Mr Hammond have be crystal clear on some of these point , other we be force to infer - and that be part of the problem . government be proceed on a wink and a nod . another difficulty be that if everything we have describe be indeed part of the plan , it be unclear where the democratic mandate for that plan come from . in @card@ , Briton vote to leave the EU and hand the government the task of implement that decision . true , there be many Leavers who do not believe this mean quit the single market . but there be many who do . at good , the latter group will be confuse by this week ' S news . for instance , Brandon Lewis , the immigration minister , insist that it be still the Conservative Party ' s goal to cut net migration to the ten of thousand and say free movement would end by @card@ . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , send the opposite signal by commission a report ask what kind of labour market business want after Brexit and by detail an ` ` implementation period ' ' , which be essentially pro-free movement , that will last until around @card@ and be eerily similar to Mr Hammond ' S transition . again , Mr Hammond and Ms Rudd would probably say they be only be reasonable . but the deal they appear to prefer be far from the reassertion of popular sovereignty the country vote for . Britain will lose its voting power in Brussels but still have a form of free movement , be under the cover of the European Court of Justice , have to swallow EU law and even pay into the EU budget for a few year . even if these be cast as sacrifice worth take to avoid economic chaos , Brexiteers can retort that voter be wellinformed of the risk pose by Brexit yet still back it - and that decision ought to be respect . some Eurosceptics will mutter that this be what happen when Remainers be in charge of implement a leave vote - and what happen if you enter negotiation with Brussel believe EU propaganda about Britain ' S weakness . if a ` ` stab in the back ' ' myth emerge , it will divide the Tories . there be senior conservative who believe that Britain can compete in the wide world whether it be inside the single market or not . there be those who think that controlling immigration be more important than sustain growth . and there be those , surely , who be frustrate with the notion that the voter do something foolhardy by voting for Brexit - as if Brexit be a toxic spill that have to be handle with care . the Prime Minister once say that Brexit should mean Brexit . the Foreign Secretary have speak eloquently of Britain ' s tremendous economic potential . if an alternative to the Hammond plan exist , the debate need to happen sooner rather than later .
Scotland Corbyn accuse of try to sabotage Brexit ; special Leaving the EU opposition leader have put near-impossible condition on Labour support for the final deal in Parliament
Jeremy CORBYN have be accuse of try to ` ` sabotage ' ' Brexit talk that begin this week by set Theresa May a near-impossible target if she want Labour ' s support for the final deal . the Leader of the opposition say Labour MP would only support the deal if it guarantee ` ` unfettered access ' ' to the European market - something that have already be rule out by the European Union . by raise the prospect of a parliamentary rebellion against the deal Mrs May secure , the Labour leader have give EU member a stick with which to beat the Prime Minister as she try to get the good deal for Britain . on Wednesday Mrs May will open the way for two year of negotiation when she invoke Article @card@ , the formal process of withdraw from the EU . she will set out her key demand in a letter to the European Council . set out his own demand , Mr Corbyn tell ITV ' s Peston on Sunday : ` ` we ' re very clear that there have to be unfettered access to the European market , otherwise the threat to job in this country be absolutely huge . ` ` most of our manufacturing industry have a European sale and European supply chain in them . and if we do n't maintain this unfettered access to the European market then quite clearly those industry be very much at risk . ' ' when it be point out to him that European leader have rule out access to the single market , he be ask if he be ` ` basically commit Labour to voting against Brexit ' ' . Mr Corbyn reply : ` ` no we ' re not ... we ' re not at the position of know what the deal be yet . ' ' if Labour vote against the Brexit deal and persuade enough Tory rebel to join them , it be possible that Mrs May could be defeat in Parliament when she present the deal in two year ' time , mean Britain would crash out of the EU with no deal at all . Tory MP Philip Davies say : ` ` he may be try sabotage but it would be futile sabotage as we be either leave with a deal or leave without a deal . if he want to leave without a deal then clearly he would be vote for the hardest possible Brexit . be that what he be advocate ? ' ' Mr Corbyn ' S comment echo the stance of shadow Brexit minister Sir Keir Starmer , who tell the BBC ' S Andrew Marr that Labour expect the government to negotiate the ` ` exact same benefit as the single market and the custom union ' ' . he say he be simply quote an undertaking give by David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , to Parliament . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader , say Mr Corbyn ' S demand be ` ` absurd ' ' and would be ignore . he say : ` ` what they be try to do be sound like they have a view . they be be heavily criticise by their own party for have no line , and he be try to give them something to hang onto . ' '
May must show Brexit leadership to win over our divide country ; the Prime Minister have huge popular support , now she need to talk the language of business
there be , once again , several Britain , and they be no longer even speak the same language . Middle England be delight by our new government and its take on the world . the late opinion poll be phenomenal : the Tories have hit @card@ per cent , the sort of height last reach at the @card@ general election ; Theresa May ' S party , buoy by huge support from woman and old voter , have take a 17-point lead against Labour , accord to ICM , its large while in power since @card@ . this triumph have go almost unnoticed , for one simple reason : Elite Britain , a much small but hugely influential section of the population , be aghast and in open revolt . it can not believe that the Tories be truly intent on pull us out of the EU and that they even want to limit immigration . in provincial , post-referendum , post-Blair/Cameron England and Wales , the Prime Minister ' S style , approach and rhetoric chime with the new mood ; in Westminster , the City and Canary Wharf , her pronouncement have be meet with incomprehension , anger and another substantial sell-off of the pound . the problem , of course , be that both group be get this wrong . Elite Britain be hopelessly over-gloomy about the future and chillingly contemptuous of democracy . bizarrely for a meritocratic class that be usually so self-confident of its own ability , it be convinced that the UK be a desperate supplicant , with little to offer . a small minority of its member even seem , at time , to be willing on Armageddon , deduce that only a full-blown financial crisis could yet stop Brexit and convince the public it now so despise of the error of their way . this be madness . but Middle England and the government be also mistake . Brexit be a great opportunity for Britain , but it need to be execute correctly . bash business and the free market never work ; crude combination of populism , socialism and nationalism inevitably end in tear . the City be a crucial source of job and wealth : it be worth fight for . we need deregulation , not more labour market rule . we need a migration system that be acceptable to a newly empower country and that work for an economy at full employment , not one that be obsess with a target make up on the hoof by the previous government . the government must also remember that kite-flying be not a good way of make economic policy : its loose thought on quantitative easing , fiscal policy and company that hire migrant have rattle the financial market , add to the sense of doom in some boardroom . in reality , the pound have long be overvalue . its decline will reduce the current account deficit by redirect consumer to domestic good and service and make it easy for firm to sell their ware abroad . but caution be essential in this febrile , nervy atmosphere . the government ' s big mistake so far lie in its approach to Brexit . Plan A be to disclose as little as possible for as long as possible , apart from emphasise that there would definitely be great control on immigration , and get government department to engage in a thorough fact-finding exercise . every side would then present its case , the Prime Minister would decide and then she would go into battle . the mantra be all about not give a run commentary and not reveal the government ' s negotiate hand . the problem be that this worthy , rational approach have fail . the Cabinet be at loggerhead on all the fundamental question ; it be unclear whether the Treasury be really plan to recycle the mendacious , appalling forecast of the suppose long-term hit to growth from Brexit it produce under George Osborne , but the fact that many Brexiteers be convince that this be the plan show how toxic the situation have already become . private memo be be leak ; official be brief contradictory message . all of this have create a vacuum which the Remainers have fill ; and trader have become obsessed with every line of every statement , briefing , or rumour , send the pound and gilt yield yo-yoing . the more we hear , the less we know about what the government would like to achieve in the negotiation , let alone what we will actually end up with . it ' s time for a completely new approach , a Brexit Plan B - and by that I do n't mean a different outcome but a different way of reach it . this be not really about debate in Parliament or clash between David Davis and Sir Keir Starmer , his Labour shadow , though they may help . this be about the Prime Minister lead from the front and the various Brexit department accelerate their work and up their game . May need to start off by make a major , define speech target clearly at Elite Britain in which she paint a picture of a successful , prosperous and open post-Brexit Britain . she have speak to Middle England ; now she need to address business , make it clear that she be confident she will be able to make Brexit an economic success . she need to stress her commitment to maximise free trade , not just with the EU but also with the rest of the world ; she would also be well advise to float the possibility of transitional arrangement after @card@ . she need to name-check key industry , include investment banking and carmanufacturing , and make it clear that she understand their concern about market access and the need for skilled worker . last but not least , the speech would explain that Britain be a powerful country that make a huge economic , financial , cultural and military contribution to Europe and be therefore in a strong negotiating position . it would need to be accompany by a series of publication from the Brexit department reassess the cost and benefit of aspect of our EU membership , and create much need intellectual ammunition for Brexit . take the single market : the European Commission think that it have boost EU-wide GDP by just @card@ per cent in @card@ . David Davis need to produce a new estimate of this as soon as possible , and he and Liam Fox must commission study show what the gain to the UK would be be we able to sign free-trade deal with the world . May be in an enviable position : she enjoy huge backing from the public . but the UK ' S establishment be increasingly and dangerously alienate from Middle England . to ensure that the UK ' S economy do as well as possible over the next few year , the Prime Minister must now focus her effort on reassure corporate Britain . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
our trade prospect be on a virtuous cycle ; the more Britain expand its global trade , the more our existing partner will want to preserve their share ; the BREXIT dividend
in the @card@ week since Britain vote to leave the EU , the contour of our future have emerge far more clearly than Theresa May ' S critic will admit . we be well-place to seize the opportunity of Brexit and to allay the fear of those who vote Remain . first , the immediate economic aftermath defy the referendum scaremongering . the FTSE @card@ and @card@ be high now than before the referendum campaign be launch in February . consumer confidence have rebound , employer be hire more staff , and export order be rise . the pound have rally , and its residual devaluation have boost export . Lord King , former governor of the Bank of England , argue that the UK economy since the referendum be ` ` now in a good position to rebalance ' ' away from consumer spending towards exportdriven growth . it ' s early day , but the British economy have prove resilient enough to weather the immediate shock . die-hard Remainers , unwilling to acknowledge these fact , be pit themselves against the @card@ per cent of Briton who , accord to a poll by ComRes , now feel positive about Britain ' s Brexit future . on Monday , Labour decry the lack of detailed proposal to attack . in fact , the parameter of the negotiation be already reasonably clear . preparatory discussion be under way . the UK will trigger Article @card@ in the new year ( probably by Easter ) , give us two year to finalise the deal , well before the @card@ general election . use Article @card@ mean the deal will be vote on by ` ` qualified majority ' ' in the EU , not unanimity , leave it less vulnerable to be hijack by special interest or isolated opposition . Brexit Secretary David Davis make it clear we wo n't be pay a fee to access the single market , or offer up national control over immigration as bargaining chip . this be crucial , and not just because it be central to the Brexit mandate . both Remainers and Leavers believe the top priority now be to retain strong trade with the EU . if Britain signal a willingness to barter free movement for access to the single market , it would consume the negotiation from start to finish . instead , diplomacy will focus on where , between the range of tariff-free trade ( that we already enjoy ) and average EU external tariff of @card@ per cent , we end up . there be strong mutual interest in avoid new tariff . yet any new trade barrier would hit Continental business far harder , because they sell £68 billion more to us each year than we do to them . in response , Labour demand that Parliament vote on the Brexit deal , a thinly veil effort to frustrate the democratic verdict - even though Parliament vote by @card@ to @card@ to hand this decision to the people . these democratic contortion be echo by SNP demand for a second referendum on independence - which be out of step with the majority of Scot , who oppose another referendum , on the EU or independence . opposition party be insert a hefty wedge between themselves and the voter , include those who vote Remain . meanwhile , at the G20 in China , Theresa May pledge to make Britain a global leader in free trade . ignore all the positive , the BBC home in on a letter from the Japanese government , express concern about the impact of Brexit on Japanese firm base in Britain and trading in Europe . in fact , the letter be address to both the EU and the UK , make the case against erect trade barrier . such pressure will help Britain ' s negotiation with the EU . equally , the chief executive of Toyota and Hitachi have say their firm will stay in the UK regardless of Brexit , and in July Japanese it firm Softbank announce £24 billion more investment in the UK . among the good news airbrush out , there have now be the numerous pledge , from Mexico to India , to negotiate free-trade deal with the UK . at the G20 , the Chinese president add his country to the list , despite uncertainty over Chinese investment in the Hinkley Point nuclear reactor . this be essential to drive Brexit ' s virtuous cycle . the more Britain expand its global trade , the more competitive pressure be exert on exist trade partner to preserve their UK market share , and the strong the EU interest in minimise trade barrier . opposition to tariff on Britain from business group such as Medef in France ( with its @card@ firm ) and the German BDI ( represent more than eight million employee ) will help temper the risk of spiteful reaction to Brexit . speak in China , EU president Jean-Claude Juncker call for partnership , not revenge , while German European minister Michael Roth say that Britain ' S size and status mean it must be give ` ` a special status ' ' with the EU . Theresa May win the Conservative leadership as a ` ` safe pair of hand ' ' for uncertain time . it be tell and welcome that she now declare herself ` ` optimistic ' ' about Brexit . a shrink minority wo n't make their peace with the referendum . but Britain under May ' S leadership look increasingly well-position to grasp both the opportunity and mitigate the risk . this will be crucial to deliver Brexit in full and reduce the @card@ per cent who count themselves Remainers on June @card@ . read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
project fear be wrong and UK economy will overtake France in @card@ , say economist
project fear be wrong about Brexit , an economic report conclude today as it reveal the UK will bounce back to overtake the French economy in @card@ . the World Economic League Table say that Britain have recover from an initial economic blip after the vote to leave the European Union and now look set to maintain its position in the ranking and even improve by @card@ . however , the datum , compile by the Centre for Economics and Business Research ( CEBR ) , also show that India will leapfrog Britain and France to become the world ' S fifth large economy in dollar term by @card@ as it grow at a fast rate . the table track different economy around the world and project forward @card@ year . it show that despite warning of a ` ` significant ' ' effect on the UK ' s fortune after the decision to back Brexit , ` ` fear be exaggerated ' ' . the CEBR also say there would be a significant impact in the previous economic forecast a year ago . however , correct that prediction , the report state : ` ` a year ago we fear that Brexit would have a significant transitional effect on the UK economy that would leave it behind the French economy for five year . it now look as though our fear be exaggerate . the post-Brexit fall in sterling mean that the UK economy be small in dollar term while growth be impede . ` ` but sterling have since recover and with a transitional deal with the EU now in place the country seem likely to overtake France again as soon as @card@ , drive by the UK ' s particular blend of the tech sector and the creative sector which CEBR have call the Flat White Economy and by the probability of a fairly soft Brexit . ' ' it come as a second report by the British Retail Consortium ( BRC ) warn that shopper will lose out if the UK fail to hold on to global trade deal strike by the European Union . Andrew Opie , director of food and sustainability at the BRC , say : ` ` while secure a deal with the EU to enable tariff-free trade to continue remain the priority , the deal the EU have negotiate with country around the world also contribute to the choice and affordability of good that UK shopper purchase every day . ` ` people need reassurance from Government that these deal will be transfer in time to ensure that UK consumer do n't lose out . ' ' overall the CEBR report forecast that the UK will fall from sixth place in @card@ to seventh in @card@ in the league table , overtake France but be overtake by India and Brazil as emerge economy grow strong .
the Brexit mutineer ; Remain-supporting Conservatives rebel against May ' s move to enshrine in law the date Britain leave EU Brexit debate ' with regret , I must say it be a mad amendment '
Theresa May be face a rebellion from at least @card@ Conservative MP who be threaten to block her plan for Brexit in Parliament . the group , which include several former minister , have inform senior party figure that they will join force with Labour to block new measure that would enshrine the date of Brexit in law . all the disaffected member , with the exception of Kenneth Clarke , vote to invoke Article @card@ , which give Britain two year to leave the EU . however , they be refuse to fix the date - give rise to accusation of a ` ` mutiny ' ' that threaten to wipe out the Prime Minister ' S majority and plunge the party into crisis . some of the MP , who all back Remain but mostly represent leave constituency , be understand to have have a ` ` stormy ' ' meeting with the whips earlier this week . they be brace to come under intense pressure to reverse their opposition before a key parliamentary vote next week . minister have already announce a major concession by hand Parliament the opportunity to debate and vote on Britain ' s final deal to leave the EU in @card@ . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , say that if MP vote to reject the deal , Britain would simply depart without one . however , there be fear among some Brexit-supporting Tories that if the date of Brexit be not write into law , there will be a last-minute attempt to keep Britain in the EU if Parliament reject the final deal . the extent of Tory division over Brexit be lay bare in the Commons yesterday as pro-European Conservative MP condemn the government ' S plan - first reveal by the Daily Telegraph last Friday - as ` ` mad ' ' . Bernard Jenkin , a senior Leave-supporting MP , say : ` ` Anyone who vote for Article @card@ , but then do not wish to fix the date , they be open to the charge that they do not actually want us to leave the European union . ' ' Sir Bill Cash , another prominent Eurosceptic Tory , accuse conservative oppose the amendment of ` ` collaborate ' ' with Labour . the ` ` mutinous ' ' MP be lead by Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general , and include a total of seven former minister and two select committee chairman . among the most prominent member be Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , Anna Soubry , a former minister , and Mr Clarke , the former chancellor . MP usually loyal to the government - include Tom Tugendhat , the chairman of the foreign affair select committee , and Oliver Heald , a former solicitor general - be also in the group . all vote for Britain to stay in the EU in the referendum but only Mr Clarke have say that he want to reverse the result of the historic vote . Labour yesterday announce that it would vote against the government ' S amendment , dismiss it as a ` ` gimmick ' ' and accuse the Prime Minister of ` ` pander ' ' to Eurosceptics . Jeremy Corbyn ' s decision to oppose the amendment mean the government be likely to face defeat or will be force to drop the measure , which specify the time and date that Britain leave the EU . but there be also rift on the Labour bench as Frank Field , a Eurosceptic MP , be heckle by his own bench for say that his party ` ` need educate ' ' about the fact that many of its voter back Brexit . Labour MP give Mr Clarke an ovation as he conclude his speech by say after half a century of be loyal to his party , ` ` I be the rebel ' ' . he say : ` ` he [ Sir Bill Cash ] now represent orthodoxy , party loyalty . I ' m the rebel . I espouse the policy that the Conservative Party have follow for the @card@ year of my membership of it until we have a referendum @card@ month ago . I regret I have not yet see the light . there be some very , very , very serious issue to settle in this Bill . ' ' Mr Grieve say : ` ` Everyone have get more and more brittle , more and more unwilling to listen ... culminate last Friday with a mad amendment . ' ' last night , @card@ Labour MP vote against repeal the European Communities Act of @card@ , which take Britain out of the European Union . it come as George Freeman , a Conservative MP and former chairman of Mrs May ' s policy board , be criticise by colleague after suggest that Brexit could turn Britain into an ` ` old people ' S home that ca n't pay for itself ` ` .
Red line will have to move to fire up new world of trade ; the man in charge of striking deal with country beyond the EU can do nothing until we decide on the good version of Brexit
if he do n't have the most difficult job in Whitehall - there be quite a few people vie for that title - he must be near the top of the list . last month , Crawford Falconer start work as the UK ' s chief trade negotiator . he ' S in charge of striking deal with country beyond the European union once the UK have quit the bloc . that will be no easy task . but the hard part of the lavishly monikered New Zealander ' s new role must be that he ca n't even really get on with it yet . that ' S because the UK Government have yet to decide what its future relationship with the EU should look like . and , until that have be decide , it ca n't start work on what our future relationship with the rest of the world look like . the crunch , however , could be come . as Brexit red line have advance and retreat , blur and disappear , the UK ' s ability to strike free trade agreement around the world have come into focus . indeed , it appear to be the yawn fissure into which the Cabinet could now collapse . the debate - over which , if report be to be believe , the Foreign Secretary be prepare to resign - centre on whether the UK ' s new relationship with the EU should be EEA-minus ( what some people be call a Swiss-style deal ) or Ceta-plus ( that be , a bit well than the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement that Canada recently strike with the EU ) . essentially , this be a more refined version of the long-running debate over whether the UK ' s good interest be well serve by a ` ` soft ' ' or a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit . different people mean different thing by these term . but the philosophical motivation of the two side seem clear : those who advocate a soft , EEA-minus deal with the EU be hope to minimise the economic damage cause by Brexit , those who advocate a hard , Ceta-plus deal be hope to maximise the economic upside of the UK ' s departure from the EU . stay in the single market - a soft Brexit - would allow the UK to maintain the well possible access to the European Union but would diminish its control because it would have to abide by the EU ' s rule while have little or no say in their formulation . a hard Brexit , on the other hand , would mean less access but more control . what ' s more , that control would extend to striking trade deal with other country , which could be preclude by single market access . we can argue long into the night about the pro and con of these two path . we could even come up with competing forecast ( not that anyone would believe them ) . but it seem clear that the political battle line within the Conservative Party have be set . those who criticise Boris Johnson ' s intervention at the weekend for its inconsistency and lack of depth be miss the point . he be not try to set out a blueprint vision for Brexit ( how could he be when point seven of his 10-point plan for a successful Brexit be : ` ` Brexit will be a success ' ' ? ) . what he be try to do be define the debate in his own term , portray one side as the optimist and the other as pessimist , and place himself firmly atop the sunlit upland . that be why striking trade deal with country outside the EU - allow Falconer to get on with his job - have become the most crimson and immutable of red line for some Brexiteers . that do n't , of course , mean it will be easy.The Department for International Trade have be staff up in fairly short order . the trade policy team , for example , have grow from @card@ to @card@ since June last year . but on a trip to Pakistan this week , trade minister Greg Hands say Britain only have the resource to focus on major deal . which then be the priority country ? should we be focus on those country with which we trade most now or those with the great potential for future growth ? what be the UK prepare to offer to get these agreement ? on agriculture , for example , what be we go to do about food standard ? the issue of chlorine-rinsed chicken have become totemic for good reason . us chicken be ban from import in the EU . will the UK waive the rule in order to get a ` ` very powerful ' ' trade deal with Donald Trump ? and , if so , what will that mean for our food export to the EU ? ultimately , the UK will have to jump one way or the other . if we be prepare to open up our farmer to competition with their US counterpart , be we also prepare to open up our healthcare market ? what will this mean for the NHS ? then there ' S immigration . free trade be often accompany by free ( or at least free ) movement . one of the stumble block to trade deal with , for example , India be the issue of student visa . will Falconer and the DIT even hold the UK ' s main bargaining chip in these negotiation or will that be control by the Home Office or , more likely , no @card@ ? and will there be a transition period as the UK exit the EU ? both Brexiteers and Remainers be worry that a long transition perpetuate the status quo . for Brexiteers that look like membership of the EU by stealth ; for Remainers it mean further uncertainty . can a transitional agreement be set up to allow the UK to start trade negotiation with other country ? these be all question Falconer need to answer . but not yet . first we must find out if the self-styled Brexit optimist will prevail or whether the champion of a soft form of Brexit can fight back . there be a thin line between pessimism and pragmatism . ben.wright @ telegraph.co.uk ' Johnson be try to define the debate , with himself on the sunlit upland '
we must help Europe ' S pragmatist to win the Brexit argument ; the government must use its valuable ' soft power ' to improve communication and prove its credibility
Brussels : the very word conjure up an image of a single , monstrous entity do everything it can to thwart our interest . indeed , Brexit have generate an unprecedented show of unity and anti-British feeling on the continent , where it be see as an act of madness and an insult . but behind the façade , ` ` Brussels ' ' be not a monster . it be a complex network of interest and perspective . on Brexit , there be broadly two constituency : those focus on ` ` winning ' ' and ensure Britain ` ` lose ' ' to shore up the EU ; and those with a broad eye on our future , strategic cooperation , who be more incline to compromise . Britain can not ensure that the latter group win , but we can do a much good job of boost its chance . the slow pace of negotiation so far be not Britain ' S fault . the process insist upon by EU official , in which the ` ` divorce ' ' be decide before any trade deal , make no logical sense . it be clearly impossible to decide how to keep the northern Irish border open before broach the broad topic of EU-UK custom and tariff , for example . privately , former EU official admit as much . still , Britain be go along with it for political reason , know that the EU must be allow to claim some sort of ` ` progress ' ' before it can admit the press need to discuss the future . this artificial hiatus before any trade negotiation should not be waste , however . it should be use to prepare the ground for a deal . and yet , more than a year after the referendum , Britain have not manage to convey any kind of consistent or definitive message about the future . ` ` what do Britain want ? ' ' I be ask , over and over , at meeting in Brussels last week . who speak for it ? be the Brexit hardliner in control or do the election change everything ? many people be convince the UK will stay in the single market and custom union ; a few be still unsure whether Brexit will happen . their confusion lead them to draw the conclusion , fair or not , that the UK be in a blunder mess . the most enthusiastic proponent of this view , when I visit , be not posture EU bureaucrat , but non-European official . you might think that none of this matter , because hard economic interest will win out in the end . that be naïve . the mood music make a difference . it be generate a political atmosphere that go against our interest , in which both our threat and promise have no credibility . as David Cameron find , ignore the Brussels mood and then hit it with a list of demand be not a successful strategy . it would be nice to blame the European commission for all of this . but the EU ' s chief negotiator , Michel Barnier , be hardly hold back a tide of pragmatism towards Britain . he be currently under no pressure to shift the EU ' S position . European politician resent have to think about Brexit and , convince that Britain be simply be difficult and will roll over in the end , have put it on the backburner . in turn , aware of the toxic atmosphere , the British government be tread carefully . its position paper have avoid extensive technical detail and certain urgent topic , like the Brexit transition , have barely be broach . it be feel its way forward , afraid of trigger backlash at home and abroad if it table concrete proposal . this ca n't last forever and be currently feed the impression that Britain have no coherent position . there be way to counter this impression , however , and they be not be use enough . the first should be to draw on Britain ' s large network of European contact . our regulator , MP , minister , bureaucrat , lawyer and business group all have contact on the continent . the government ca n't divulge technical detail of its negotiate plan to them , but it could brief them on the message Britain want to send , the argument in its favour , the consequence if the EU refuse to budge , and our broad vision for the future . confuse European journalist and MEPs should also be brief and tell exactly who to call for clarification when document leak or Tony Blair show up in Brussels . yet the government seem to have no strategy for deploy this valuable soft power . it have only just set up an engagement team in the Brexit Department to widen its channel of communication beyond the official negotiation . the second way to improve the UK ' S position be for Theresa May to give a more detailed speech about Brexit . her impressive Lancaster House address be now nine month old . she have say nothing substantial since lose her majority . she need to say more about where Britain be go not just to EU government and official but to the British people . what possibility await a post-Brexit UK and why should voter believe in their country ? at the same time , she must prepare voter for certain compromise : a proper Brexit can not be achieve overnight and require a transition ; and Britain will put up some cash , provide the EU fulfil certain condition . these belief be generally accept in Westminster , include by staunch Brexiteers , but this consensus be not share by the country at large , nor be it understand in Europe . it be not enough to allude to them once and then rely on rigid repetition . they must be explain in a human way , make explicit , and discuss openly . the third and final task be for the Tories to demonstrate credibility by deliver functional government . first and foremost , this means get legislation through Parliament , for which the conservative must rediscover a sense of discipline . it mean minister agree to execute a single Brexit strategy and avoid off-message remark . it mean fire those who break rank . it mean backbencher must avoid write self-indulgent letter and the Home Office should stop wrongfully send deportation notification and leak half-formed policy . it be shameful that the EU , manage @card@ country , have so far exhibit great discipline than the UK . I still believe the pragmatist will win out in the end on both side . but their victory can not be take for grant . Angela Merkel will not simply fly to our rescue at the behest of her carmaker . the UK must do more to make it clear that cooperate be worthwhile for Europe . it do not have much time to get it right . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; Read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
focus on our strength , not negotiation tactic body : the behaviour of EU official during the Brexit talk only validate the vote to leave . Britain ' S approach be flexible and rational : tie any financial settlement to a free-trade deal that benefit us all . Europe prefer melodrama . it say that Britain must pay up to ( Euro ) @card@ billion gross , even though there be no legal basis for such a figure . Britain might be kick out of Europol , warn chief negotiator Michel Barnier , even though the European Commission contradict him . and in the very building where these talk take place , Jean-Claude Juncker greet Tony Blair with a kiss - their meeting emblematic of the elitist politics that British voter reject in @card@ . much of what we see of the negotiation be for show ; Mr Barnier and David Davis square up like boxer at a weigh-in . but it can affect morale . British medium often repeat EU claim without question them and the government have fail to present an alternative narrative . Mr Davis be do his good , but he need support on three front . first , the Tories have to remind the public why Brexit be a good thing . the government ' s obsession with minimise risk have result in some bad idea - such as a permanent transition , which have now be drop - and a ` ` steady as she go ' ' economics that limit our ability to compete . secondly , the Tories should be talk up the UK ' S strength , which be on show during Theresa May ' s visit to Japan . Nissan and Toyota have both invest in the UK since Brexit ; Aston Martin have just announce a £500 million agreement between Britain and Japan . and , yesterday , Mrs May secure a formal agreement to replicate any EU-Japan trade deal with an equivalent for the UK . in addition , Mrs May ' s pledge to stand ` ` shoulder to shoulder ' ' with Tokyo against North Korea be a reminder of the UK ' s diplomatic and military significance . finally , the government have to prepare the voter for the possibility that Britain will pay something as part of Brexit , if not as much as the Eurocrats want . Mr Davis have suggest that while Britain owe nothing , it be mindful of its ` ` moral obligation ' ' . failure to explain that concept , combine with failure to explain the upside of Brexit , could lead many voter to ask what the point be . the point be that Brexit be a reassertion of self-government that could , if exploit correctly , make Britain even rich . the case for it need to be make over and over again .
Brexit threat to European banking system ; Impact on London ' s financial hub will be feel year down the line , say head of new UK lobby ' bank would be quick to move should a new EU hub emerge '
a CLIFF-EDGE Brexit in early @card@ would pose serious danger to the whole European financial system and will be avoid at all cost by both the British Government and EU authority , the City of London ' s top financial consortium have conclude . the much great threat to London ' S banking , insurance and fund industry lie further ahead , several year after the UK have leave the single market and have lose its full ` ` passporting ' ' right for financial service . this may be hard to head off even if there be a transition phase . ` ` a hard rupture from day one would be very disruptive on a Continental scale . the European banking system do not have the infrastructure capable of absorb these activity , ' ' say Stephen Jones , head of the newly form mega lobby UK Finance . ` ` Everybody realise this and I can not believe that either the UK or the EU would let it happen . Wolfgang Schauble ' S cabinet totally understand it , ' ' he say , refer to Germany ' s all-powerful finance minister . London handle the lion ' s share of debt and equity security issue in Europe , as well as much of its syndicated lending and risk management . roughly 40pc of the $ 5trillion of global currency trade every day be book in London , as be two third of all interest rate derivative in euros - chiefly for European firm . ` ` Our work assumption be that EU regulator will be flexible from day one , but over time they will require more infrastructure to move , ' ' he tell the Daily Telegraph . bank and finance house be already draw up contingency plan and acquire permit for EU branch office . ` ` they be establish a presence that could be dialled up significantly if require to by regulator , ' ' he say . just how much they will have to ` ` dial up ' ' be the elemental question for the City . Mr Jones , former finance director at Santander and Barclays , be bear in Brussels and grow up in Germany . he have a ` ` Fingerspitzengefuhl ' ' ( fingertip feeling ) for the EU scene that be vitally www.needed.UK Finance be launch last month after a merger by the British Bankers ' Association , the Asset base Finance Association , the Council of Mortgage Lenders , and three other entity . he say it be not yet clear whether the EU will insist that all syndicated loan , capital market , and interest rate derivative base in euros , will have to move to Europe , or how much ` ` local content ' ' the EU will demand . ` ` we just do n't know . we would like mutual recognition where we accept each other ' s supervisory regime . if there be the political will , this might be possible . we hear different thing , ' ' he say . while the process of set up foothold inside the eurozone usually begin as a paper exercise - more of an option if need be , rather than an actual switch - it risk turn into a relentless drain from Britain as the EU build up its own hub and gradually impose stiff demand . RBS reveal last week that it be eye Amsterdam as a new home for its European banking arm if there be a hard Brexit , a move that could lead to @card@ NatWest Markets staff migrate . ` ` it ' S in case we need it . we ' ll be operationally ready if require , ' ' say the chief executive Ross McEwan . the charm of the EU single market can be exaggerate . the late version of the market in Financial Instruments Directive ( Mifid II ) be something of a horror story in itself . critic say it be so restrictive that it will ultimately render Europe a global backwater in finance . ` ` I be far more worry about the damage from Mifid than I be about Brexit , ' ' say one London banker from a eurozone state . the drip-drip of Brexit-linked announcement be unsettling - and easily manipulate by Brexit foe - but it have not reach the point of mass exodus . a recent report by consultant Oliver Wyman say that loss of privileged access to the EU market would drive @card@ to @card@ financial job out of the UK , half in wholesale banking . ` ` so long as the outcome of the Brexit negotiation remain unpredictable , bank must act as if a hard Brexit be come . some of the fragmentation and inefficiency that would result from a hard Brexit will likely occur even if a close relationship between the UK and the EU be ultimately negotiate , ' ' it say . the report say the process have reach a ` ` critical stage ' ' for bank . they be try to devise way to keep some EU-linked trading and risk man-agement in the UK . while regulator in EU state be signal leniency for the first ` ` interim ' ' phase of Brexit , they will tighten the rule over time . the concern be that commercial logic will compound this effect as chunk of the financial market ` ` ecosystem ' ' migrate to the EU , push total job loss in bank alone to @card@ in the long run . yet one major danger have for now be avert . ` ` at present , none of the other European banking centre seem set to replace London as a pre-eminent global financial service hub . should a new EU hub emerge , bank would be quick to re-orient their operation towards that location , ' ' it say . the picture be messy . some be go to Frankfurt or Dublin , other to Amsterdam , Luxembourg , Paris , or Brussels . this be a risk for the EU itself - and why it may force a policy - since a fragmented system be likely to force bank to raise the $ 30bn to $ 50bn in extra capital , shave two percentage point off their return on equity . ` ` these new challenge from Brexit will raise difficult question about the viability of some activity over the medium term . some bank may even choose to withdraw capacity from the European market as a whole and redeploy to other region , such as Asia or the US , ' ' it say . the City have few friend after banking debacle in @card@ , but the Square Mile quietly butter a lot of turnip . financial service generate £71bn in tax - roughly 10pc of government revenue , or two-third of the NHS budget - and help to plug a big hole in the UK ' s trade deficit . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have tell business leader that he want an ` ` off-the-shelf ` ` transition deal . it be far from clear what this actually mean and whether the European Commission will agree at this late stage . the EU have develop its strategy base on the core assumption that the UK will leave both the single market and the custom union as state in Theresa May ' s Article @card@ letter to Brussels . this will remain the case until the EU be inform otherwise in categorical term with the full force of the British GovernSome ment and Parliament behind it . 40pc the percentage of global currency trade that be book in London every day ' none of the other European centre seem set to replace London as a pre-eminent global financial service hub '
put sugar tax back until after Brexit , say soft drink trade
the implementation of the sugar tax on soft drink maker should be put on ice until great certainty surround Brexit have be establish for business , the trade have say . the Food & Drink Federation ' s director general , Ian Wright , say give the range of other pressure on food and drink maker , such as rise cost on ingredient and the increase in the national living wage , it would be reasonable to give his member a hiatus where the forthcoming sugar levy be concern . ` ` the government would be welladvised to pause it during Brexit negotiation , ' ' he say . ` ` with all the new burden on business , Brexit will be a massive period of uncertainty and potentially one of great turbulence . any extra burden on business be unwelcome . ' ' the sugar levy be announce in the @card@ budget by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer , George Osborne . the current chancellor , Philip Hammond , confirm this year it would be levy at 18p a litre for drink with @card@ gram of sugar per 100ml and a high band of 24p a litre for those contain more than 8g per 100ml . many company have already move to reformulate recipe , include Britvic ' s move to only produce and sell Robinson ' s ` ` no added sugar ' ' squash in @card@ , but Mr Wright say some member would still appreciate a pause . Mr Wright , whose body boast @card@ member range from sole trader through to giant such as Nestle and Coca-Cola , say many food and drink company have see the cost of some of their ingredient rise because the fall in sterling have make it more expensive to buy many foreign-sourced ingredient . in addition , Mr Wright say , many food and drink producer who sell into supermarket be under the constant pressure of that industry ' s price war . Mr Wright also say some of his member be also vulnerable because they have high number of EU worker . he say roughly one third of the @card@ or so worker in food manufacturing be from mainland Europe and with the fall in the pound , the value of their way when they send some of it home have fall . ` ` they have have a 20pc pay cut [ due to the fall in sterling ] and that mean a number be begin to go elsewhere , ' ' he say .
the new battle for Britain ; PM rule out new independence vote before Brexit and delay Article @card@
Theresa May last night rule out Nicola Sturgeon ' S plan for a new Scottish independence referendum before Brexit , but postpone trigger Article @card@ after the First Minister ' S demand catch her by surprise . in a day of high drama , Ms Sturgeon appear to wrong-foot No10 when she announce she would set the wheel in motion for a second referendum next week , and insist the ballot should take place between autumn @card@ and spring @card@ - while the Brexit negotiation be still go on . the Prime Minister issue a stern rebuke , tell her ` ` politics be not a game ' ' , and accuse her of ` ` tunnel vision ' ' . source close to Mrs May say she would not allow a referendum until several month after Britain ' s EU exit . hour after Mrs May ' S riposte , Downing Street make the unexpected announcement that the Prime Minister will not now invoke Article @card@ before March @card@ . the Article @card@ Bill be expect to receive royal assent from the Queen this morning , and it have be widely anticipate that Mrs May would choose today to make the historic announcement . Whitehall department have be tell to work to a March @card@ deadline . Downing Street yesterday insist that the Prime Minister have always intend to wait until the end of the month , but Ms Sturgeon ' S announcement leave Mrs May scramble to seize back the initiative . the referendum row overshadow Mrs May ' s achievement in successfully steer the Article @card@ bill through Parliament last night . a threatened Tory rebellion on the issue of give MP a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal fail to materialise , with the result that two Lords amendment to the Bill be defeat in the Commons . Mrs May and Ms Sturgeon now appear set for a prolonged and bitter fight . and Mrs May now face the unprecedented challenge of negotiate Brexit while attempt to see off a new campaign for Scottish independence . the Prime Minister say : ` ` the tunnel vision the SNP have show today be deeply regrettable ; it set Scotland on a course for more uncertainty and division , create huge uncertainty . ` ` and this be at a time when the evidence be that ... the majority of the Scottish people do n't want a second independence referendum . ' ' Drawing attention to Ms Sturgeon ' s questionable record on domestic policy , Mrs May tell her that ` ` instead of play politics with the future of our country the Scottish government should focus on deliver good government and service for the people of Scotland ' ' . Ms Sturgeon claim she have be force to act because Mrs May have refuse to consider a special Brexit deal for Scotland that would allow it to remain part of the single market . her decision to call for a referendum as early as next year represent a huge gamble ; a BMG poll for the Herald newspaper yesterday show @card@ per cent of Scots opposing independence , with just @card@ per cent support it . equally significantly , @card@ per cent say there should be no referendum before Brexit , with just @card@ per cent want one . the First Minister say she would next week ask the Scottish Parliament to agree the detail of a Section @card@ order with Westminster - the legal process that allow a referendum to be hold . she argue that by autumn next year the shape of the UK ' s Brexit deal with the EU would be clear , give Scot a chance to decide between a future as part of the Union but outside the EU , or a future outside the Union but as part of the EU . if Mrs May refuse , the government would not only have ` ` sink the ship ' ' for Scotland , which vote overwhelmingly to remain in the EU , but would be ` ` puncture Scotland ' S lifeboat ' ' as well , it be claim . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , say the timetable demand by Ms Sturgeon would ` ` force people to vote blind on the big political decision a country could face ' ' because they would not know the detail of the Brexit deal by then . although Downing Street would not officially be draw on the timing of any referendum - or even if Mrs May would allow one - it be understand that Mrs May will put off a ballot until several month after Brexit . it mean she will block a referendum until at least summer @card@ , though she be unlikely to refuse one altogether , as do so would risk stoke nationalist fervour north of the border .
Tebbit : Heseltine deserve to be kick out ; Tory peer accuse fellow Thatcher contemporary of try to wreck Brexit Bill of party he ' clearly loathe '
lord Heseltine should be sack as a government adviser and ` ` kick out ' ' of the Conservative party after he vow to rebel over Brexit , one of his former Cabinet colleague say yesterday . Lord Tebbit , who serve alongside Lord Heseltine under Margaret Thatcher , accuse him of ` ` descend from on high ' ' and try to ` ` wreck the Brexit Bill ' ' . it come after Lord Heseltine say he would defy Conservative whip and vote with Labour and Liberal Democrat peer to change Theresa May ' S Brexit Bill and give Parliament an effective veto on the outcome of negotiation with Brussels . Lord Tebbit tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` I can not remember when he last bother to look into the Lords , let alone speak there . ` ` now he promise to descend from on high to try to wreck the Brexit Bill in company with the Lib Dems and some Labour peer . I , and I think many of my colleague , think that it be time he be kick out of the party he clearly loathe . ' ' Other Tory MP have also call for Lord Heseltine to go . Andrew Bridgen , the MP for North West Leicestershire , say : ` ` it be difficult to see how he can stay on as an advisor to a Secretary of State when he be lead a rebellion against government policy . Phillip Davies MP add : ` ` if Lord Heseltine be go to rebel and encourage other to do so , then his role in the Department for Communities and Local Government become untenable and if he do n't resign he must be sack . ' ' Lord Heseltine have defend his intention , say that while he be not engage in a ` ` confrontation ' ' with the government he want to ensure that its commitment to a vote on the Brexit deal , which it have make on the floor of the Commons , be ` ` legally intact ' ' and write into the Article @card@ bill . he say he have ` ` agonise over few position more than this ' ' and that it be an ` ` incredible privilege ' ' to work as an adviser at the Department for Communities and Local Government . Labour be increasingly confident that it will defeat the government on two key amendment - give Parliament a ` ` meaningful ' ' vote on Brexit and guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK . it have the support of the Liberal Democrats , a large number of cross-bencher and around a dozen Conservative peer who be prepare to rebel . however , Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , say that there be no possibility of Mrs May agree to any amendment to the bill . she tell ITV ' s Peston on Sunday : ` ` no , I do n't think there be any possibility and I do n't think there should be . this be a process bill . ' ' in an article in the Mail on Sunday Lord Heseltine say : ` ` in the end the outcome of Brexit will have to be confirm by Parliament . it will also have to pass in @card@ national European parliament , several sub-national parliament and the European Parliament . ` ` it be perhaps unwise for our government to suppose that our Parliament should be exclude where all other be include . very sensibly , after the Supreme Court interpret the law , that position be reverse and Parliament be restore to its rightful constitutional role as the ultimate authority . ` ` I will vote in the House of Lords to ensure that position be legally intact . this be not a confrontation with the government which have already make such a commitment . ' ' Andrew Lloyd Webber , the Conservative peer and composer , say he would vote with the government this week and warn that peer must not ` ` overrule the will of the people ' ' . the Tory peer Karren Brady , a judge on the Apprentice , and Michael Dobbs , the writer of the House of Cards television series , will also come to the House of Lords to back Brexit this week . government source suggest Lord Heseltine will not be sack because he be not a minister . editorial comment : page @card@
fight loom over key panel to oversee EU withdrawal
a FIERCE row be brew over the make-up of a powerful new Brexit committee after Tory MP demand that pro-Leave campaigner make up the majority of the all-party panel . Eurosceptics say pro-EU colleague must not use the committee to ` ` challenge ' ' the Brexit referendum result and warn of ` ` political war ' ' if it be use to subvert the people ' s will . up to @card@ MP will be elect this week , include @card@ Tory and six from opposition party , to join the panel chairman , Labour ' S Hilary Benn , who back the campaign to stay in the EU . leave campaigner say MP who call for Britain to stay in the single market should not be elect to the panel , which be intend to scrutinise the government ' s approach to Brexit . one Eurosceptic MP say : ` ` what ' s go on at the moment be a tremendous political war to avoid actually leave the EU . when [ Remainers ] say we need to stay in the single market what they be really do be try to prevent actual exit from the EU , because if you be in the European Economic Area you be subject to the jurisdiction of the EU and that be just not Brexit . ' ' Andrew Rosindell , Tory MP for Romford , warn that if the committee be use to challenge Brexit ` ` we ' ve get rocky time ahead ' ' . Fellow Tory Anna Soubry say the panel ' S work be not about Remain versus leave , but ` ` how we get the good deal for our country ' ' . editorial comment : page @card@
Scotland Scotland ' s university ' need clarity now ' on fee post-Brexit
Scotland ' S university yesterday demand that SNP minister make clear whether EU student who win a place next year will get their tuition fee fund by the taxpayer after Brexit . principal , staff and student join force to issue a joint call for the Scottish government to say for how long their ` ` free ' ' tuition policy will apply to EU student , who be already apply for degree programme start in autumn @card@ . their demand for clarity come after Jo Johnson , the UK Universities Minister , announce that European student apply for place in England next year will continue receive loan and grant for the duration of their study , even if Brexit happen sooner . SNP minister be currently force by European anti-discrimination law to offer ` ` free ' ' tuition to EU as well as Scottish student . however , Brexit will spell the end of this requirement . if Britain leave the EU in @card@ , as expect , this would be halfway through a fouryear degree that start next year . university at that point could then theoretically charge EU student fee in the same way that English , Welsh and northern Irish applicant already have to pay £9,000 per year to study in Scotland . but principal be worried they could face legal action as prospectus publish before June ' s Brexit vote guarantee that EU student take up place in the @card@ academic year would not have to pay fee . they be concern that university face have to plug a financial gap of around £60 million if Brexit mean they be force to provide tuition for two year without Scottish Government funding . John Swinney , the Deputy First Minister , announce in July that EU student start university this year will not pay tuition fee for the duration of their degree but be yet to make clear the status of those apply for place next year . application for @card@ place open last month and will close on Saturday for medicine , veterinary and dentistry course . the deadline for other course be Jan @card@ . Alastair Sim , director of umbrella group Universities Scotland , say : ` ` Scotland ' S university and EU applicant apply here really need certainty from the Scottish government on the fee status for course start in @card@ . ` ` university be already receive thousand of application and they need to start make offer now . it be very difficult to ask EU applicant to make decision about the next four year of their life without know if they be entitle to fee-free high education or not . ' ' he say university be in the ` ` extremely difficult situation ' ' of decide whether to make offer to EU student without know if or from the funding for their tuition might be come from . Theresa May say last week that the two-year Article @card@ process for leave the EU will be trigger by the end of March @card@ . nu Scotland and UCU Scotland , the union represent academic and lecturer , call for the Scottish government to guarantee tuition fee funding for the full four year . Liz Smith , the Scottish Tories ' education minister , call for an ` ` urgent response ' ' from minister . ` ` for three month now , the SNP have do little else other than criticise the Westminster Government , keep entirely silent about its own policy in the process , ' ' she say . a Scottish Government spokesman say minister be ` ` currently consider ' ' the issue and urge the UK Government to give assurance ` ` that the immigration status and right of EU national live in Scotland will not change in the future ' ' .
Scotland Brussels : we ' ll make Britain beg ; European official believe they can exploit ' disarray ' in May ' s government at negotiation on split
Britain have become ` ` completely lost ' ' post Brexit and can eventually be expect to ` ` plead ' ' for a deal when it realise the weakness of its position at the negotiate table , senior European Commission official believe . while officially press for Britain to invoke Article @card@ and begin divorce talk , official in Brussels be take grow satisfaction in what they believe be paralysis and disarray in Theresa May ' s new government , accord internal discussion see by the Daily Telegraph . the spectacle of Mrs May rebuke David Davis , the Brexit minister , at Prime Minister ' s question for prematurely reveal the government ' S hand be take as further evidence in Brussels that Downing Street do not have a coherent strategy for Brexit , accord to one Commission insider . official be also jubilant that the United States , Japan and India all give the UK what one EU diplomat describe as ` ` the cold shoulder ' ' at the recent G20 Summit in Hangzhou , heed Brussels demand that Britain can not begin independent trade negotiation before Brexit . the mount internal friction come as Europe stage a post-Brexit display of unity this week , when Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , deliver his ' state of the Union ' address on Wednesday follow by a meeting of all @card@ EU leader in Bratislava on Friday . Mrs May have pledge not to trigger Article @card@ until at least @card@ , but be likely to face rise pressure from European capital if she do not act soon after the New year . the Prime Minister stick to her gun this week during a visit to London by Donald Tusk , the European Council president , who hint at rise impatience in EU capital , say Britain should trigger talk ` ` as soon as possible ' ' .UK official concede privately that the Whitehall bureaucracy be still ` ` mile and mile ' ' from be ready to conduct detailed negotiation as it come to term with a new departmental structure create by Mrs May . however , official contend that Europe be equally in disarray . British negotiator be determine that the European Commission , with its more ` ` theological ' ' approach to issue like free movement , must not be allow to dominate the Brexit negotiation but want them control by EU leader who , Britain feel , may take a more pragmatic approach . the Commission hope that division among the remain @card@ member state will enable the Brussels bureaucracy , with its mastery of the legal detail , to insert itself more forcefully into the come talk - a strategy that some analyst warn could backfire . ` ` Member state be n't on the same page follow Brexit , and the Commission clearly see this space and want to exploit it for its own end , to push its agenda , ' ' say Mujtaba Rahman , manage director for Europe at the Eurasia Group risk consultancy . ` ` it ' S a high risk strategy , and be likely to fail , further alienate Juncker from the member state . ' ' Analysis : Page @card@ ' Member state be n't on the same page after Brexit , and the commission want to exploit this for its own end '
Scotland Davis write off UK ' s future in single market
Britain ' S Brexit minister have say it be ` ` very improbable ' ' that the UK will remain a member of the single market if the country be to get control of its border after leave the EU . EU leader have repeatedly say that Britain will have to accept freedom of movement rule if it want to remain part of the single market after Brexit . in his first statement to the commons about Brexit , David Davis be ask for ` ` clarity ' ' over whether Britain will retain membership of the single market , which give UK firm access to the EU ' S @card@ million consumer . Mr Davis say : ` ` this government be look at every option . but the simple truth be that if a requirement of membership be give up control of our border , I think that make it very improbable . ` ` Mrs May have previously refuse to say whether the UK will remain a member or attempt to maintain access to the single market , insist that she do ` ` not want to adopt a particular model ' ' . in a sign of Italy ' s concern about Brexit , the country ' s economic development minister , Carlo Calenda , say measure to curb free movement would be meet with trade barrier from Brussels . ` ` the more they be go to regulate and limit the presence of EU citizen in the UK , the more we be go to limit the presence of UK good into Europe , ' ' Mr Calenda tell Bloomberg Television . Mr Davis also pledge that Britain ' s immigration system after Brexit would be ` ` more rigorous ' ' than the one which leave campaigner call for before the referendum . it follow criticism of Mrs May ' s decision to rule out the introduction of an Australian-style points-based system , a central pledge of the leave campaign . meanwhile , former Lib Dem leader Lord Ashdown prompt controversy amid the row over proposal for a pointsbased system . he compare Tory Eurosceptics to Nazi thug and write on Twitter : ` ` the Tory Brexit brownshirts be stir . betrayal be the word most likely to be hear in the run up to the Tory conference . ' ' Mr Davis also describe call by MP for a second referendum as ` ` anti-democratic ' ' . he say : ` ` there will be no attempt to stay in the EU by the back www.door.No attempt to delay , frustrate or thwart the will of the British people . ' ' Nicola Sturgeon : page @card@ G20 report : page @card@ John Eliasch : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
Scotland Sack Boris and he will refuse to go , May warn ; Johnson ' wo n't go quietly ' if demote in reshuffle
Boris Johnson will ` ` just say no ' ' if Theresa May try to demote him , his ally have say as they warn that sack the Foreign Secretary would undermine Brexit and destabilise the government . the Prime Minister be instead be urge by member of her Cabinet to remove Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , for ` ` make Brexit hard ' ' and be ` ` miserable ' ' . Mrs May indicate yesterday that Mr Johnson could be move into another Cabinet role in a reshuffle at the end of the month , say that she would not ` ` hide from a challenge ' ' . her comment prompt a furious response from Mr Johnson ' S supporter , with one minister say there be a ` ` stench of death ' ' emanate from Downing Street . they warn that the Prime Minister lack the authority to demote Mr Johnson in the wake of her disastrous general election performance and chaotic party conference speech . one ally of Mr Johnson say that remove him as Foreign Secretary would go down ` ` like a bucket of cold sick ' ' with Brexit voter amid concern that key Cabinet role be dominate by Remain campaigner . even a minister who be critical of Mr Johnson ' s recent intervention on Europe tell the Daily Telegraph that remove him would ` ` undermine public confidence in Brexit ' ' . Eurosceptic Tory MP turn on Mr Hammond yesterday , say that he should be demote for ` ` deliberately try to make Brexit negotiation difficult ' ' . they be back by a Cabinet minister , who say : ` ` he have completely fail . he have not give her any domestic announcement that she can sell . he be miserable , he talk people down , he be make Brexit hard . he just sap everyone ' S self-confidence . ' ' an ally of Mr Hammond say : ` ` the Chancellor have make very clear that we ' re leave the custom union and single market when we leave the EU in March @card@ . he be not try to frustrate the process at all . ' ' the Prime Minister be attempt to re-assert her authority after Downing Street see off a coup by around @card@ Tory MP who want her out by Christmas . she will this week attempt to get her government back on track as Parliament return by tell MP that she will ` ` prove the doomsayer wrong ' ' over Brexit . she will tell Brussel that ` ` the ball be in their [ the EU ' s ] court ' ' to break the deadlock in negotiation . Mrs May will tomorrow launch an audit highlight racial inequality across society as she seek to address the ` ` burning injustice ' ' in modern Britain . it follow a calamitous speech at the Conservative party conference in which she be hand a P45 by a prankster , suffer a cough fit and the set behind her begin to fall apart . she be now consider a reshuffle to ensure that she have ` ` the good people in my Cabinet ' ' . ask about Mr Johnson ' S future , the Prime continue on Page @card@ Juliet Samuel : page @card@ Minister tell the Sunday Times : ` ` it have never be my style to hide from a challenge and I ' m not go to start now . ' ' several Cabinet minister have make it clear that Mrs May would have their support if she remove the Foreign Secretary , whom they blame for ` ` destabilising ' ' the party . Mr Johnson have be accuse of disloyalty over his decision to announce a series of Brexit ` ` red line ' ' on the eve of the party conference , include warn that the transition should not last ` ` a second longer ' ' than two year . however , Mr Johnson ' S ally say that remove him would be ` ` insane ' ' . one Tory minister highlight Andrea Leadsom , who threaten to resign after be sack as Environment Secretary . follow a stand-off with Mrs May , she be offer a high-profile media role in promote and defend the government alongside her position as Leader of the Commons . the minister say : ` ` let ' s say she try to move Boris to defence secretary . Leadsom say no thank you , and Boris carry significantly more influence . he ' d just say no - what be she go to do about it ? there ' s a stench of death emanate from Downing Street . if you be a Brexiteer you would be worry [ if Mr Johnson be demote ] . you ' d look around the Cabinet table and see Remainers occupy the key position . ' ' another minister say : ` ` Brexit be absolutely crucial to democracy in this country now . if we fail to deliver that , the public will never forgive us . a reshuffle would be a huge distraction , we do n't need to replace people for the hell of it . it [ remove Mr Johnson ] will undermine public confidence in Brexit . it would be counter-productive . ' ' Lord Heseltine , the former deputy prime minister , also suggest that Mrs May would be take a ` ` high-risk ' ' gamble if she sack Mr Johnson . he say : ` ` I think that if she want to assert her authority she would have to sack him , but of course it ' S a high-risk AFP/ OLIVAS/ policy because he will be on the back bench and he wo n't go quietly . ' ' Nadine Dorries , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , say Mr Hammond should be sack instead . she say : ` ` I think he ' s be deliberately try to make the Brexit negotiation difficult .
Scotland Osborne accuse of Brexit plot as critic hit out at newspaper role
George Osborne be unveil as the new editor of the London Evening Standard yesterday in a surprise announcement that lead to accusation that he be plot to undermine Theresa May ' S plan for a clean Brexit . the former chancellor be face open call from Tory MP to quit Parliament amid concern about a series of conflict of interest over the appointment . Mr Osborne now have six job and will earn more than £1.5million this year . his appointment provoke fury in Downing Street and allegation from Mrs May ' s ally that he will use his ` ` new power base ' ' to ` ` slam ' ' the government ' s Brexit plan . a senior government source tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` it ' S all about establish a power base . he lose the argument last year in the referendum , he lose influence in Parliament . ` ` now he think he can start a new debate as the editor of a newspaper . as a major newspaper that represent the City and have a huge voice , you can kick up quite a stink and absolutely slam the government ' s Brexit plan . it ' S not subtle , he want to keep Britain in the single market . he can not stay on as an MP , it ' S absolutely disgraceful . ' ' Mr Osborne have warn Mrs may he be prepare to ` ` fight ' ' the government over Brexit issue , include access to the single market , free trade and immigration . he say yesterday : ` ` we will be fearless as a paper fight for their interest . we will judge what the government , London ' S politician and the political party do against this simple test : be it good for our reader and good for London ? if it be , we ' ll support them . if it be n't , we ' ll be quick to say so . ' ' a senior Tory MP say : ` ` he want to use this to bring Theresa down , to oppose the referendum , to campaign relentlessly on the Remain ticket . ' ' Philip Davies , a Conservative MP , say : ` ` I be sure there be many newspaper editor who will be interested to know that their job be not a full-time job . ' ' David Cameron , the former prime minister , describe the appointment as a ` ` great move ' ' after he bump into an Independent journalist while shopping at an organic food store close to the Evening Standard ' S office . Carla Flynn , editor of the Knutsford Guardian in Cheshire , question how Mr Osborne could meet the need of his constituent in Tatton . she say : ` ` give the huge reaction we ' ve already have from reader today since the news break , I think this will be the final straw for a lot of constituent . ' ' Mr Osborne have limit journalistic experience . after leave Oxford University he fail to get a place on the Times trainee scheme and work briefly as a freelancer for the Daily Telegraph ' s Peterborough diary column . editorial comment : page @card@ the other side politician who make the switch CP Scott edit the Manchester Guardian from @card@ until @card@ while sit as a liberal MP . Bill Deedes edit the Daily Telegraph from @card@ to @card@ after step down as Tory MP and minister . Michael Foot Edited Evening Standard in @card@ at @card@ before become MP . Boris Johnson Edited The Spectator before stand as an MP in @card@ . Telegraph columnist until last year . EYEVINE STANDARD/ Winston Churchill he be a Daily Telegraph journalist before he become an MP in @card@ . evening conflict of interest ? MP for Tatton Can Mr Osborne represent his constituent give the commons sit four morning he be edit ? press regulation will he be able to vote without prejudice on the issue ? membership of @card@ Committee Will Tory MP be afraid to speak up with a journalist among them ? privy council can he hold his tongue as a member of the Privy Council ; member swear to ` ` keep secret all matter treat in council ' ' ? loyalty to party can he follow the Tory whip despite his newspaper ' S stance ? Standard ' s City coverage can journalist cover BlackRock when it employ him ? advertising : can he hold big business to account if he be rely on them for advertising ?
Scotland May accuse of ' losing momentum ' by delay formal start to Brexit talk ; Brexit : Parliament ; Prime Minister will miss chance for discussion at EU summit by trigger Article @card@ too late , MP say
Theresa May have be accuse of ` ` lose momentum ' ' and ` ` make error ' ' by delay the formal start of Brexit talk in the wake of Nicola Sturgeon ' s shock demand for a Scottish independence referendum . the Prime Minister be expect to formally start negotiation with other European Union member state as early as this week once Parliament have pass a law allow talk to begin . the Daily Telegraph understand that the Queen be likely to give legal assent tomorrow to the law that allow Mrs May to start Brexit talk . however , Mrs May be understand to be target trigger Article @card@ on Wednesday March @card@ , after a speak tour of Britain when she will sell her vision for the UK outside the EU . this delay have lead to concern that Mrs May now can not begin formal talk until May , miss the chance of talk with EU leader on April @card@ . Lord Jones of Birmingham , a crossbench peer who be a trade minister in the last Labour government , say he ` ` can not understand why she have do it ' ' . the peer , who be head of the CBI for eight year , praise Mrs May for the way she have ` ` handle ' ' the period lead up to the start of negotiation . but he tell the Telegraph : ` ` if she have delay it by two week , I be disappoint ; it be an error . ' ' Lord Jones say : ` ` the issue be momentum . she be in mid-innings , she be deal with the bowling . do n't declare your innings now ! ' ' Other MP urge Mrs May to trigger Article @card@ to avoid the chance of another legal challenge to the process be make to the High Court . Sir Bill Cash , the euro-sceptic Tory chairman of the EU scrutiny committee , say it be ` ` essential that minister take the well possible legal advice and act as quickly as possible . get the Article @card@ letter out be an absolute priority ' ' . former Ukip leader Nigel Farage add that he be worry the start of talk have be ` ` kick into the long grass in May ' ' . he say : ` ` now that we be delay the trigger of Article @card@ , what it mean be that we will miss the summit of European leader on April @card@ at which Brexit could practicably have be discuss . ' ' Senior government figure admit talk will not get under way properly in April because of the long parliamentary recess and Easter . but the source deny that the delay would damage Britain ' s interest because preliminary talk have be go on ` ` for week ' ' between the UK and European Union . this be despite EU leader insist that Brexit talk can not begin formally until Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty have be trigger . one say : ` ` despite the fact that they say there be no negotiating there be contact go on with the Commission . ` ` the official have be in contact and meet personally . it be under way , prepare the ground for negotiation , so we be not start totally from cold when the notice have be serve . the end of the month be what we be always aim at . ' ' Gina Miller , the fund manager whose legal challenge force the government to legislate for the start of Brexit talk , threaten more legal action if MP and peer be not give a proper vote on the final package . she say : ` ` if they do n't deliver on that I will take them back to court to find out whether they can do as they be intend to do . ' ' the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman play down suggestion of a delay due to Ms Sturgeon ' S announcement , say Mrs May have always say she would trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . PIXEL8000
like wag a dog ' s tail to make it happy , EU exit warning be flaw
the Treasury recently bring out its report on the long-term effect of Brexit , say they will be dire . this week it follow that up with equally severe warning about the short-term impact . both be flaw . George Osborne be force to admit to Jacob Rees-Mogg in a Treasury select committee hearing that he have make unfavourable assumption about Brexit in the crucial ` ` World Trade Organisation option ' ' . the Treasury assume that if we leave the EU we would erect the same trade barrier on the whole world , include the European Union . these barrier be around 20pc on both agriculture and manufacturing , so that be a huge negative assumption . it would be a retreat from free trade ; it be certainly not the good ` ` WTO option ' ' . as economist for Brexit have repeatedly explain , the good option would be for the UK to abolish all the EU trade barrier and trade freely with the world , include the EU , at world price . Mr Osborne ' s excuse for the Treasury ' S assumption be that he think leave proponent favour some protection , such as on steel . but this be no excuse . first , it be perfectly consistent with general free trade to have some protection of particular industry : look at the free-trading US where a 267pc anti-dumping duty have just be levy on Chinese steel . second , whatever the view of leave proponent , it be the Treasury ' s duty to work out the well available option in the national interest . the Treasury have deliberately cook the book in its ` ` assessment ' ' of the Brexit outlook - both long term and short . the IMF and the Bank of England have now sign up to the International Friends of Messrs Cameron and Osborne Club . how could anyone resist such an establishment consensus ? but have they understand the deceit at the heart of the Treasury calculation ? Brexit , like the repeal of Corn Laws nearly two century ago , will lower the price of import by abolish the EU tariff enforce by the EU Customs Union . these EU tariff have a huge effect on our cost of living , through high food and manufacturing price . what about the threat that country who have a trade agreement with the EU will not replicate them for a post-Brexit UK ? there be no reason to think these agreement would not continue . but , if one country put up a barrier , it would have a tiny effect on world demand . the price of our product , sell to buyer from all over the world , would not change ; we would simply trade with other country . in order to create their case against Brexit , the Treasury have use a ` ` gravity model ' ' approach . the basic idea be simple : the amount of trade that people do with other country depend on basic measure of ` ` mass ' ' ( GDP , population ) and the cost of ` ` transport ' ' , mean all the cost associate with distance , whether geographical , political or tariff and other explicit barrier . to measure trade barrier , the Treasury use the suppose effect of membership in the EU , EEA and other trade agreement ; it get these effect measuring what happen to trade from the date they occur . the problem with these gravity equation be that they be mere association from past datum , which result from the policy and shock of the past . they be not causal relationship and so you can not assume they will be repeat in the future when the policy and shock will be different . in other word , they ca n't be use to predict the effect of a Brexit , which be take place in quite different circumstance . the Treasury then repeat the same gravity model for foreign direct investment ( FDI ) , again use datum from many country and time period . the same critique apply to this . matter do not end there . to link the economy to trade and FDI as predict by these gravity model , equation be estimate for the average relationship of productivity with trade and FDI . the problem be that these relationship too will vary accord to the shock the economy face and will not predict the effect of Brexit . this matter because the gain to welfare of UK citizen come from the effect on household live standard and on the industrial structure of output . more productive industry attract more FDI . trade change mirror sectoral change in production and consumption . hence measure these shift in the economy be vital to a proper assessment . an analogy might help . we can see that when a dog be happy ( perhaps because it have be chase squirrel ) it wag its tail vigorously . there be an association here between happiness and tail-wagging . one conclusion might be that , to make the dog happy , you should wag its tail for it . that be the wrong conclusion . so it be with trade and FDI . we observe that reform economy generate a lot of trade , FDI , and productivity ; some country join the EU to buttress their reform . be the conclusion that we can make these country more productive by force up trade and FDI ? or , be it that , with those reform establish , their achievement would be destroy if they leave the EU ? clearly not . it be in cost the WTO option , as I explain at the start , that the Treasury come most spectacularly to grief , bizarrely calculate that GDP will fall by nearly 8pc . in our standard model of trade , with proper free trade assumption , Brexit get rid of EU protection and reduce consumer price by 8pc . this , in turn , impact on wage and competitiveness throughout the economy . the structure of production shift towards non-protected sector , increase productivity overall , and consumer no longer transfer resource to foreign EU producer . GDP rise by 4pc . this WTO option allow the UK to abandon all EU regulation within the Single Market and politically give us full freedom from the EU in every respect - for example we need not negotiate a new trade agreement with the EU . this option be not dependent on good will from the EU , which may be in short supply on June @card@ . it can be implement by simply repeal the @card@ European Communities Act . the establishment be wrong over Brexit , as it be repeatedly wrong on major UK policy issue in the past @card@ year . Brexit will be a major liberal supply-side reform of the British economy . we should embrace it . Patrick Minford be co-chairman of economist for Brexit ' the problem with these gravity equation be they be mere association from past datum , which result from the policy of the past '
hundred of business leader back Brexit
more than @card@ business leader today call on Britain to vote to leave the European Union , say that the country ' S competitiveness ` ` be be undermine by our membership ' ' . in a letter publish in today ' S Daily Telegraph , the business leader say that Brussels ' red tape ` ` stifle every one of Britain ' S @card@ million business ' ' and claim that a Brexit would allow them to ` ` create more job ' ' . signatory to the letter include Peter Goldstein , a founder of Superdrug ; Steve Dowdle , a former vice-president Europe of Sony ; David Sismey , a manage director of Goldman Sachs and Sir Patrick Sheehy , former chairman of British American Tobacco . the letter be also sign by hundred of people link to small and mediumsized business . the letter ' S backer employ hundred of thousand of staff . it will be see as an attempt to redress the balance after the Bank of England and the International Monetary Fund last week warn that a Brexit would damage Britain ' S economy . it come as : ? Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , say that Brexit campaigner be in denial about the economic risk of the UK leave the EU , in an intervention describe as ` ` incredibly dangerous ' ' by a minister . George Osborne , the Chancellor , will today make a speech warning about the economic cost of a Brexit . Boris Johnson prompt a row by compare the EU to Nazi Germany . Senior conservative say that as many as @card@ Tory backbencher could back a ` ` no confidence ' ' vote in David Cameron even if Britain vote to remain in the EU . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , say that he will under no circumstance share a platform with Mr Cameron ahead of the referendum . three million EU citizen in Britain could have to be deport in the event of a Brexit , a Home Office minister suggest . the letter in today ' S Daily Telegraph be sign by @card@ business leader in a personal capacity . it state : ` ` Brussels ' red tape stifle every one of Britain ' S @card@ million business , even though only a small minority actually trade with the EU . ` ` it be business - not government - which generate wealth for the Treasury and job for our community . outside the EU , British business will be free to grow faster , expand into new market and create more job . ' ' meanwhile , Lord Farmer , the former treasurer of the Conservative Party and the founder of Red Kite Group , who be also a signatory of the letter , write on the Telegraph website that warning of the risk of a Brexit be ` ` misguided ' ' . Lord Farmer write : ` ` Britain , the world ' s fifth-biggest economy , should be confident that other will want to trade freely with it especially if , like the EU , they already do so . ` ` nor will EU country want to restrict their access to the London market . Canary Wharf alone do more business than Frankfurt and we be Europe ' s financial outlet to the world . ' ' David Cameron ' s Remain campaign believe that it can win the June @card@ vote by focus on the risk of a Brexit to the economy . Mr Osborne be in the come day expect to announce a major report into how the value of house will fall if Britain leave the EU . report : page @card@ and @card@ Boris Johnson : page @card@ Editorial Comment and Letters : page @card@
we need Tory talent to fight the Blairites ; establish @card@ body : Tony Blair ' s call for a second EU referendum showcase the argument that Remain will use in @card@ : Brexit threaten the economy and the NHS be hemorrhage foreign staff . few voter trust Mr Blair enough to believe him , but his real audience be the EU , which could scupper the Brexit negotiation , and the MP who could undermine the withdrawal legislation . the message to both be to play tough : if Brexit be perceive to be go badly , the voter might be persuade to change their mind . Mr Blair ' S argument , as always , be disingenuous . we still ca n't judge Brexit ' s impact on the economy because it have n't happen yet ; all we do know be that the predict economic crash be nonsense . as for the report fall in recruitment of some EU staff , it ' S important to remember that EU citizen only account for about six per cent of staff in an English health service that , if manage properly , should n't be reliant on foreign worker anyway . why be it ? partly for the same reason that housing or teacher be in short supply : Mr Blair ' s policy of welcome cheap labour to Britain in the Noughties put enormous pressure on infrastructure and service , create a cycle of demand and supply that draw more and more migrant to an overcrowd Britain . indeed , one of the big cause of Brexit be New Labour . Mr Blair lead us further into Europe without proper consultation ; and although Gordon Brown veto membership of the euro , he sign the Lisbon Treaty without first put it to the public . New Labour ' s obsession with centralisation and regulation feed popular resentment towards the status quo . the linger influence of Blairites today point to an elite that have learn nothing . Alan Milburn and Lord Adonis have both resign from government job in protest at Brexit , job the Tories should never have allow these fade bureaucrat to hold . the Tories must let a Blairite cabal monopolise debate . after Mr Blair speak on the today programme yesterday , he be answer not by a Cabinet Minister or even a sit MP but by Lord Lamont , who last serve as a minister in @card@ . Lord Lamont do a superb job , as ever , but the government have to join the fray , lest Remain make ground by sheer attrition . it be time to promote some Tory talent dedicate to make the case for Brexit just as doggedly as Mr Blair oppose it .
settle the Brexit bill deadlock or we will ' shake the tree ' , warn EU ; pressure mount on May as Wall Street banker threaten to pull job out of the City
the EU will look to use the Brexit deadlock and rise uncertainty in the business world to ` ` shake the tree ' ' and force lucrative company to relocate to Europe if Downing Street fail to make a move soon to settle the socalled ` ` Brexit bill ' ' , the Daily Telegraph have learn . the hard-nosed EU stance come as ambassador meet in Brussels yesterday for discussion about the shape of a possible Brexit transition and deal . the European Parliament warn that there be still ` ` major issue ' ' stop a deal on citizen ' right , contradict Theresa May ' s assertion that the two side be within ` ` touching distance ' ' of a deal on the issue . the parliament reject British plan to require the 3.2million EU citizen already in Britain to register after Brexit , subject them to blanket criminal record check and charge the cost of a British passport - £72.50 - to obtain ` ` settled status ' ' document . the ambassador ' meeting before today ' s Brexit negotiation be design to begin ` ` scoping out ' ' option for the next phase of talk , accord to a seven-page discussion document see by the Telegraph , but also to put pressure on the Prime Minister to make commitment on the ( Euro ) 60billion ( £53billion ) Brexit bill . ` ` the plain fact be that , as Mr Barnier repeatedly say , ' the clock be tick ' , and time be not on the British side , ' ' say an EU source with knowledge of the plan for discussion . ` ` the long the UK wait , the more the pressure will build , the more we shake the tree . ' ' EU official tell Reuters that failure to reach an agreement on the principle behind the bill before December could lead to delay the opening of trade talk until March , heap more pressure on the government to secure a transition deal early in @card@ . ` ` some believe that the bad it get for the British , the good for us ... that maybe we could delay it all until , for instance , March , increase the uncertainty and trigger the contingency plan in the corporate sector , ' ' the official tell the agency . pressure to make progress be grow , amid report that Wall Street banker have warn Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , on a visit to London that they be prepare to move thousand of job from the city as confidence wane in Mrs May ' s ability to cut a deal . Independent analyst warn that time be run out for a deal by December . Mujtaba Rahman , the head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group , a risk consultancy , warn client that the UK would need to make a move by ` ` the end of the month ' ' . the hardening tone reflect mount EU frustration with Mrs May ' s refusal to elaborate on the pledge make in her Florence speech , that the UK would ` ` honour the commitment ' ' make during the UK ' S 43-year EU membership . ` ` essentially , nothing be happen on the ground . we be not lack public announcement , but progress in Brussels , ' ' say a second EU source . Mrs May indicate that the UK would pay some ( Euro ) 20billion ( £18billion ) for a transition deal in @card@ and @card@ , which would fill the immediate hole leave in the EU budget by Brexit , but the EU say it want an additional ( Euro ) 30billion . the UK dispute the EU ' S arithmetic but could agree ( Euro ) 50billion if the EU offer the UK a ` ` deep and special ' ' trade partnership , but official say Mrs May be in ` ` no mood ' ' to make concession . empire building Balkans could enter EU after Brexit be a chance for the EU to welcome western Balkan country into the bloc , the prime minister of Bulgaria say yesterday at the European Commission headquarters in Brussels . Boyko Borissov call for the inclusion of Macedonia , Montenegro , Albania , Serbia , Kosovo , and Bosnia-Herzegovina . Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the European Commission , say he think Serbia and Montenegro would be member ` ` before @card@ ' ' . by James Crisp
UK ' s ' readiness for change ' rating boost Brexit hope
Britain have be rank 10th in an index of the nation most ready for political and economic change , ease concern it will struggle to deal with financial uncertainty cause by Brexit . the Global Change Readiness Index , produce by KPMG , examine @card@ indicator across @card@ country , gauge their ability to deal with upheaval . factor include the flexibility of labour and financial market , adaptability of government fiscal policy and the versatility of a country ' S workforce . the UK rank highly in enterprise potential , come seventh , and in societal robustness , where it place eighth . government capability be also strong , rate 13th . ` ` Our country ' s spirit of entrepreneurialism , mastery of technology and renowned business environment all point to a long-term , collective ability to rebuild our economy after Brexit , ' ' say Karen Briggs , head of Brexit at KPMG . the UK be one of only two major nation rate as be capable of respond to ` ` shock ' ' financial instability and political uncertainty in the top @card@ . the other lead economic power be Germany , which be place ninth . the finding come as a lift after claim that the UK will struggle to adapt to the uncertainty surround Brexit negotiation . small European country include Switzerland ( 1st ) , Sweden ( 2nd ) , Denmark ( 5th ) and the Netherlands ( 7th ) be see as well prepare for change . however , the UK rate high than heavyweight such the US ( 12th ) , Hong Kong ( 13th ) and France ( 20th ) . the UK also rank highly in subindicators include economic openness ( 5th ) , business environment ( 6th ) and financial sector ( 6th ) . score high in these category be suggestive that the UK be more prepare for the financial volatility of Brexit than anticipate . @card@ Britain ' s position in the KPMG index of @card@ country , suggest it be well place to deal with financial upheaval
how Project Fear get it all wrong over Brexit
it ' S one year to the day since the UK vote to leave the European union after a bitter campaign in which the Remain camp consistently promise that Brexit would bring economic doom . in his Treasury assessment of the impact of leave the EU , George Osborne claim that a vote to leave would ` ` cause an immediate and profound economic shock ' ' , with the effect be ` ` to push the UK into recession and lead to a sharp rise in unemployment ' ' . growth be to be affect and lending rate be to go sky high . in short , the former Chancellor say that a leave vote would push the country into economic meltdown . he be wrong . the economy have continue and will continue to grow the economy grow by 0.2pc in the first quarter of @card@ , which , although low , mark the 17th consecutive quarter of growth in the UK . that ' S the third long period of consecutive growth that the UK have experience since @card@ , and mean that it have now be nearly eight year since the last recession . the late forecast indicate that this growth be expect to continue , with the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) estimating growth of between 0.3pc and 0.4pc in every quarter until the end of @card@ . if a vote for Brexit be a vote for an immediate recession , then these forecast would be significantly gloomy than they be . another area of continued growth be house price , which keep tick along despite a long forecast fall . price grow by 5.6pc in April , the most they have increase since November last year . while growth have slow , the market be still resilient to Brexit uncertainty , and stamp duty change - from April @card@ an additional rate of stamp duty apply to buyer of second home , buy-to-lets or other ` ` additional property ' ' - will also have play a part . employment have hit record high with figure at 74.8pc Osborne ' S report claim that an extra @card@ people would be unemployed as a result of a Brexit vote - something which have fail to happen so far . indeed , quite the opposite be true . in the late set of figure from the ONS , the UK ' s unemployment rate be 4.6pc , the low it have be since @card@ . this be down from 5pc at the time of the referendum and from 8pc when the conservative come to power in @card@ . employment have reach new height over the same period with figure stand at 74.8pc at the late count - the highest ever record by the ONS . foreign investment have increase to £197bn there be worry that take the UK out of the single market will make the country a less attractive venue for investor . a good way of measure whether this be happen be by look at inward foreign direct investment , a measure of the value of significant business investment into a give country . a recent OECD report reveal that Britain be the number one destination in Europe for foreign direct investment last year , with inflow reach level not see since before the financial crisis . in a vote of confidence in Brexit Britain , UK FDI inflow soar to $ 253.7bn ( £197bn ) in @card@ , up from £33bn the previous year . this represent the high level of inflow since @card@ . the figure also show the UK drive the bulk of the 17pc increase in FDI inflow to the European Union . Britain climb above Ireland , Switzerland , the Netherlands and France to become the top destination for inward FDI across Europe and second only to the US in the OECD club of @card@ rich economy . the UK ' s improve performance owe a lot to several big investment include ABInBev ' s £79bn takeover of SAB Miller to create the world ' s large beer company , oil major Shell ' s £34bn acquisition of BG Group , and Softbank ' s £24bn purchase of ARM Holdings . while two of these be announce well before the Brexit vote , the datum also show the UK remain the top FDI destination in Europe even when these deal be exclude . the stock market have hit new high despite poll blip the FTSE @card@ suffer a short blip after Theresa May call the General Election in April , but recover to reach record high at the end of May and start of June . the index have show a consistent rise since the referendum vote last June , with its value now 22pc high compare to its pre-Brexit vote level . similarly , the FTSE @card@ have recover after an initial post-Brexit drop in value and now stand at more than @card@ , have be slightly above @card@ at the beginning of June @card@ . reason to be cautious despite a strong FTSE although many of Project Fear ' S prediction have so far be prove wrong , there be some note of caution to take heed of . despite strong performance from the FTSE @card@ and FTSE @card@ , the FTSE local index , which only include business that conduct more than 70pc of their sale in the UK , have n't perform so well since Brexit . the strength of the pound - which have fall since the referendum and then take another brief hit after the General Election - have make it more expensive for British company to conduct their business and easy for foreign company to launch takeover . inflation be also increase at a fast rate than have be forecast , and this will have an effect on the cost of live in the UK as wage struggle to keep up in the short term . with interest rate still very low there be little the Bank of England can do to help out with this . however , even with these note of caution , the majority of the stark prediction make by Project Fear have very obviously not come to pass . since the referendum , the UK ' S headline economic performance have continue to be mostly strong , and the country show little sign of head into an immediate
Britain vote for chaos ; Tories leave short of majority as election shock throw country into uncertainty ; May ' S gamble backfire to leave her future in doubt and Brexit under threat ; we ' ve change the face of politics , say Corbyn as young voter flock to Labour ; the Telegraph Election @card@
Britain be face political turmoil this morning after Theresa May ' s election gamble backfire , put her Brexit plan in chaos as the Conservative majority be predict to be wipe out . with more than @card@ result count , Labour be take constituency from the Tories all over the country , with the conservative forecast to take @card@ seat - down @card@ - and Labour expect to gain @card@ seat to put it on @card@ . the vote mean a hung parliament be the most likely outcome . it leave Mrs May ' s premiership in serious doubt and raise the possibility of Jeremy Corbyn in Downing Street lead a minority government - the ` ` coalition of chaos ' ' of which Mrs May have persistently warn . Mrs May be determine to fight on this morning , though she appear to concede she would have to lead a coalition rather than a majority government . she say : ` ` at this time , more than anything else , this country need a period of stability and if the Conservative Party have win the most seat then it would be incumbent on us to ensure that we have that . ' ' she say her ` ` resolve ' ' to lead the country through Brexit ` ` be the same this morning as it have always be ' ' . but senior Tory cast doubt on whether Mrs May would still be Prime Minister by the end of today . ask if she would ` ` survive the day ' ' , Sir Craig Oliver , David Cameron ' s former director of communication , say : ` ` it ' S certainly look increasingly difficult . ' ' Boris Johnson ' s odd of be the next prime minister be slash from @card@ before poll close to @card@ . Brexit negotiation , due to begin in @card@ day , would have to be postpone if neither party be able to form a government , and senior conservative suggest another election might now have to be call . the result be be watch almost as keenly in Brussels as it be in the UK . Mrs May call the election hope to ` ` strengthen her hand ' ' in Brexit talk , but her authority would be hugely weaken if the predict result prove correct . Mrs May would be unable to form a coalition without the support of the Democratic Unionist party , but this morning DUP leader Arlene Foster say she do not favour a hard Brexit - an indication of the upheaval to come . Mr Corbyn say Mrs May ' S mandate ` ` be lose vote and lose support ... and I would have think that be enough to go ' ' . by the early hour , Conservative loss be rack up , with minister among those lose their seat . Ben Gummer , the Cabinet Office minister who help write the manifesto , lose to Labour in Ipswich . Jane Ellison , the Financial Secretary to the Treasury , be beat by Labour in Battersea , forfeit what have seem a safe majority of @card@ . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , face a recount in her seat in Hastings and Rye , where she have a @card@ majority . the Liberal Democrats be predict to gain seat - and retake Twickenham with a return for Sir Vince Cable - but Nick Clegg lose his seat in Sheffield Hallam in one of the big shock of the night . it be a disastrous poll for the SNP and Ukip . Nicola Sturgeon ' S party be predict to lose @card@ seat to end on @card@ , a result that will hugely undermine her hope for a second Scottish independence referendum . Angus Robertson , Ms Sturgeon ' S deputy and the SNP ' s leader in Westminster , and former SNP leader Alex Salmond lose their seat to the conservative in a Tory surge north of the border , lead by Scottish leader Ruth Davidson , that see the party capture at least nine more seat . a total collapse in Ukip ' S vote appear to have be decisive in the overall result . prediction that Ukip voter would flock to the conservative prove wide of the mark , with Labour and the Tories appear to pick up vote in roughly equal number . it mean the Tories fail to make as many gain in northern Leave-voting seat as expect , while Labour do well in southern Remain-voting seat . the pound tank by @card@ per cent against the dollar as soon as the first exit poll be publish . Kenneth Clarke , speak after retain his Rushcliffe seat in Nottinghamshire , say the country be in the middle of ` ` great event ' ' and add that it be one of the ` ` most remarkable general election ' ' he could remember . Mrs May have a work majority of @card@ seat and repeatedly tell voter that if she lose just six seat , Mr Corbyn would be prime minister . turnout across the country be high , with young voter apparently out in force to back Mr Corbyn ' s tax-and -spend manifesto . Prof Michael Thrasher , Sky News ' s election analyst say ` ` the kind of people that have n't be vote in the past do appear to be vote in this election ' ' . a senior Conservative source say : ` ` Whether or not we get over the line , there be go to be big change . ' ' George Osborne , the former chancellor , say the result be ` ` ghastly ' ' for the Tory and ` ` catastrophic ' ' for Mrs May . a source close to Mr Corbyn say Mrs May ' S reputation have be ` ` shoot to piece ' ' while John McDonnell , the shadow chancellor , say her position appear ` ` increasingly untenable ' ' . Mr McDonnell say : ` ` she go for it to secure a mandate that she already have and people see through that . it be for party advantage . ` ` people see this as opportunism . even if the result be anywhere near this , it be a catastrophic error and people have see through it . ' ' Emily Thornberry , Labour ' S shadow foreign secretary , accuse Mrs May of ` ` hubris ' ' in call the election , say : ` ` I think we ' re on a verge of a great result . I think she should go , because she have manifestly fail . ' ' David Gauke , the Chief Secretary to the Treasury , hit back by say Mrs May ' S position ` ` be n't in question ' ' . he say : ` ` I do n't think there ' S anyone else who could lead us into the negotiation so effectively . the idea that we should ignore that and navel-gaze would be a big mistake . ` ` Theresa May continue to be the right person to lead that . she ' S the right person for the job , clearly . ` ` give that we ' ve get really important negotiation begin in @card@ day ' time , the responsibility of those of us who hope to be elect as Conservative MP be to continue to support her . ' ' Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , refuse to be draw when ask whether Mrs May should be force to step down . he tell the BBC : ` ` it ' S very early in the evening and I think we have to wait and see . we will see what happen in term of the number of seat we get and the vote share before we make any assumption . ' ' Ms Thornberry say that if there be a hung parliament ` ` what we will do be we will put forward a budget we will put forward a Queen ' s Speech and Labour MP will support it and we will ask MP from other party to support it as well . if they do not , it will be for them to explain to their constituent why they have allow a highly unpopular Conservative government to carry on with the same old same old . ' '
' Dinner with the Donald ' : Farage join inner circle ; Former Ukip leader brief White House aide on Brexit and echo Trump ' S attack on ' hostile ' medium
Nigel FARAGE enjoy a dinner with Donald Trump and his daughter Ivanka on Saturday after visit the White House and discuss Brexit with senior aide . the former Ukip leader be photograph dining with the president , his family and close adviser at the Trump International Hotel in New York . it be understand that he meet Steve Bannon , Mr Trump ' s chief strategist , and update him on Brexit . the visit come after Mr Farage become the first foreign politician to meet Mr Trump follow his election . Mr Trump have suggest that Mr Farage should become Britain ' s ambassador to the US in a snub to Sir Kim Darroch , Britain ' s man in Washington . Theresa May subsequently establish a strong relationship with Mr Trump after become the first foreign leader to visit him . however , Mr Farage ' s late trip to the US demonstrate that he still have access to Mr Trump and his inner circle . one source tell the Sun that Mr Farage spend three hour at the White House and update staff on ` ` how Brexit be go and discuss the wide political situation in Europe ' ' . another add that Mr Farage and Mr Trump ` ` discuss the Brexit progress , global politics and the wide conservative movement ' ' . on Saturday night , Mr Farage post on Twitter a photograph , caption ` ` Dinner with the Donald ' ' , of himself grin at table with the president , Ivanka Trump , her White House adviser husband Jared Kushner , and Florida governor Rick Scott . it come as Mr Farage travel to Washington to tell Mr Trump ' s follower that they be part of a ` ` global revolution ' ' that begin with Brexit . he be greet with a stand ovation at the Conservative Political Action Conference ( CPAC ) , where he speak of the ` ` Brexit mania ' ' he have witness after travel to the US to take part in a Trump rally . ` ` I ' m proud to be a part of that campaign , I really be , ' ' he say , add that he be begin to feel ` ` more American ' ' ever since Mr Trump ' S victory . ahead of his speech , he speak with the Daily Telegraph about the first time he meet Mr Trump . he say : ` ` the first thing he tell me when I meet him be , ' you ' ve do a great thing , but when I win I ' m go to supersede you . ' I say , ' you sure be . ' ' ' speaking in Maryland on Friday , Mr Farage speak out against globalism , say ` ` our real friend in the world speak English ' ' , and allude to upcoming European election . his late visit to America come as the Trump administration bar the BBC and several major American news organisation from a White House press briefing . Mr Farage appear to back the president ' s aggressive dismissal of the medium , tell US broadcaster Fox Business Network it be ` ` lose this battle big time ' ' . he say : ` ` they be simply not prepare to accept that Brexit happen , that Trump happen . they kind of want to turn the clock back and what they do n't realise be they be lose viewer , they be lose listener , they be lose this battle big time . ` ` I be please that the president be not afraid to stand up to them . ' ' Mr Trump continue to attack the medium yesterday , single out the ` ` fail New York Times ' ' for criticism . a spokesman also say his decision to skip the annual White House correspondent ' dinner , during which president typically give a self-deprecate speech , be due to ` ` tension ' ' between him and the press . ` ` I think it ' S kind of naive of us to think that we can all walk into a room for a couple of hour and pretend that some of that tension be n't there , ' ' she tell ABC News . Security riddle Adviser not ours , say Swedish official ? Sweden ' s defence ministry and foreign office have deny that a man introduce in a Fox News segment as a ` ` Swedish national defence and security adviser ' ' work for the government . on the prime-time O'Reilly Factor show , Nils Bildt suggest there be a migrationdriven crime wave in the country that be be suppress by political leader . ten day ago , President Donald Trump suggest , inaccurately , that the country have be hit by a terrorist attack . he later clarify that he mean problem cause by ` ` large-scale immigration ' ' to Sweden . Mr Bildt say : ` ` there be a problem with socially deviant activity , there be a problem with crime . ' ' he add that ` ` these thing be not be openly and honestly discuss ' ' .
Scotland Warnings on single market ' ignore ' in Brexit report
remain MP on a powerful Brexit committee have be accuse of ignore expert evidence about Britain leave the single market and custom union as a major report be publish today . the report from the Exiting the European Union committee urge Theresa May to publish a detailed White Paper on her plan for Brexit by the middle of next month . the MP also ask the Prime Minister to make clear whether she want to keep Britain in the European single market and custom union . the report be sign off by senior Conservative Brexiteers include John Whittingdale , Michael Gove , Dominic Raab and Peter Lilley . however , there be frustration among Conservative member of the cross-party committee that the report ignore expert who have tell the MP that Britain would have to quit the custom union and single market after leave the EU . one MP who argue for the warning to be include in the report say it be ` ` the most interesting bit of evidence that the committee leave out . Conservative effort to address this be rebuff . ' ' Mr Raab say : ` ` the published evidence the committee hear be crystal clear . the expert witness consensus be that Britain will not stay formal member of the single market or custom union , but aim to maintain barrier-free trade . ' ' the Prime Minister sign up to a Labour motion require her to publish detail of her plan for Brexit before the invocation of Article @card@ by the end of next month . but she have so far hold back from say whether MP will be grant a vote on the Brexit deal . the report say minister should seek an outline framework of the future trading relationship with the EU as part of the Article @card@ negotiation , with transitional arrangement to allow trade to continue if a deal be not reach in time for the expect Brexit in @card@ . Hilary Benn , the Labour chairman of the committee , say : ` ` whatever deal be conclude , Parliament must be give a vote on it and the government should make this clear now . ' ' @card@ the year that Britain be expect to exit the EU . the MP ' report say a plan for trade must be in place before then
Scotland Carney to quit straight after Brexit ; Bank Governor will stay at helm through EU talk but wo n't serve full term
mark Carney yesterday tell Theresa May he will quit as Governor of the Bank of England month after Britain leave the European Union . the Governor say he will stay until June @card@ - lead the Bank while Britain conduct Brexit negotiation - but will not serve his full eight-year term . there have be expectation that Mr Carney would stay in post until @card@ - and last night it be say that Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , want the Governor to extend his initial five-year contract for an extra three year . his decision to sign just a one-year extension follow day of speculation over Mr Carney ' s position during which it be suggest that he would either quit immediately or stay a further three year . the announcement come amid a deterioration in relation between Mr Carney and Downing Street . he clash with Mrs May after she give a speech in which she appear to criticise Bank of England policy . meanwhile , senior Conservative Eurosceptics have call for his resignation in recent month after his dire warning about what Brexit would mean for the economy . ahead of the EU referendum , Mr Carney predict that Britain would face a recession if it vote to leave the EU . in the hour before Mr Carney announce his decision , Mrs May ' s official spokesman have suggest that the Prime Minister be ` ` supportive ' ' of him serve until @card@ , say that he be ` ` absolutely ' ' the good man for the job . last night Mrs may ` ` welcome ' ' the neAL/ news that Mr Carney would stay in post during the Brexit negotiation , with a spokesman say that it be ` ` good news for the UK ' ' . government source Leon say it be ` ` entirely ' ' Mr Carney ' s decision to step down post-Brexit and it be understood Mrs May do not attempt to convince him to stay during a meeting in Downing Street which last one hour and @card@ minute . however , it be believe that Mr Hammond have in recent week be call for Mr Carney to stay at the Bank until @card@ . ` ` ultimately the decision on how long he be stay be up to him , ' ' a source say . it be also claim that Mr Carney have decide to return to Canada in @card@ for ` ` family reason ' ' because his child be almost at the age where they will attend university , and that his wife want to return home . in a letter to the Chancellor last night , Mr Carney say that extend his tenure by one year would ` ` contribute to secure an orderly transition to the UK ' s new relationship with Europe ' ' . Mr Hammond respond by praise Mr Carney for continue his ` ` highly effective leadership of the Bank through a critical period for the British economy as we negotiate our exit from the European Union ' ' . Mrs May have say she will trigger Article @card@ , which begin the formal Brexit negotiation , by the end of March next year . Britain will then have two year to leave the EU , mean Mr Carney will depart around three month after Brexit . Tory MP last night continue their attack on Mr Carney , accuse him of ` ` talk down the economy ' ' after his ally say he believe @card@ ` ` could be the dark day ' ' for the British economy . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pension secretary , say : ` ` it be not the job of the Bank of England to talk down the economy . ` ` I ' m deeply sadden by the fact we now have a soap opera at the Bank of England . ' ' Sterling yesterday reach its high level against the dollar of $ @card@ shortly after the announcement be make at 6pm , and be up @card@ per cent against the euro at ( Euro ) @card@ . the news come after equity market in London close for the day , but City trader suggest the FTSE @card@ , which end down @card@ at @card@ , be likely to be reassure by the confirmation . James Kirkup : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ business : page @card@
Brexit will not harm Europe ' S economy , say German banker
a German central banker have claim that Europe ' S economy will emerge from Brexit largely unscathed , and have take an apparent swipe at Theresa May for criticise the Bank of England ' s response to the vote to leave the European Union . Andreas Dombret , a member of the Bundesbank ' s executive board , say that he do not share fear that ` ` if Brexit hamper the banking sector , it might impair the financing of the European economy ' ' . in a speech to a British Bankers ' Association conference , he argue that ` ` Brexit and its possible repercussion for the City of London be unlikely to be an issue for financial stability or the financing of the EU ' s real economy ' ' . in an unusual move , Mr Dombret also intervene in the simmer dispute between the Prime Minister and Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , by issue what he call ` ` a friendly reminder that central bank independence be not debatable ' ' . earlier this month , Mrs May criticise the Bank ' s reaction to the Brexit vote by warn that there be ` ` bad side-effect ' ' from quantitative easing and rock bottom interest rate . Mr Carney respond to the comment say that he would not ` ` take instruction ' ' from politician . Mark Garnier , an international trade minister , meanwhile seek to reassure the city about negotiation over the term of Brexit , tell the BBA that ` ` we have to find a mechanism that behave exactly the same as passporting . ' '
German threat to Brexit trade deal ; Merkel ' s strong opposition to bespoke agreement may torpedo British blueprint
Britain ' S plan for a bespoke Brexit trade deal be at risk of be derail by Germany , even before negotiation on the future EU-UK relationship begin later this year , the Daily Telegraph can reveal . Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , be against a British plan for so-called ` ` managed divergence ' ' from the EU , with senior EU official and expert warn that she consider the idea another ruse for Britain to ` ` have its cake and eat it ' ' . the staunch German opposition to the UK ' S position come as Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , arrive in Germany today for a joint charm offensive . the pair will travel to Berlin and Munich , respectively , to appeal for more pragmatism from Europe as a reward for the UK ' s decision to agree to a ( Euro ) 45billion Brexit bill last December . Mr Hammond and Mr Davis will argue that the UK be not try to cherry-pick , but that ` ` it make no sense ' ' to erect unnecessary barrier to trade in good and service ` ` that would only damage business and economic growth on both side of the Channel ' ' . the British overture come as source say that Berlin remain implacably oppose to what UK official have nickname the ` ` three basket ' ' approach to Brexit , in which the UK would identify where it want to stay close to Europe , where it will diverge and a regulated middle ground . a senior German diplomat work on preparation for the next round of negotiation say : ` ` The ' three basket ' sound like the late episode in the ' cake and eat it ' sitcom series , ' ' add that Germany see a ` ` serious risk to the integrity of the EU and its single market ' ' . regional analyst warn that the British plan to diverge from the EU over time risk being stillborn if minister could not convince Europe to take a more flexible approach . ` ` Hammond and Davis be go to have their work cut out to convince the EU that the UK ' s ' three basket ' approach be n't another attempt to cherry-pick and sow division within the EU , ' ' say Mujtaba Rahman , head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group consultancy . ` ` Germany be go to play hardball . Senior official in Berlin be clear that Angela Merkel be determine not to award the brit a deal that give Eurosceptics and future trade partner a precedent to point to . ` ` UK minister have be encourage that some EU state - notably the Nordic , Netherlands , Italy and Luxembourg - have question the hardline approach by Berlin and Paris , and be now begin a month of intensive lobbying with member state . both side will now engage in a crucial month-long war of idea , with British minister urge a pragmatic approach , while the @card@ member state try to reach agreement on how to tackle the trade talk . a formal EU ` ` mandate ' ' be promise in March . report : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
Mrs May ' s Brexit quandary deepen Body : Theresa May head to Brussels today for a meeting with Jean Claude-Juncker that promise to be crucial for the prospect of a harmonious and mutually beneficial Brexit agreement . whether the unfold deal will be politically acceptable at home remain to be see . over the next few day , the UK government need to convince the EU negotiator that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make on the three issue deem by Brussels to require prior consideration before move on to discuss the wide post-Brexit relationship , include trade . so far , this have essentially involve the government agree to the EU ' S term . even though theoretically nothing be agree until everything be agree , their financial demand have be largely accept . the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) be set to retain a role oversee the right of EU citizen after Brexit ; and Britain be be force to contemplate treat Northern Ireland differently from the rest of the UK , with uncertain implication for peace in the province . at her lunch today with the EU Commission president , the Prime Minister will be look for some indication that the Brussels summit later this month will give the go-ahead to the next stage of the Brexit process . when Mrs May outline Britain ' s position in Florence in September and put some money on the table , she be rebuff just day later by her fellow head of government . after almost double the financial offer and make concession in other area , another repudiation would be politically damaging and raise question as to whether the process be worth continue if a succession of UK compromise be greet with obduracy on the other side . yet difficulty remain , even to get past this stage - notably over the status of the regulatory framework in Northern Ireland . in addition , Brexiteers be alarm at the possibility of a residual role for the ECJ in the legal system of the UK , which would negate one of the key reason many vote to leave . how will it fulfill the pledge to ` ` take back control ' ' if ruling of the ECJ be still bind in UK court ? Mrs May be walk a fine line between her understandable anxiety to move on from the current stalemate and the risk of do so at a price that few - Leavers and Remainers alike , for different reason - be prepare to pay .
the Chancellor fail to grasp that sovereignty lie at the heart of Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Philip Hammond be quite wrong when he say that our first priority in negotiate Brexit must be prosperity ( report , June @card@ ) . when we vote for Brexit , we vote to leave the EU : nothing more or less . of course prosperity be important , and it will come when we reclaim our sovereignty and control of our own affair . we have always be a successful trading nation , and have no place in an inward-looking , protectionist federal Europe . Bob Pugh Ringwood , Surrey sir - I be feed up with commentator and politician lazily trot out the line ` ` people do n't vote to be poor ' ' to justify any propose violation of Brexit . in fact , the people do just that . the logic be clear . since everyone from the Governor of the Bank of England to the Chancellor of the Exchequer threaten that we would be financially bad off after Brexit , even with drastic economic measure and emergency budget , any vote for Brexit be an indication that this be a price worth pay . an unambiguous majority of those who vote show that it be n't about money at all : they simply want to live in a sovereign country again . it be disingenuous to say that people do n't know what they be vote for and therefore the vote be invalid . the point be that people do know what it be like to be in the EU , and almost any alternative be good than that . Jane Biggs Taunton , Somerset sir - as Google , which have be fine £2.1billion for fail to adhere to EU competition law , will attest , the European Commission have become a punishment mechanism . if only its commissioner would spend as much energy create an environment in which great company can innovate and prosper , the EU might create national wealth rather than destroy it . John Maloney Biggar , South Lanarkshire sir - although I vote for Brexit , have be oppose to our membership of the EU since the time of Ted Heath , I have now conclude that we must remain as full member . event over the last year and the result of the general election have show that leave the EU will cause damage to our economic prosperity and our influence in the world . unpick EU-inspired legislation will be tantamount to change element of our constitution . most country require safeguard to ensure that important constitutional change be support by more than a simple majority . while it be true that a majority of those who vote in @card@ back Brexit , the leave vote represent only @card@ per cent of the electorate . this mean that a majority be either oppose or too indifferent to vote . it be time that our MP do what they be pay to do : act in the good interest of the country as a whole . this mean withdraw our Article @card@ notice . Paul Laing Dereham , Norfolk
Scotland be Ukip ' S Frank Sinatra ready for one last comeback ? ; Brexit Sketch
great mind think alike . yesterday morning , Labour announce the six thing they want from Brexit . then Ukip reveal the six thing they want from Brexit , too . disappointingly the Lib Dems do n't join in the fun , but I suppose we can guess what their six demand would have be . ( ` ` @card@ . remain in the EU . 2 . do n't leave the EU . 3 . avoid exit the EU . ' ' Etc . ) Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , speak at Chatham House in London . Labour , he say , want ` ` a strong and collaborative relationship with the EU ' ' ; ` ` the exact same benefit as we currently have as member of the Single Market and Customs Union ' ' ; ` ` fair management of migration ' ' ; ` ` defend [ worker ' ] right ' ' ; ` ` protect national security ' ' ; ` ` deliver for all region and nation of the UK ' ' . Sir Keir do n't sound optimistic that Theresa May would achieve them . then again , Sir Keir rarely sound optimistic about anything . he have the perpetual air of a policeman on a doorstep , remove his helmet to deliver bad news . ` ` failure to meet these test , ' ' he say glumly , ` ` will affect how Labour vote in the Commons . ' ' an interesting strategy . vote against Mrs May ' S deal would surely mean leave with no deal at all : in the language of Remainers , the hardest possible Brexit . which would make Labour the party that warn us against this calamity - and then deliver it . Paul Nuttall , Ukip ' s current leader , make his own six demand at a hotel near Parliament . his audience consist of journalist , plus a special guest : one Nigel Farage , who saunter in and sit at the back . Mr Farage have n't come to speak ; in fact , it be never make clear why he be there . both before and during Mr Nuttall ' S speech , photographer spend a lot more time take picture of Mr Farage than they do of Mr Nuttall . their camera click like cricket . Mr Farage beam . although the room be small , Mr Nuttall read out his speech at the top of his voice . perhaps , for some reason , he feel a need to assert his authority . Ukip ' S six demand , he bellow , be : full parliamentary sovereignty ; full control of border ; full control of fishing water ; leave the Single Market and Customs Union ; finalise Brexit by @card@ ; and do n't pay a penny more to the EU . suddenly I remember something . after he resign as Ukip leader last summer , Mr Farage be ask whether he might ever return . ` ` if Brexit be n't deliver , ' ' he reply , ` ` then I would have to think seriously about plunge back in . ' ' I raise my hand . if Mrs May fail to pass Ukip ' S six test , be Mr Nuttall worry that the gentleman at the back of the room would demand his job back ? both Mr Nuttall and Mr Farage laugh loudly . perhaps a little too loudly . ' both Mr Nuttall and Mr Farage laugh loudly . perhaps a little too loudly '
a profit from Brexit be more likely than the Chancellor ' s gloomy forecast ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the ` ` cost of Brexit ' ' highlight in the Autumn Statement will undoubtedly be wrong . the independent office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) have previously make @card@ fiscal forecast . the average cumulative upward revision have be £49.9 billion in nine of them . in four , the average cumulative downward revision have be £37.6 billion . the margin of error on these budget forecast be very high . they be sensitive to economic forecast and also , as the OBR itself have previously state , its judgment on fiscal policy . my detailed research show that leave the EU and take a global approach produce high growth and more employment than remain in an unreformed EU . far from a cost , Brexit be more likely to produce a significant gain.Gerard Lyons Chief economic advisor to Policy Exchange London SW1 Sir - the OBR claim the cost of Brexit might be close to £60 billion . with HS2 forecast to cost approximately £80 billion , the price to regain our sovereignty be a bargain.Alan Belk Leatherhead , Surrey Sir - in spite of the effort of political journalist , particularly on BBC television , to create an atmosphere of crisis , Philip Hammond succeed in present a calm and unruffled demeanour while announce his view of our economic outlook . Mr Hammond ' s use of the OBR ' S figure be skilful . he make no attempt to disguise the fact that the figure show the Brexit vote have have a negative effect . at the same time , he give the clear impression that everything be under control , and that growth would continue . his transparent honesty completely undermine the feeble response of John McDonnell , the shadow Chancellor . the OBR ' S figure be pessimistic , but by stick to them he will reap the benefit when thing turn out to be good than originally predict . David Kidd Petersfield , Hampshire Sir - one must welcome the Chancellor ' s pledge to spend £23 billion on ` ` innovation and infrastructure ' ' over the next five year . this citizen , however , would welcome the chance to get a usable signal on his mobile phone , be able to navigate the pot-holed and unsalted Sussex lane in winter , and to commute on a train that be not delay , cancel or overcrowd . how about a little bit of that £23 billion to fix this ? Neil Mackwood Dallington , East Sussex Sir - if the Chancellor be so concern about the British economy , why be he see leave Downing Street in a BMW ? Ian Maddock Alveley , Shropshire
Scotland Mundell : do n't let SNP doom-mongering overshadow risk of separation ; SNP be use Brexit fear to downplay risk of break up Union , say Mundell
David Mundell will today accuse Nicola Sturgeon of use ` ` increasingly alarmist ' ' rhetoric about Brexit to distract Scot from the fact that it have make independence even risky . speak on the eve of the second anniversary of the referendum on break up Britain , the Scottish Secretary will attack the First Minister ' s ` ` doom-mongering warning ' ' and suggest they be design to make separation appear the safe option rather than provide a truthful analysis . he will argue that Brexit have make independence less attractive than two year ago , cite the prospect of Scotland join the euro , have a hard border with England and lose access to the UK single market . a separate Scotland ' s EU status would bear little resemblance to the proposition Remain voter back in June , he will claim , with the country face a ` ` major downgrade and loss of control ' ' thanks to a voting system that favour the large member state . his intervention come after Alex Salmond yesterday predict that Nicola Sturgeon will call an independence referendum in the autumn of @card@ after the Brexit negotiation fail to keep Scotland in the EU single market . but write in today ' S Daily Telegraph , Ruth Davidson describe the SNP ' s decision to agitate for a rerun in the wake of the EU referendum vote as ` ` unjustified , infuriate and wrong . ' ' the Scottish Tory leader argue that ` ` the very bad response be to doubledown on uncertainty ' ' and the correct response to leave one political union continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ ` ` ca n't be to withdraw from a much more important one too . ' ' Ms Sturgeon this week warn that Britain face a ` ` lost decade ' ' while it deal with the consequence of Brexit . she argue that this should make Scot ` ` sit up ' ' and consider independence . but , in a speech host by the IPPR Scotland think tank in Glasgow , Mr Mundell will argue that the country ' s political leader have a responsibility to take a ` ` positive approach ' ' to the future . he be expect to say : ` ` part of that mean use temperate language . Doommongering warning of a ' lose decade ' and ' deep and severe ' damage be become increasingly alarmist . ` ` objective observer might wonder if the aim be to provide bracingly frank analysis , or to try and talk up the challenge of Brexit in the hope of make Scottish independence seem less of a risk . ' ' Mr Mundell will argue that the case for Scotland stay in the UK have get strong since the @card@ referendum , add that the Brexit vote have not substantially weaken it . ` ` it certainly do not make Scottish independence any more attractive , viable or beneficial a prospect than it be in @card@ . indeed quite the reverse , ' ' he will say . the Scottish Secretary will note that ` ` full and unrestricted access ' ' to the UK single market be ` ` far more important ' ' to business than the EU single market . Scottish export to the UK be worth £48.5 billon compare with £11.6 billion to the EU . if there be a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit , which leave the UK outside the EU single market , aca-demics have warn that an independent Scotland would face a choice between free trade with the EU or the UK but it could not have both . Mr Mundell will warn that a separate Scotland would be one of the EU ' s small member state , and it could be marginalised in Brussels . he will add : ` ` it be , in truth , a very different proposition from that which Remain voter in Scotland back in June . ' ' in contrast with Scotland receive a ` ` fiscal transfer ' ' from the UK every year of £15 billion , Mr Mundell will argue that Scottish taxpayer would have to pay into the EU pot at a high rate as they would no longer benefit from Margaret Thatcher ' S rebate . Ms Sturgeon have recently shift the focus of her demand from Scotland retain its EU status to maintain membership of the EU single market . Mr Salmond say yesterday he would expect her to give Theresa May ` ` the opportunity to embed Scotland ' ' in the Brexit talk to make that happen . but he tell RT UK ' S go underground programme : ` ` my reading of the situation be , the UK will not be flexible or wise enough to do that , and therefore I expect there ' ll be a Scottish referendum in roughly two year ' time . ' ' Mike Russell , the SNP ' s Brexit negotiation minister , say : ` ` David Mundell represent a Tory government which the people of Scotland overwhelmingly do not vote for , try to sell them an EU referendum result that they overwhelmingly do not vote for - and these comment would be laughable be they not so ridiculous . ` ` just a few month ago Mr Mundell , Ruth Davidson and many other Tory warn us of the disastrous consequence of leave the EU - yet now they try and pretend that the UK offer some sort of stability or certainty for Scotland . ' '
we have Brexit ally out there - but we ' re too busy go round in circle ; Tory MP be in such a state of confusion that they be not pick up signal from Ireland and other
if in doubt , blame the civil servant . that seem to be the strategy adopt by disgruntled backbencher and minister who be n't happy with our rudderless government . but ask anyone who have to deal with the government from the outside , from foreign diplomat to business , and the civil servant be the only one single out for praise . a bad workman blame his tool and a poor political class blame its bureaucrat . MP do have much to be unhappy about . the UK be squander its good opportunity to shape European attitude in our favour . even as EU government be at their most open to influence , Downing Street be dither . this week , the EU will finalise its negotiate guideline on the transition , deliberation over which be likely to follow the pattern see last autumn : a long , painful spectacle in which Britain will concede nearly every point . rather than get it over with and move on to what matter - our future long-term relationship with the EU - our government look set to waste more time fight itself . in the meantime , European government will be agree their position on the more important question of the UK-EU trade deal . Britain have a window of opportunity to influence that process , but our government be so divide that it can not take advantage of it . to see what could be , consider the position of Ireland , where I spend most of the past week . Brexit will have almost as big an impact in Dublin as it do here , since half of all export by Irish company be buy by Britain and many have to cross UK territory to reach buyer in Europe . and although Ireland be a small nation , bully by Europe ' s large state as it once be by the UK , it have a clever , energetic leader , a deep understanding of Britain and a strong interest in make sure Brexit do n't go pear-shaped . last week in Davos , the Irish Taoiseach , Leo Varadkar , directly contradict Brussels dogma by say that the EU should aim for a bespoke deal with Britain to take account of our deep trading tie . Ireland ' s preferred outcome would be for everything to stay the same - that be , for Britain to remain in the single market and custom union . but many of its politician also understand that do so could prove politically impossible , unleash chaos in Westminster . they conclude , therefore , that it be in their interest to soften the hard line so far take by France and Germany . in other word , Dublin be a potential ally . it be not the only one . several other northern European country with strong UK trade tie have give signal suggest they could take a pragmatic approach to Brexit , if the right argument be make . Sweden have say explicitly that any Brexit deal should be extensive and go further than the EU ' s deal with Canada . Denmark and the Netherlands have both commission report show the disruption their industry would suffer from fail to reach a deal and , at different time , suggest that a comprehensive trade deal would be in their interest . Luxembourg ' s prime minister , Xavier Bettel , recently criticise the EU ' s ` ` binary thinking ' ' on Brexit . Spain and Italy , while echo French and German rhetoric more closely , have emphasise the importance of keep Britain close . all of these country make pro-EU sound and believe sincerely in the importance of EU project such as the single market , but they be not quite as attach to its dogma as France and Germany . it ' s no wonder . the Franco-German engine have do more than any other alliance to shape the union , and its institution therefore suit them good . the point , though , be not to sow division among Europe ' s government on Brexit . it be to help the moderate win the argument . beyond Brexit , Europe be face a crucial choice between a hyper-federalist leap forward , favour by France ' S Emmanuel Macron and Germany ' s centre-Left SPD , and a series of incremental reform . Ireland , like other nation with strong national identity and a naturally sceptical outlook on the EU political project , be anxious about be railroad into a union that go beyond the pure economic advantage it seek . Britain be now an outsider in this debate . but there be a grow conversation across the continent about which of the two outlook should win . Ireland ' S politician talk hopefully about forge a northern European alliance with likeminded trading nation . on Brexit , there be talk in Dublin about draw up a new framework for ` ` a ' ' customs union to facilitate trade , which could give Britain more flexibility than stay in ` ` the ' ' exist EU custom union . if the UK could look up , for just a minute , from the briefing war in Westminster , it might well find fertile ground on the continent for a reasoned argument about pragmatism , share value and a model of free trade that do n't revolve around build a super-state . instead , we ' re sabotage ourselves . in Ireland , attitude to Britain range from frustration to resentment . one senator recount the reaction when he state the obvious at a local party meeting : ` ` a good deal for Britain be a good deal for Ireland . ' ' an irate party member respond : ` ` I do n't come here to listen to this pro-English S -- -- . ' ' Mark Daly , an opposition senator involve in parliamentary committee work on Brexit , describe Britain ' s MP as ` ` astoundingly ignorant ' ' on basic trade policy issue . it ' S hard to argue with that when , as Buzzfeed reveal on Saturday , staunch advocate of a hard Brexit , like Nadine Dorries , be still post question on social medium group ask fellow MP what exactly membership of the custom union involve . the UK be count on Ireland and likeminded nation to win the argument , soften the stance take by Berlin and Paris . government insider point to unmove poll and the steady state of the British economy as evidence that everything be fine . but the management of Brexit be in chaos and we should n't be rely on our ally to manage it for us . when push come to shove in the EU , it ' S the big nation that tend to steamroller the small one . we be at a point in history when all the piece have be throw into the air . they could land in any formation . yet at this crucial moment , even as the future be decide , Tory MP be still struggle to understand the most basic aspect of the choice they have to make . our ally ca n't help us unless we help ourselves . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
employer hand PM a tight Brexit deadline ; Theresa May move to reassure business as CBI president warn ' clock be tick ' on EU trade talk
most business will start move job across the Channel and slash recruitment in the come month as 60pc plan to launch no-deal Brexit plan before the end of March . however , 75pc of big business tell the CBI they would put these plan on hold if a Brexit transition deal be agree between the government and the EU by the end of March . ` ` the clock be tick , ' ' Paul Drechsler , the CBI ' S president , tell the business group ' s annual conference . ` ` the government and the EU need to get a move on , make progress , remain flexible and , first of all , sort out transitional arrangement . ' ' after that he want the focus to switch to longer-term negotiation for ` ` the big prize of all ... a trade deal for good and service that be right for the people of Britain ' ' . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , tell the conference that the negotiator be make progress and she hope to make a move on the transition and trade talk ` ` as quickly as possible ' ' . ` ` during this period our access to one another ' S market should continue on current term , ' ' she reassure business . both the Prime Minister and Mr Drechsler use their speech to make the case for capitalism with moderate governmental support . free market be ` ` the good way to spread opportunity and lift people out of poverty ' ' , Mrs May say . she tell the business audience that the government should seek to foster business growth , particularly in hi-tech sector , seek to emulate the success of the UK in grow a world-leading financial service sector , while limit the risk of under-regulation and over-reliance on one sector . ` ` by set the right framework and invest in skill and infrastructure , we can help broaden our economic base , build a more balanced economy and make Britain a true global leader , ' ' she say . ` ` we can not and will not try to make a plan for every corner of our economy . we believe in the free market and wo n't attempt to shield the economy from market force . ` ` we have to make strategic decision about where the government can and can not best support key sector of the economy . ' ' meanwhile , Mr Drechsler say capitalism have be the drive force in the UK and the world promote wealth , health and well-being , but that ` ` until everybody feel the benefit of capitalism in their pocket and in their home , we will have a problem ' ' .
end the migrant influx will shake Britain out of its laziness , say Ramsay ; celebrity chef reject bitter rival Jamie Oliver ' s complaint over effect of Brexit on restaurant trade
BREXIT will shake Britain out of laziness and give homegrown talent a chance to shine , Gordon Ramsay have say . the chef say he be look forward to an end to the ` ` influx ' ' of migrant after Britain leave the European Union and claim it would have a positive effect on the restaurant industry . his optimism contrast with his rival Jamie Oliver , who campaign for Remain and blame the closure of six of his Italian restaurant on the uncertainty that follow the Brexit vote . a curb on migrant labour would create opportunity , Ramsay tell Radio Times . ` ` that level of influx of multinational worker in this country have sort of confirm how lazy as a nation we be - when individual from across the sea be prepare to come and work twice as hard for less money , ' ' he say . ` ` if anything , it ' S a big kick up the a -- -for the industry , and it ' s go to get back to the modern-day apprenticeship . so not only do I welcome that kind of change , but I think it ' s go to put a lot more emphasis on homegrown talent . ' ' there be no love lose between Ramsay and Oliver . ` ` it ' S all very well to spout off now about sugar tax and supermarket . none of that be speak about when he be label-slapping with Sainsbury ' S for @card@ year , ' ' Ramsay say . he be refer to Oliver ' s decade as the face of the supermarket chain , a job report to have earn him £10million . ` ` sadly , the only time he open his mouth be when he ' S get something to promote , ' ' Ramsay add . in August , ask about Ramsay make regular jibe at him , Oliver say : ` ` Times ` ` he ' S get four kid and I ' ve get five kid and I do n't want to be slagging off some kid ' dad on telly . it ' S not nice . ' ' it appear to be an attempt to bury RADIO the hatchet , but Ramsay say the remark be hurtful because his wife , Tana , miscarry their fifth child last year . she be ` ` mortify ' ' by Oliver ' S remark and Ramsay say he will never talk to Oliver again until he apologise . the Michelin-starred chef give the interview to promote a new ITV documentary about the cocaine trade . he say teenager should be teach about cocaine , explain that he sit his child down and show them how the drug be often cut with cement powder or battery acid . it ` ` scare the life out of them ' ' , he say . he add that child should be give drug education in the same way that they receive sex education . Ramsay say cocaine be rife in the restaurant industry , recall an occasion last Christmas when a customer ask for a side plate to be change because he have use it to snort the class-A drug in the bathroom . a chef at a celebrity book launch press a foil wrap of cocaine into his palm during a handshake , Ramsay claim . on another occasion , while cooking for a dinner party he be ask to dust the soufflé with cocaine mix into the icing sugar . he decline . ' that level of influx of multinational worker have sort of confirm how lazy as a nation we be '
Irish premier ' s Brexit idea be so good that Ireland should take it up too ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the suggestion by Leo Varadkar , the Irish Taoiseach , that the United Kingdom should consider become a member of the European Free Trade Association or Efta ( report , August @card@ ) be www.good.No solution will please everyone and compromise must be make . membership of Efta would offer many of the advantage we be seek from Brexit and avoid a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' on departure from the EU . it would help to heal the nation ' S division . such a sensible , workable plan be lay out in Daniel Hannan ' S excellent what next : how to get the good from Brexit . MP and peer of all party who truly have the national interest at heart , as well as those try to frustrate or overturn Brexit , would benefit by use the summer recess to read and inwardly digest this book . meanwhile , instead of encourage the disaffected Nicola Sturgeon and Carwyn Jones in their idea of stay in the single market and custom union , which be tantamount to stay in the EU , which @card@ million of the British people vote to leave , Mr Varadkar might more usefully spend his time reflect on the benefit to the Irish Republic of do the same and join Efta . after all , the bulk of Ireland ' S trade be with the UK , which may well strike a free trade deal with the United States , with which Ireland have far more tie than with continental Europe . do Ireland really want to be an EU outpost maroon in the middle ? Maureen Waller Little Barningham , Norfolk sir - member of the government now seem to be agree that we need a ` ` transition period ' ' after we leave the EU because we can not sort out the detail in the time available under Article @card@ and we want to avoid a so-called ` ` cliff edge ' ' . their plan now seem to be that no great change in our relationship will occur until after we have leave , and then change will be make as and when they be require , with no time limit as require by Article @card@ . if instead of invoke that Article we have simply revoke the Acts of Parliament that take us in , we would have be in the same position three year earlier . this unnecessary delay will cost us about another £25 billion in contribution and allow an extra unknown number of EU national into our crowded island . this be predictable and be indeed predict . the government owe us all an explanation for its delay . Brian Meadley Axminster , Devon sir - I wonder if there be any chance of one more EU diktat before we leave . drive around Europe this summer , I think a common rule would be useful for allow another road user into the road . in Britain a quick headlight flash indicate to another driver that they may pull out . in many , but not all , continental EU state it mean : ` ` do n't even think about pull out . ' ' perhaps one rule could be agree ? Michael West Bishopstoke , Hampshire
top boss to grill Davis over Brexit plan
the head of some of the UK ' s big company will today seize on the first opportunity since the election to tell the government what they would like to see from the Brexit process . the guest list at the Chevening summit - be host by David Davis , the Brexit Secretary - be understand to include Xavier Rolet , the chief executive of the London Stock Exchange , who be battle to retain the lucrative euro clear market in the face of call in Brussels to move it on to the continent after Brexit . Dame Carolyn McCall , the chief executive of EASYJET , will also attend the meeting . the airline be spend ten of million of pound on set up a new European base and restructure its operation , to allow it to continue fly within the EU . Dave Lewis , the boss of Tesco , which have be hit by the decline of sterling since the Brexit vote , and Gavin Patterson of BT , which face challenge around data rule , be also expect to attend the talk . Alison Brittain , who run Costa Coffee and Premier Inn owner Whitbread , be expect to attend too , with migration likely to be high on her agenda . other on the guest list include Jes Staley , chief executive of Barclays , and Emma Walmsley , the boss of Glaxo-SmithKline . the agenda be understand to be broad , with discussion on any topic relate to Britain ' s planned break with the EU . it follow the creation of an EU exit Business Advisory Group by Mr Davis , the Chancellor and the Business Secretary , which be due to meet once a fortnight . Carolyn Fairbairn , the CBI boss , who last night appear to be on a collision course with Mr Davis after call for the UK to stay in the single market and the custom union until a Brexit deal be do , will also attend . Adam Marshall : page @card@
how the Americans begin to see Brexit as the model for their own electoral revolution ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Americans be latch on to Brexit to explain Donald Trump ' S victory . I suspect few understand what our referendum be about . we be in America on June @card@ , the day of the referendum result , and everyone we meet think the EU be simply a free-trade arrangement . they assume therefore that the Brexit vote must be just a vehicle for protest against the government of the day . when we explain to them the loss of sovereignty , the corruption and the profound lack of democracy of the EU , they be shock : ` ` we never hear about those thing . ' ' Quite . Cynthia Harrod-Eagles Northwood , Middlesex Sir - if the next wave of election follow the same pattern as the most recent one , the Prime Minister wo n't have to worry about her negotiation for leave the EU , as there ' ll be no EU leave to negotiate with . Earl of Ronaldshay Richmond , North Yorkshire Sir - until recently I have never see the term ` ` work class ' ' use to define a section of society in America , but the description be use increasingly in the presidential campaign of both Trump and Clinton . how strange it be that a billionaire Republican should have be elect because of support from this new group , the Working Class of the United States . what happen to the land of the free and its classless society ? Mike Taylor Chichester , West Sussex Sir - for the first time in decade the people of Britain have show they have the power to change the way they be govern . the people of America have now show they too be feed up with the old order and , like those who vote for Brexit , be ready to face the uncertainly that change bring . be those protest against this change , here and in America , say that they do n't like democracy , or be they blind to how out of touch our govern elite have become - in the case of the EU , out of touch because it do n't like democracy ? David Croxson New Milton , Hampshire Sir - Those , include Mr Trump himself , who see him as a ` ` Brexit President ' ' have get it wrong . the Brexit referendum victory be base on the popular vote , and the popular vote in the US election be for Hillary Clinton . Hugh Hetherington Sandwich , Kent Sir - Those protest against the election of Mr Trump be protest about the decision of their demo . if they ca n't stand the democratic decision of the demos that they inhabit , they must leave and find one more to their liking . or sulk . Christopher Monniot Leeds , West Yorkshire Sir - why do Gary Gerstle ( Comment , November @card@ ) describe Mr Trump ' S victory derogatorily as ` ` populism ' ' ? it be respectful democracy at work . Dr J Meirion Thomas London SW3 Sir - Populism = widespread opinion I do n't agree with . Popular = widespread opinion I do agree with . Dr John Lockley Ampthill , Bedfordshire Sir - ` ` as democracy be perfect , the office [ of President ] represent , more and more closely , the inner soul of the people . we move toward a lofty ideal . on some great and glorious day the plain folk of the land will reach their heart ' s desire at last , and the White House will be adorn by a downright moron . ' ' - H L Mencken , @card@ . Peter Smith Ingatestone , Essex Sir - the result of the presidential election shock me and shake me . I do n't believe that American voter could be so ignorant and intolerant that they would choose to elect Donald Trump . this election be not just a choice between Republican and Democrat . a vote for Trump be a vote for racism , bigotry , misogyny and hatred . throughout my life America have be hail as the capital of the free world . it uphold ideal of democracy and freedom of speech , idea and religion . yet Trump manage to win a presidency from a platform of hatred . the problem be not Trump but that America hear what he be say , and like it . Faith Browning Leicester Sir - perhaps the American people be follow Mae West ' S dictum : ` ` when choose between two evil , I generally like to pick the one I ' ve never try before . ' ' John Frankel Kingsclere , Berkshire Sir - the arrogant liberal elite and its impressionable groupie only embrace democracy if it produce a result they want . otherwise , the result be ignore , reject or violently protest against . David Williams Epperstone , Nottinghamshire Sir - I think I understand the way many people in America be feel . recently I ' ve have a recur nightmare that Philip Green be prime minister . Jennifer Grover Great Kingshill , Buckinghamshire Sir - while he seem strange to us , Mr Trump will be a president with a record of be able to do business with anybody . exactly what the world need in these dangerous time . sue Doughty Twyford , Berkshire Sir - Nigel Farage have say that he will not be return to politics after a new leader of Ukip have be appoint . but he appear to know the US presidentelect well , he be experience in the business world , and by now be a familiar figure in the United States . it would not seem preposterous to suggest that he might be a suitable candidate for appointment as British ambassador to Washington DC . Nigel Milliner Tregony , Cornwall Sir - Allister Heath ( Comment , November @card@ ) wonder ` ` whether Trump intend to repeat that act of vandalism ' ' , refer to the Smoot-Hawley tariff Act of @card@ . but in @card@ , the United States have a huge trade surplus with the rest of the world . that be why the act be ` ` the single great economic blunder of all time ' ' . now , the United States have a huge trade deficit with the world ; the circumstance be entirely different . in effect , the United States be borrow money from its foreign supplier to enable it to buy import . the current US trade deficit be the great economic blunder . how can the United States and other Western developed economy get out of this mess ? Tony Hart Topsham , Devon Sir - Will President-elect Trump receive the Nobel Peace Prize immediately he take office or will he have to wait @card@ day , as President Obama do ? Alan Kennington Axminster , Devon Sir - be anyone else look forward to Mr Trump ' s first meeting as President of the United States with a foreign dignitary when there be a wind blow . bad hair day or baseball cap ? Alistair Leitch Morpeth , Northumberland
' Brexit be n't a vote to shut down the economy ' ; Tory conference Philip Hammond warn that immigration control must not come at expense of growth
Philip Hammond be keen to point out that his relationship with the Prime Minister be very different to the one George Osborne have with David Cameron . in the three month since Theresa May make him Chancellor , there have be grow report that their relationship have become strained . go be the day when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne govern almost as one . the new Prime Minister prefer to make decision alone or with only her most trust adviser , it be say . it have even be report that Mr Hammond be no longer a guest at the Prime Minister ' s daily morning meeting , something that would have be unthinkable when Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne occupy Downing Street . however , Mr Hammond suggest that the near-symbiotic relationship maintain by his predecessor and the former prime minister be not necessarily conducive to good government . ` ` George Osborne have a very close perrsonal and political relationship that go back a very long way with David Cameron and they work together in a certain way , ' ' Mr Hammond say . ` ` Theresa May and I work together in a different way - [ though ] we ' ve also know each other a long time . ' ' he add : ` ` the most important thing be that we share clear objective . that we understand each other ' S priority , we know how each other work and we have a channel of ready communication between us and I ' m quite satisfy with the arrangement that Theresa May and I have get . ' ' Brexit and the Single market in recent day there have be report that Mrs May be seek a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , which would mean Britain relinquish its membership of the single market so that it can have full control over its border . Mr Hammond be dismissive of the attempt to characterise Britain ' s exit negotiation as either ` ` soft ' ' or ` ` hard ' ' . ` ` we ' re the world ' s fifth-largest economy and create a relationship between the European Union and the world ' s fifth-largest economy be go to be a complex process for which there be no model , ' ' he say . ` ` so it will be a bespoke model . we should be look for a good Brexit - not a hard Brexit or a soft Brexit . ' ' there have be report that Mr Hammond be increasingly concern that the desire among some in Government to control immigration could lead to economic harm , with the European union deny access to the single market if Britain do not accept the free movement of migrant . but Mr Hammond be insistent that any migration control must not come at the expense of economic progress . the Chancellor say : ` ` we ' ve get to be clear about one thing - there ' s an implicit term of the mandate we receive from the British people . it may not have be state explicitly but it ' s implicit . and that be that they do not want to see the economy suffer . ` ` they do not want to see job lose , they do not want to see standard of live decline . so they will expect us to negotiate a solution which deliver the key element of leave the European union - regain our sovereignty , get control over our border - but they will expect us to do all of that in a way that allow the UK economy to go on grow . ' ' Immigration Mr Hammond have make clear that whatever immigration control be enforce , ` ` highly skilled ' ' worker will never be ` ` shut out ' ' of Britain . he have already say that key worker in the financial service industry will be exempt from any control , but appear to suggest that other sector will get similar freedom . ` ` the message that I want to send to business be that whatever solution we end up with , whatever control power we have over immigration into the UK , we will use them responsibly , ' ' he say . ` ` we will use them in a way that support the UK economy and we will certainly not use them to shut out highly skilled people - whether they be banker or software engineer or manager in global company - from the UK when their presence be support inward investment and growth in our economy . ' ' responsible capitalism Mrs May have face criticism from the country ' s big firm by demand ` ` responsible capitalism ' ' . the Prime Minister want to put worker on company board and also rein in excessive pay . he insist that the measure , particularly plan to put worker on board , be ` ` something that responsible business will recognise can be positive for them ' ' . he also suggest large company will not want to risk a backlash from angry customer . Deutsche Bank amid grow concern about the German lender Deutsche Bank , Mr Hammond be quick to reassure voter that the British - and global - banking system be more ` ` resilient ' ' than before the @card@ financial crash . he say that if a major bank be in trouble ` ` the world ' s central bank would cooperate together to resolve it in a way that do n't contaminate the wide system ' ' he add : ` ` I have a high degree of confidence that those mechanism that we now have in place be effective and will work if call upon . ' ' the tech industry Mr Hammond will use his speech to the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham to announce a huge cashinjection for hi-tech company . as well as £100 million for life science , there will be £120 million to research artificial intelligence and nanotechnology . Mr Hammond say he want to make Britain a ` ` global capital ' ' of ` ` innovation ' ' . what ' S on when conference agenda ? Tomorrow Theresa May ; David Davis , Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union ; Liam Fox , International Development Secretary ; Boris Johnson , Foreign Secretary ; Sir Patrick McLoughlin , party chairman ? Monday Philip Hammond , Chancellor ; Greg Clark , Business Secretary ; Sajid Javid , Local Government Secretary ; Chris Grayling , Transport Secretary ? Tuesday Amber Rudd , Home Secretary ; Michael Fallon , Defence Secretary ; Liz Truss , Justice ; Jeremy Hunt , Health ; Justine Greening , Education ; Damian Green , Work and Pensions ? Wednesday Theresa May
we ' ve sign a blank cheque for nuclear power ; Brexit offer the perfect chance to cancel Hinkley Point , but Britain have give in to France and China
every cloud have its silver lining , and for Remainers such as me , one potential upside of Brexit be that it might finally bury that Franco-Chinese folie de grandeur-bysea , Hinkley Point C. Britain ' s most ambitious nuclear power station to date appear so bind up in the spirit of European communautaire that it be hard to imagine how the French , statecontrolled , energy giant Électricité de France ( EDF ) , could proceed if Britain vote leave . for both party - the UK Government and EDF - Brexit seem to offer a god-given excuse to pull the plug on an investment which all along have be dog by controversy and www.setbacks.No such luck . bar a surprise change of heart , which be not altogether impossible after the late boardroom bust-up , they be to plough ahead regardless - regardless , that be , of the solvency risk it pose to EDF , already struggle with the finance for nuclear renewal in France , regardless of the late EDF resignation , regardless of the ever-escalating cost - estimate at £18 billion and rise the last time I look - regardless of the untested technology be adopt , regardless of the fact that it commit Britain to a Chinese solution to other nuclear reactor elsewhere in Britain , together with the accompanying security risk , and most important of all , regardless of spiral subsidy cost , include a strike price , inflation-proofed for @card@ year , for output which be more than double the current go rate for wholesale electricity . even Brexit could n't stop it . indeed , the referendum vote might actually have give it a boost . keen to demonstrate that Britain be still capable of attract big league overseas money , and that we be not wholly divorce ourselves from our Continental neighbour , the new government be , if anything , even more enthusiastic about Hinkley than the last one , kowtow to the French and Chinese in equal measure . it be obviously good news that Brexit do n't seem to have deter EDF , or indeed overseas appetite for UK investment in the round . but then the largesse of the dowry be such that even in the face of a 10-year depression , EDF would have struggle to refuse . the bottom line be that far too big a price be be pay for an untried technology which will very likely be obsolete before the plant be even complete . to get Hinkley build , minister have have to agree an ever-lengthening and more humiliate list of concession , include , almost unbelievably , virtually penalty free scope for contract over-runs of up to eight year beyond the planned completion date of @card@ . with Hinkley Point schedule to provide Britain with @card@ per cent of its electricity need , any such delay would leave consumer disastrously expose to Britain ' s loom energy shortfall , as exist nuclear and coalfired plant come to the end of their natural life . in any case , a project of questionable value to the UK economy from the start have be leave look like a total white elephant by the collapse in the price of fossil fuel . the National Audit Office recently estimate that over the lifetime of the project , the extra cost to consumer of Hinkley ' S output have rise from a punish £6.1 billion when the strike price be agree three year ago , to a jaw-dropping £29.7 billion today . together with other policy design to deliver a lowcarbon future , Hinkley ' S cost will add approximately £230 a year to the average household electricity bill , accord to government estimate . climate change risk may well justify these environmental goal , but whether Hinkley be the right way to deliver them always seem questionable and today look positively reckless . to understand how we get ourselves into this mess require a little history . as with so many other pioneer technology , Britain practically invent civil nuclear power , but then lose its way in the hopelessly expensive technological cul de sac of bespoke gas-cool reactor . a further stab at nuclear power be make under the Thatcher government , but be derail by the ` ` dash for gas ' ' and the fallout from Chernobyl . climate change objective give nuclear new leg , but private-sector solution have prove elusive . it be no accident that Hinkley ' S two backer , France ' s EDF and China ' S General Nuclear Power Corporation , be creature of the state , for the upfront cost of grand projet like Hinkley be so large and high risk that the private sector struggle to finance them . France and China will be charge us through the nose for the privilege . frankly , we would have be good off do it ourselves . there be much good solution to Britain ' s loom energy shortfall - gas as a stop-gap , small , more affordable nuclear power station from Japan , and further out , the development of ` ` small modular nuclear reactor ' ' , a promising technology where Britain could again excel . Let ' s trade with France , China and the rest of the world by all mean . but it be a great mistake to mortgage our future to them in the endeavour . follow Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ jeremywarneruk ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Britain ' s EU exit date might not be March @card@ , @card@ , after all
Theresa May have concede that Britain ' s exit from the EU could be postpone after she be force into a climbdown over the date of Brexit . the Prime Minister say Brexit day - March @card@ , @card@ - could be push back ` ` in exceptional circumstance ' ' if negotiation with the EU overrun . in accept an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill give Parliament the power to postpone Brexit if EU member state decide to extend the Article @card@ period , she have avoid a second defeat in the space of a week over an amendment to the bill . however , Brexiteers fear this could ` ` indefinitely extend our stay in the EU ' ' . Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , have insist the transition period should end in December @card@ , earlier than the two year favour by the government . Mrs May have say Britain would leave the EU at 11pm on March @card@ , @card@ , and repeat this at Prime Minister ' S question yesterday . but she announce the government have accept an amendment by Sir Oliver Letwin , David Cameron ' s former policy chief , that allow the date to be change by a vote in Parliament . Mrs May have no choice but to accept the amendment after more than @card@ Tory MP , include Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , put their name to it . Mrs May say : ` ` we would use that power only in extremely exceptional circumstance for the short possible time . ' ' John Baron , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , ask the Prime Minister to pledge that ` ` it will only be use for a matter of week , or a couple of month at most ' ' . but Mrs May refuse to set a time limit . it come as the EU draft guideline for transition and for the future relationship with the UK . No10 say the timing of the transition be a matter for negotiation . the guideline expect the UK to follow EU rule during the transition while have no say over them . Mr Barnier appear to indicate that Spain would have a veto on any arrangement cover Gibraltar , say decision would be ` ` make for the @card@ , unanimously , by consensus ' ' . Mrs May tell the commons : ` ` we be not go to exclude Gibraltar from negotiation . ' ' France must not punish UK : page @card@
get on with the job of Brexit ? no sign of it on the British side ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the Prime Minister have give the nation two mantra about herself . one be that she be ` ` about get on with the job ' ' , and the other that she ` ` want to be clear ' ' about everything . but many perceive a lack of clarity , and wonder why the government have appear so tardy about get on with the job of Brexit . meanwhile , the EU have ` ` get on with the job ' ' and appear ` ` clearer ' ' and well prepared in its negotiate position than Britain under the PM and David Davis . the EU have declare ever since the ( very late ) invocation of Article @card@ that the four freedom ( free movement of good , capital , service and labour ) be indivisible . yet the Cabinet and the Tory party continue to oscillate back and forth about which slice of the EU cake we can keep as we leave the table , as if any of that be a realistic option . our civil service have seem , since the referendum , to be ill-prepared with scenario planning . that impression have continue , despite position paper which have be short on clear negotiate proposal . of course it ' s difficult , but surely by now we could have take the initiative in negotiate , with our own clear and visionary proposal . we do n't seem to have get on with the job , and certainly not with any clarity worth the claim . Rev Canon Robin Morrison Barry , Glamorgan sir - Hard Brexit ? bad Brexit ? more like botched Brexit . Nigel Adams Hertford sir - I spend most of my career negotiate commercial deal . nothing be agree until everything be agree and the ink have dry on the paper . if you be not credibly able to walk away at any time up to that point , you will be take to the cleaner . this be why it be essential that Britain should prepare for a no-deal future , irrespective of the apparent state of negotiation . the European Commission ' s strategy in the next @card@ month will be to spin these out , make encouraging noise from time to time to lure us into not commit the time and money require . as the clock tick , we will make desperate concession until it ' S too late . then the Commission will find some excuse to persuade the @card@ other EU country to pull the rug , blame HMG for ` ` lack of sufficient detail ' ' or competence , to a disloyal chorus of approval from the opposition , the BBC and much of the UK press . the trap will be spring . Britain will be give a generous invitation to rejoin - without the rebate and the opt-outs . we need to disabuse ourselves of the notion that the Commission be seek a fair and amicable outcome , or even one which make economic sense . from the Commission ' S viewpoint , pour décourager les autres , the next good outcome to have Britain return to the EU fold as a supplicant with its tail between its leg would be to have it leave in chaos with an onerous deal . Michael Jones Cowbridge , Glamorgan
Scotland CBI chief call on SNP to work with Tory on Brexit deal
the head of one of the UK ' s most eminent business group will tonight demand that SNP minister work ` ` more effectively ' ' with their Tory counterpart during the Brexit talk to get the well possible deal . Carolyn Fairbairn , CBI director-general , will tell the group ' s Scottish annual dinner in Glasgow that make a success of Brexit be one of the main reason overseas firm should continue invest north of the Border . but she will argue that the two government must work together , follow month of acrimony . her intervention come as Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , admit in a magazine interview that her great fear over Brexit be that ` ` if there ' s a short-term economic hit , we do n't bounce back from it . ' ' it also coincide with Tory warning that Ms Sturgeon ' S government do not ` ` understand the economy ' ' after she use this week ' s programme for government to hint at tax increase for the middle class and the rich . Ms Fairbairn be expect to issue four challenge to the Scottish government over innovation , productivity , business rate and work well with the UK Government over Brexit . Ms Fairbairn will note the UK Government promise to take account of the view of the devolve nation before warn both government : ` ` Scottish business be look for evidence of progress - the logjam must be unblocked . ` ` it be essential that this relationship strengthen and , as EU negotiation continue , help get the good deal possible for Scottish business . ' '
Tory MP warn Davis to make ' clean break ' from EU court
David Davis have be warn by Tory MP that the UK must make a ` ` clean break ' ' from the European Court of Justice amid concern he could allow its continued influence for year to come . the Brexit Secretary will tomorrow publish a paper suggest that the European Free Trade Association ' S court could provide a potential model for the UK after Brexit . the court , which be independent , rule on dispute between Brussels and non-EU member of the single market , such as Norway . Tory Eurosceptics have raise concern that the body simply ` ` rubberstamp ' ' the ruling of the European Court of Justice and would fail to deliver sovereignty after Brexit . however , Brexit official believe that it could help Theresa may meet her ` ` red line ' ' that Britain will leave the European Court of Justice after Brexit . they say that the model will end the court ' s ` ` direct effect ' ' on British law . John Redwood , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP , say : ` ` I do n't see the need for it . as far as I ' m concerned , once we leave the European union we leave the jurisdiction of the court . more than @card@ nation have trade deal with the EU without any special arrangement . ` ` we just want to get on with it , we be have to wait much longer than we want to . people be make heavy weather of something that could all be much simple . we vote to leave , we do n't want the EU boss us around and tell us what law we have . ' ' Jacob Rees-Mogg , another Eurosceptic Tory MP , say : ` ` one of the ruling of the EFTA court be it wish to be as close as possible to the European Court of Justice because it believe that there should be homogeneity . ` ` it do n't diverge from the European Court of Justice in normal circumstance . if we do that we be only marginally well off than we be before . we need to ensure that the final decision-maker be Parliament , subject to democratic control . ' ' the paper publish by Mr Davis tomorrow will state that Britain will leave the direct influence of the European Court of Justice after Brexit . it will instead highlight a series of precedent , include membership of EFTA and a ` ` dispute resolution panel ' ' set up to arbitrate the new EU-Canada trade deal .
MP must tell us more about a Brexit transition period , warn IOD
the government must set out a detailed vision for a Brexit ` ` transi­ tional ' ' period or risk lose the confi­ dence of business that it can successfully move towards a new rela­ tionship with the EU , the Institute of Directors ( IoD ) warn today . a report from the boss ' lobby organisation hint at rise frustration among the business community about the lack of clarity from Downing Street , warn that ` ` sound-­bites be no sub­ stitute for policy ' ' on Brexit . in recent week , Cabinet minister have open the door to a time-­limited transition arrangement for Brexit , but detail of what it would entail in prac­ tice remain obscure . Theresa May be bill to make a major speech in early September clarify Britain ' s vision for its future relationship with Europe , include a possible transition , but Whitehall insider say deep and unre­ solve division remain in the Cabinet . Peter Lilley , a lead Eurosceptic , question the need for transitional arrangement at all this week in an arti­ cle for the Daily Telegraph , accuse Remainers of rely on them ` ` like drunk use a lamppost - more for sup­ port than illumination ' ' . however , the IoD report , entitle bridge the Gap , argue that because negotiator will only sketch out the post-­Brexit relationship in ` ` broad ' ' term in the EU-­UK withdrawal agree­ ment , a transition period be need to cover the gap between the two . ` ` interim arrangement would there­ fore deal with the bridge period dur­ ing which the UK and EU would negotiate the technical detail of new regulatory co-­operation outline in the withdrawal agreement ' s framework for future relation , ' ' the IoD say . the government , which later this month will begin publish @card@ posi­ tion paper cover key area of Brexit , have resist provide detail for fear of reveal the British negoti­ ating stance and weaken its position in the talk . but the IoD argue that ` ` engage in discussion about objective be not tan­ tamount to reveal our negotiate hand ' ' , and it have urge the government to ` ` signal to industry and enterprise that an orderly exit be not just sound­ bite but an active policy objective ' ' . the compact 10-­page paper by Allie Renison , the head of EU and trade pol­ icy , lay out the spectrum of option , begin with the extension of the Article @card@ negotiation , which must be do unanimously by the EU , but would be the most comprehensive way to retain the status quo . a second ave­ nue would be for the UK to join the Eu­ ropean Economic Area , which would give it effective single market access , but would require an exemption on bureaucratic ` ` rule of origin ' ' check . however , with both side indicate that these option be either politically unpalatable or too legally complex , the report explore a list of alternative measure that would effectively mirror exist arrangement and keep trade moving . these include port over the EU ' S Common Customs Code in the forthcoming Customs Bill , agree to maintain the common External tariff that ensure good can cross EU bor­ ders freely , and accede to the Com­ mon Transit Convention to smooth passage for haulier .
Scotland Cable : main party too split to deliver Brexit
BREXIT may never happen , Sir Vince Cable have say as he vow to work with Labour and Tory MP to block Theresa May ' S plan for leave the European Union . Sir Vince , who be expect to be the next Liberal Democrat leader , say he believe that division within the Conservative Party and Labour be ` ` so enormous ' ' they could halt Brexit . the former business secretary claim that the public will swing behind the Lib Dems ' offer to hold a second European Union referendum when they be face with the economic reality of Brexit . he tell the Andrew Marr Show on BBC one : ` ` I ' m beginning to think that Brexit may never happen . I think the problem be so enormous , the division within the two major party be so enormous . I can see a scenario in which this do n't happen . ` ` with the situation deteriorate in the economy - as I think it will , none of us be certain but I think it will - people will realise , well , we do n't vote to be poor . ` ` and I think the whole question of continued membership [ of the EU ] will once again arrive . ' ' the government will this week face a plot by Labour , the Lib Dems and moderate Tory MP as it publish the great repeal bill . the Bill will transfer up to @card@ European law and regulation into British law on the day that Britain leave the EU . it be likely to prove one of the big test of Mrs May ' s authority after her failure to secure an outright majority in the general election . Opposition MP be prepare to table a series of amendment in the autumn to ensure the European Court of Justice and other EU institution retain influence over Britain . they also want to curb the use of secondary legislation - know as Henry @card@ clause - which enable the government to repeal legislation without further parliamentary scrutiny . the government insist that the power be necessary because of the sheer volume of legislation . it also insist that any change will be technical . set out his plan as Lib Dem leader , Sir Vince say that there should be high tax and he announce a review of student tuition fee . he also offer the prospect of a new home for disgruntled Labour MP who face be force out over their continued opposition to Jeremy Corbyn . he say : ` ` we have a generous policy on refugee - we will give them food and accommodation . ` ` Jeremy Corbyn have a good election . but there be an element of a bubble about it . he be very pro-Brexit , a hard Brexit . when that become apparent , division in the Labour Party will become more clear . ' ' Owen Paterson , a Tory MP and former Cabinet minister , say : ` ` I ' m afraid Vince be behind history , we be go to leave , we be on target . ' '
European leader taunt May and put pressure on to negotiate now ; Election @card@
European Union leader pile pressure on Britain to start Brexit negotiation yesterday , as they seek to take advantage of the UK ' s political predicament after Theresa May ' s failure to win a majority leave her negotiate strategy in disarray . even as the Prime Minister struggle to form a minority government , Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , openly taunt Mrs May that the EU side be ready to ` ` open negotiation tomorrow morning at half past nine ' ' . have already delay talk once by call the surprise election in April , Mrs May ' s failure to go on to win the promised mandate be deride as a spectacular ` ` own goal ' ' that risk a damaging result for both side . ` ` yet another own goal , ' ' say Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S lead Brexit co-ordinator , reflect EU exasperation with Britain over the handling of the negotiation . ` ` after Cameron now may , [ this result ] will make already complex negotiation even more complicated . ' ' before the election , Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , have say that talk should begin on June @card@ - a date Mrs May have appear to endorse on the campaign trail - but which EU source concede privately now look increasingly unrealistic . Mr Barnier say that negotiation ` ` should start when UK be ready ' ' , urge both side to work for a deal but also note that both the ` ` timetable and EU position be clear ' ' - a reminder that the two-year timeframe set for talk under Article @card@ be now rapidly ebb away . Donald Tusk , the European Council president , be more explicit in his warning to Mrs May , write formally to the Prime Minister to congratulate her on her re-appointment while note that there be ` ` no time to lose ' ' over talk . our share responsibility and urgent task now be to conduct the negotiation on the UK ' s withdrawal from the European union in the well possible spirit , secure the least disruptive outcome , ' ' he write . somewhat more menacingly , he add on social medium : ` ` we do n't know when Brexit talk start . we know when they must end . do your good to avoid a ' no deal ' as result of ' no negotiation ' . ' ' officially , the EU say it be simply put the ball in the UK ' s court to begin talk , but the apparent rejection of Mrs May ' s vision for a so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' be also see in some quarter as a rejection of a hardline position by the British electorate . regional analyst say the lack of conciliation by EU leader reflect mount frustration with Britain in Brussels and the belief that the inconclusive election result hand the EU even more leverage in the come negotiation . ` ` this result will play to and reinforce the EU ' s negotiate hand , ' ' say Mujtaba Rahman , head of European analysis at Eurasia Group . ` ` May ' S significantly weaken mandate , and the tick Article @card@ clock , will give the EU more leverage to dictate term to the UK . ' ' the warning also reflect concern in Brussels and EU capital that political disarray in London now risk drag out the talk beyond the March @card@ deadline set for Brexit . one senior EU aide tell the Daily Telegraph that it be ` ` ludicrous ' ' for Mrs may even to try to form a government , say that she ` ` no long have any credibility ' ' in Brussels . that view be echo across Europe where Mrs May suffer a personal maul in the continental press , with Germany ' S Der Spiegel magazine nickname her the ` ` wobbly woman ' ' while Italy ' S Corriere Della Sera opine that Mrs May be ` ` no Margaret Thatcher ' ' . ` ` May-Day ' ' be the headline in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , note that British voter be ` ` insecure , angry and upset ' ' , while die Welt comment that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit - so much for that ' ' . ` ` Theresa May ' s authority in her own party be break , ' ' add Elmar Brok , the Brexit representative for Angela Merkel ' s faction in the European parliament . ` ` she have become a weak prime minister and negotiator . ' ' Britain be hope to complete initial talk by October this year , with a view to complete negotiation over trade and the future EU-UK relationship by October @card@ . Mr Barnier set the October @card@ target in order to leave time for the deal to be ratify by the European Parliament in order to complete an orderly UK exit in March @card@ . the Article @card@ process can be extend by unanimous agreement but lawyer be divide over whether Article @card@ can actually be withdraw . the UK Supreme Court have say it be irrevocable , but Mr Tusk have say he believe it be possible to pull out . that be a possibility discount by both Tories and Labour but still openly moot in some quarter yesterday . ` ` who know , perhaps British society will decide it ' s worth remain after all in a Europe of nation state , ' ' say Mateusz Morawiecki , the Polish finance minister . elsewhere in Europe the sudden upend of the expect talk schedule be see as a ` ` bad sign ' ' for Europe , with Jaroslaw Gowin , a deputy prime minister in Poland ' s conservative government , warn it ` ` deepen the uncertainty ' ' over the future of the bloc . in Hungary , the news website Index describe the result as a ` ` slap in the face for May ' ' . US President Donald Trump and French President Emmanuel Macron call British Prime Minister Theresa May on Friday to congratulate her . ` ` French President Emmanuel Macron ... say he be please that she would continue to be a close partner , ' ' a spokesman for Mrs May ' S office say in a statement . ` ` they agree that the strong friendship between our two country be important and would endure . ' ' the spokesman say May and Trump have also agree to continue the close cooperation between the two country . ' her authority in her own party be break . she have become a weak prime minister and negotiator '
Scotland EU staff put on guard against Brexit lobbyist Body : European Union bureaucrat have be give a ` ` do and do n't ' ' checklist to protect them from lobbyist look to influence the upcoming Brexit negotiation . Brussels civil servant be tell not to accept hospitality ` ` without careful consideration ' ' or share confidential information , and ` ` where necessary ' ' to report any gift . meeting outside office hour be ban and official warn that ` ` lobbying can also take place during casual encounter and in social setting ' ' . lobbying be carry out in Brussel by organisation such as consultancy , law firm , NGOs , trade association and campaigner , the list read . the document be draw up by the European Ombudsman , which investigate maladministration in EU institution , such as the European Commission . the 20-point list be ` ` relevant to the imminent Brexit negotiation when large number of interest representative will understandably seek to engage with EU official ' ' , the watchdog say . Brussels attract large number of lobbyist , who look to influence EU legislation on behalf of their client and employer through meeting with the official work on draft law . Britain and the EU have two year to conclude the Brexit talk . uncertainty around the impact of Brexit have create much work for lobbyist in sector as diverse as agriculture , technology and financial service . ` ` it be not always obvious to public official as to what constitute acceptable lobbying , ' ' say Emily O'Reilly , who lead the watchdog . ` ` this checklist will help ordinary civil servant to navigate these occasionally tricky water . ' '
Mandelson call for Lords to frustrate Brexit bill in Blairite plot ; Ex-Labour minister urge peer to ' not throw the towel in ' as debate begin over trigger Article @card@
ally of Tony Blair will today attempt to frustrate Brexit in the House of Lords by urge peer to rally against the government . the former Labour prime minister , last week urge people to ` ` rise up ' ' against Brexit and support a new movement to keep Britain in the European Union . Lord Mandelson , one of Mr Blair ' s close ally , yesterday urge peer to defy the government and not ` ` throw in the towel early ' ' . the Labour peer say he believe that the Lords can force minister into give Parliament a ` ` meaningful ' ' vote and guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK . Lord Hain , who serve as a cabinet minister under Mr Blair , will push for a vote on keep Britain in the single market and call for the open border between Northern Ireland and the Republic to stay in place . he claim that despite be an unelected peer , he have a right to force major change to the Brexit Bill . he say : ` ` critic say ' what right have I , an unelected peer , to oppose this Bill or even seek to radically amend it ? ' but I be appoint by my party . and in the referendum , two third of Labour elector vote to remain . ` ` that ' s what I be reflect , that ' s my mandate . ' ' the House of Lords will this week begin debate the government ' s legislation to trigger Brexit amid report that six peer be ready to defect from the Labour Party and sit as cross-bencher . around a dozen Tory peer be expect to form an alliance with Labour and Liberal Democrat member of the Lords in seek to defy the government over Brexit . they believe that with the support of cross-bench peer they have the number to send the bill back to the commons with amendment . pa Lord Mandelson yesterday tell BBC One ' S Andrew Marr Show he believe peer will be successful in defeat the government on migrant right in a parliamentary vote on Brexit . he say yesterday : ` ` there be a strong body of opinion across the party and independent peer that both these issue be very serious . if it [ the final Brexit deal ] be not good for Britain , send the government back to the negotiate table . ` ` [ we be ] try to instill a bit of courage in the Tory MP - most of whom seem to have capitulate to the ideologue - put pressure on Labour , the Lib Dems and the green to say you ' ve get to speak up for us when the time come . ' ' he urge people to sign up to Open Britain , a pro-EU organisation , and donate money . his appeal come after the Sunday Telegraph disclose how Lord Mandelson , a former European trade commissioner , be estimate to receive an EU pension worth around £35,000 a year . Liz Truss , the Justice Secretary , respond to Lord Mandelson ' s comment by describe him as ` ` yesterday ' S man ' ' and say that the government expect the Lords to respect the result of the referendum . she say : ` ` Peter Mandelson and other in the Labour Party be try to frustrate the will of the British people , try to re-fight a battle he conclusively lose last year . I just listen to Peter Mandelson , it be like the referendum never happen . he need to move on and the Labour Party need to move on . he ' s a blast from the past . ` ` I fully expect the House of Lords will recognise the will of the people and the will of the commons which be overwhelming . ' ' Lord Mandelson also claim that immigration will not fall after Britain leave the European Union . he say : ` ` we ' re go to have less trade , we ' re go to be pay through the nose for it and , broadly speak , we ' re go to have the same number of immigrant come to the country as well . be that a reasonable deal ? do n't you think the public will have something to say about that outcome when the negotiation end ? ' ' Lord Lawson , the former Tory chancellor , will be one of nearly @card@ peer to speak during the debate today and tomorrow . he say : ` ` the Bill go through the commons on a huge majority without any amendment . it would be wholly wrong and unconstitutional for the Lords to interfere with that in any way . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@ @card@ the number of peer expect to speak during two day of debate over the Brexit Bill in the House of Lords
history make as MP vote to trigger Brexit
Boris Johnson last night say that ` ` history have be make ' ' after MP vote overwhelmingly in favour of trigger Brexit negotiation and begin the process of leave the EU . the Foreign Secretary call it a ` ` momentous ' ' night as MP vote four to one in favour of trigger Article @card@ . Kenneth Clarke , a former chancellor , be the only Tory MP to oppose it . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , will today publish a White Paper formally set out the government ' S plan for Brexit in response to the concern of pro-European Tory MP . however , there be further sign of division among the conservative as George Osborne , the former chancellor , accuse Mrs May of put Brexit ahead of the economy and warn he will join the ` ` fight ' ' over Britain ' s future outside the EU . yesterday ' S vote mean the government ' s Brexit legislation have clear its first hurdle and Mrs May be on course to trigger the process by her March deadline . there have be @card@ and a half hour of debate and bitter clash in Parliament over two day as nearly @card@ MP express their view about Brexit . MP finally vote in favour of the European Theresa May face a packed commons for PMQs before the Brexit debate resume Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill by @card@ vote to @card@ , with @card@ Labour MP , @card@ SNP MP and seven liberal democrat vote against . it leave Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , face his third reshuffle in @card@ month after @card@ serve frontbenchers vote against it . four member of his front bench team have already quit . Mr Johnson say : ` ` I ' ve just vote three time in the House of Commons for an absolutely momentous thing - to give our Prime Minister the right to trigger Article @card@ and Britain to begin the path out of the EU . do n't forget we may be leave the EU treaty but we be not leave Europe . ` ` we be go to be make an amazingly positive contribution to our continent as we always have do and always will . but we be now able to forge a new identity with new free trade deal as global Britain . ' ' however , Mr Osborne say that Mrs May have choose ` ` not to make the economy the priority in this negotiation ' ' . he say that there will be ` ` lively debate ' ' to come on migration , state aid and agricultural policy . ` ` I will be in those fight for year to come , ' ' he say . while he have argue ` ` passionately ' ' for Britain to stay in the European Union , Mr Osborne say , he have ` ` lose the case ' ' and ` ` sacrifice ' ' his position in Government . ahead of the debate , Mrs May accuse those plane to vote against Article @card@ of abuse the trust of the people . during the debate Neil Coyle , a Labour MP who want Britain to stay in the EU , be censure for call the government ` ` b -- -- -- - ' ' . he also call Mr Corbyn ' s decision to impose a threeline whip on the vote a ` ` disgrace ' ' . Ed Miliband , the former Labour leader , say he would not oppose Article @card@ even though he have not want the referendum . ` ` we do not want to give the sense that people who vote for Brexit because they feel they have be ignore be be ignore once again , ' ' he say . Tim Farron , the Liberal Democrat leader , face jeer of ` ` where be you ' ' from MP after fail to turn up to the debate on Tuesday . Alex Salmond , the former SNP leader , say : ` ` the choice the House will get be a bad deal or no deal . ' ' the White Paper - concede by Mrs May last month - will be base on the 12-point plan contain in her Brexit speech at Lancaster House last month . editorial comment : page @card@
Carney : Brexit not big threat to economy ; Bank of England say credit growth risk should be warn light , with rise in consumer spending
BREXIT no longer pose the big risk to domestic financial stability , accord to the Governor of the Bank of England , who signal that the economy ' S resilience would prompt the Bank to upgrade its UK growth forecast within week . in a significant about-turn on previous warning about the impact of Brexit , Mark Carney tell MP on the Treasury Select Committee that the risk associate with June ' s vote to leave the European Union have recede , while the market turmoil predict by some have not materialise . ask by committee chairman Andrew Tyrie if the vote to leave the EU still pose the big domestic threat to the UK , Mr Carney say : ` ` Strictly speaking , the view of the committee be ' no ' . in the run-up to the referendum , we feel it be the large risk because there be a series of position and possibility in the financial sector - thing that could have happen that would have have financial stability consequence . ' ' Mr Carney say action by the Bank to free up £150bn in lending and slash interest rate have help to mitigate the impact of the vote . ` ` have get through that night [ of the Brexit vote ] and the day after , the scale of the immediate risk around Brexit have go down for the UK , ' ' he say . Mr Carney describe the strength of the UK economy in the month follow the Brexit vote as ` ` absolutely welcome ' ' . bank policymaker almost double their economic growth forecast for @card@ last November compare with August , and Mr Carney say recent economic datum ` ` would be consistent with some further upgrade of that forecast ' ' in February . policymaker on the Bank ' S Financial Policy Committee ( FPC ) also warn that the ` ` extremely rapid ' ' growth in UK credit card and loan debt have become ` ` very difficult to ignore ' ' . Alex Brazier , the Bank ' s executive director for financial stability , say credit growth risk be rise amid a ` ` loosen of credit condition ' ' . he say credit growth have be ` ` a significant driver of consumer spending ' ' over the past year , contribute £20bn of the £30bn in extra spending flow . consumer credit rise 10.8pc in November compare with a year ago , represent the fast rise since @card@ . Martin Taylor , an external member of the FPC , describe the pace of credit growth as a ` ` flash light ' ' on the FPC ' s dashboard of risk . the former Barclays chief say growth at this pace risk become a ` ` big concern in the come quarter ' ' if real income growth start to slow amid high inflation . ` ` the big thing that ' S happen in the British economy since Brexit be that people have get on with their life . thank goodness . increasingly they ' ve get on with their life thanks to consumer credit , which be another issue , ' ' Mr Taylor say . Mr Carney also tell the Treasury Select Committee that failure to secure a transition deal with Brussels after the UK ' s exit term from the EU be agree pose a big financial stability risk to the 27-member bloc than to the UK . ` ` I ' m not say there be not financial stability risk to the UK - and there be economic risk to the UK - but there be great financial stability risk on the continent in the short term for the transition than there be for the UK , ' ' he say . Mr Carney say UK growth remain on course to slow in the come year .
Scotland SNP urge to stop link hate crime to Brexit after fall in number of racial offence body : a Tory MSP have accuse the Scottish government of have a ` ` dangerous obsession ' ' with link hate crime to Brexit despite a fall in report race attack since the EU referendum . Annie Wells also accuse Nicola Sturgeon of ` ` tokenism ' ' in her work with gay anti-bullying group and call for more work to be do in tackle the type of hate crime which be ` ` on the increase and be vastly under-reported ' ' . she say Police Scotland ' S @card@ statistic show race hate crime have fall by @card@ per cent since last year , while sexual orientation crime be up @card@ per cent and disability hate crime have increase @card@ per cent , despite the latter two be under-reported . in a debate at Holyrood , Ms Wells say : ` ` firstly I want to ask why it be that the SNP become so obsessed with link hate crime to Brexit when this summer Police Scotland report that in Scotland it have see no increase in the number of hate crime report . in fact hate crime actually fall in the aftermath of the EU referendum . ` ` it be dangerous to continually link the Brexit vote with hate crime . ' ' she highlight research by the campaign for inclusive education show that the scale of homophobic bully . she add : ` ` this be why I call on the SNP Government to stop the Brexit bashing , the end goal of which we all know , and address the hate crime it so conveniently turn a blind eye to . ' ' Angela Constance , the Scottish equality minister , say the Scottish Government have invest and strengthen the law in a bid to tackle hate crime . she say it will introduce a public education campaign next year , raise awareness of the impact of hate crime and the support available .
Scotland the judge versus the people ; May pledge to uphold Brexit vote as High Court rule Article @card@ must pass through Parliament ; Article @card@ battle will lead to early election , say MP
three High Court judge be yesterday accuse of frustrate the will of more than @card@ million British people after they rule that Brexit can not be trigger without a parliamentary vote . Europhile MP immediately put into action a plot to use the ruling either to overturn the Brexit vote or force Theresa May to water down dramatically her plan for Britain ' s exit from the European Union . the Prime Minister pledge last night to face down any attempt to thwart Brexit , suggest that she intend to dare Remain-supporting MP to vote against her in Parliament , in a move which would provoke a constitutional crisis . Senior backbencher and peer suggest that she could be force to call an early general election if she want to proceed with her plan . the country vote leave in the June referendum with @card@ million people back Brexit , the big mandate in British political history . however , Parliament have a significant majority of Remain-supporters , with about @card@ of @card@ MP believe to have back the campaign to keep Britain in the EU . the government immediately say that it would appeal to the Supreme Court after the judge declare that Mrs May do not have the power to bypass MP by rely on royal prerogative to trigger Article @card@ and begin the two-year period of separation negotiation with Brussels . however , a member of Mrs May ' S government say last night that minister be resign to lose the case . they be now prepare an Act of Parliament , mean that both the Commons and the Lords will be able to debate , amend and vote on Article @card@ before it be trigger , potentially delay the process for month . Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , say that the ruling be an example of the ` ` uncertainty ' ' that could affect the economy during Brexit . Mrs May will today speak to European leader include Jean-Claude Juncker and tell them the court ruling have not disrupt her ` ` resolve ' ' to take Britain out of the EU or ` ` alter her timetable ' ' . government source have tell this newspaper that the need for an Act of Parliament will delay Brexit by as much as a year , mean Britain will not now leave the bloc in @card@ . there be grow anger last night over the court ' s involvement in the case , with Iain Duncan Smith , a former Cabinet minister , accuse the judge - Lord Thomas , the Lord Chief Justice , Sir Terence Etherton , the Master of the Rolls , and Lord Justice sale - of risk a ` ` constitutional crisis ' ' by ` ` pit Parliament against the will of the people ' ' . Lord Justice sale be a close friend of Tony Blair , the former prime minister who campaign for Remain and want a second vote on Britain ' s EU membership , and Lord Thomas cofound a Europhile legal group . Eurosceptics also point out that the leaflet send to every household before the referendum say that the government - and not Parliament - would implement the result of the vote and that the decision be ` ` yours ' ' . Mr Duncan Smith say : ` ` you now have the High Court tell Government and Parliament how to go about their business . this be unprecedented . ' ' Dominic Raab , a former justice minister , say : ` ` on June @card@ the British people give a clear mandate for the UK Government to leave the EU and take back control of our border , law , money and trade . it be disappointing that today the court have choose to ignore their decision . this case be a plain attempt to block Brexit by people who be out of touch with the country and refuse to accept the result . ' ' Lord Tebbit , a Cabinet minister in Margaret Thatcher ' S government , say : ` ` Judges be out of their box these day and need to be put back in . it be clearly not an advisory referendum - it be Parliament ask people to make a decision . ' ' Douglas Carswell , Ukip ' s only MP , hit out at the ` ` shocking judicial activism ' ' , add : ` ` these judge be politician without accountability . ' ' John Baron , a Tory MP who support leave , say the decision ` ` must not be allow to frustrate the will of the British people ' ' and promise to ` ` man the barricade if the result be not respected ' ' . Remain-backing MP include George Osborne , the former continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Chancellor , and Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , say that the ruling would allow them to force Mrs May to reveal in the Commons detailed plan for Brexit . Mrs May have repeatedly refuse to ` ` show her card ' ' before Britain have start formal negotiation with the EU . if Europhile MP attempt to amend the Act of Parliament on Article @card@ to such a degree that it be see as water down Brexit , Mrs May may have to trigger an early general election in order to increase her majority in the Commons . one minister say last night that Mrs May and her close adviser be ` ` completely against ' ' call an early general election . however , backbencher include Mr Raab and Mr Duncan Smith say she could be force to call a national vote if MP be see to be attempt to block Brexit . Mr Raab say : ` ` the elephant in the room here be if we get to the stage where [ MP ] be not willing to allow this negotiation to even begin , I think there must be an increase chance that we will need to go to the country again . ' ' the case be bring to the High Court by Gina Miller , a wealthy philanthropist . Lord Thomas say trigger Article @card@ without a Commons vote would be contrary to ` ` the fundamental constitutional principle of the sovereignty of Parliament ' ' . ' it be a bad day for the constitution ... the court will be perceive to be help to frustrate Brexit ' comment : page @card@
Scotland Separation will be bad than Brexit for financial industry ; financial service ' depend more on the UK than EU '
Scottish independence pose a great threat than Brexit to the country ' s £8 billion-a-year financial service industry because of its reliance on English customer , a report by two of the sector ' s most eminent figure warn . Jeremy Peat , the former group chief economist at Royal Bank of Scotland , and Owen Kelly , former head of the industry body Scottish Financial Enterprise , say the uncertainty cause by separation ` ` look even great ' ' than those trigger by the EU vote . their assessment say ` ` nearly every provider of financial service in Scotland ' ' serve the UK rather than the EU market and in particular those provide banking , insurance and pension product . although it acknowledge that asset and fund manager could lose out if the UK do not retain EU ` ` passporting ' ' right , the report note that many already have operation on the continent through which they could continue to access European market . the Scottish Government yesterday continue to insist that Brexit pose the large economic threat but its stance be further undermine by another report warn that the threat of a second independence referendum be damage business demand for office , shop and factory space . the continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ assessment , send to client from the consultancy Ryder , say Scotland ' s commercial property market be lag behind the rest of the UK as uncertainty cause by Brexit be be ` ` compound ' ' by Nicola Sturgeon ' s threat to stage a rerun of the @card@ vote . last week a major report by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors find Scotland experience the large drop in demand for commercial premise in the UK follow the Brexit vote , with surveyor blame the SNP ' s independence threat . however , the warning about the financial service industry ' S prospect be potentially more damaging to Ms Sturgeon ' S case give its importance to the economy and the focus it be likely to receive during the Brexit negotiation . it contribute about £8 billion a year to the Scottish economy and employ about @card@ directly and a further @card@ indirectly - together around a 12th of the country ' s total workforce . Murdo Fraser , the Scottish Conservative shadow finance secretary , say : ` ` more and more we be start to hear industry expert express concern about the damage that a second independence referendum would cause . ` ` the SNP ' s obsession with independence be the big threat face our economy , but they be determine to push ahead with it regardless of the harm it would cause . ' ' the report , publish by the University of Strathclyde ' S International Public Policy Institute , admit it be difficult to see new opportunity arise for the financial service sector from Brexit but say the threat pose to it by the EU vote be not ` ` existential ' ' . Mr Peat and Mr Kelly , who be now a lecturer at Edinburgh Napier University Business School , back the First Minister ' s lobbying of the government to retain the UK ' s place in the EU single market and protect passporting right . but they say : ` ` this line of argument do not take us to a case for Scottish independence in the EU . ' ' they say there be only ` ` limited ' ' activity in Scotland sell insurance to the continent and ` ` there be not much of a single EU market in pension ' ' . meanwhile , RBS ` ` have most of its customer in the UK ' ' . a Scottish Government spokesman say : ` ` it be Brexit which be far and away the big threat to Scotland ' S economy , job and long-term prosperity ... that be why we be do everything we can to protect Scotland ' S interest , and that must include the option of independence if it become clear it be the good or only way of do so . ' '
the City be go to lose business from Brexit , say fund manager
the City of London be go to lose business from Brexit , say fund manager . the vast majority of investment industry executive fear Brexit will harm the City of London , and most believe it will damage the rest of the country too - potentially lead to the break-up of the United Kingdom . a total of 82pc of fund manager believe London will be a loser from Brexit , accord to a survey by the Chartered Financial Analyst ( CFA ) Institute . by contrast 69pc believe Frankfurt will win more business as a result , and 62pc believe Dublin will also benefit . the study ask more than @card@ investment worker about their expectation follow the referendum on EU membership on June @card@ . the study look at CFA Institute member across the globe , and the gloom about London ' S prospect be less pronounced in more far fling country . while 60pc of EU respondent expect non-UK finance firm to reduce their presence in London , the same be true of only 44pc of non-EU investment professional who respond to the survey . the survey ' S finding ` ` make challenging reading for the financial service sector in the UK and for the policymaker that will work on the Brexit negotiation , ' ' say Will Goodhart , chief executive of CFA UK , add that sentiment among investment worker be ` ` disturbing ' ' . ` ` as we have see in recent time , thing can change rapidly , but as it stand a great deal of work will need to be do to maintain the City ' s competitiveness as a global financial centre and to secure the broad economic benefit that flow from that . ' ' a majority also fear for the future of Britain itself : 59pc see UK fragmentation , such as Scottish independence , as ` ` more likely than not ' ' . just under half believe Britain ' s departure from the EU could prompt more country to follow suit and also break with Brussels . the overall uncertainty follow the vote will probably last for less than a year - 33pc of investment professional believe the uncertainty will die down in under six month , and another 25pc believe it will take between six and @card@ month . a substantial minority of 26pc , however , believe it could rumble on for up to two year . ` ` while change in the relative attractiveness of one financial centre over another will see some lose ground and other gain , those change can be disruptive for client and for investment management business , ' ' say the CFA ' s global president and chief executive , Paul Smith .
former MI5 chief be not worry by Brexit , claim MP
the former head of MI5 have say that leave the European Union will make ` ` no difference ' ' to Britain ' s national security , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP claim . Julian Lewis , head of the Commons defence committee , say Lord Evans have tell him privately that a Brexit would not have a significant impact . Mr Lewis say he be ` ` surprised and rather disappointed ' ' yesterday after Lord Evans write a joint article say a Brexit would hamper ` ` our ability to protect ourselves from terrorist ' ' . he suggest that Downing Street may have ` ` manipulate ' ' Lord Evans and Sir John Sawers , the former head of MI6 , into write the article . in a personal capacity , he say : ` ` I have a conversation very recently with one of the two and I be quite impress by the fact that although he tell me he be in favour of remain in the EU , it would make no difference to our security . ` ` I be surprise and rather disappoint to see this article have appear . I find it dif-ficult to believe he have change his mind in such a short period of time . I can only wonder if there ' s some manipulation go on here . ' ' Lord Evans and Sir John deny that their intervention have be coordinate by Downing Street . ` ` we ' re not do it at anybody ' S behest , ' ' they write in the Sunday Times . ` ` we be completely politically neutral . ' ' Lord Evans and Sir John say in the article : ` ` the term on which we exchange datum with other European country be set by agreement within the EU . as an EU member , we shape the debate , we push for what we think be the right balance between security and privacy and we benefit from the data that flow as a result . ' ' Mr Cameron say their article hold an ` ` important message ' ' . their claim be dispute by Lord Howard , the former Conservative leader , who say they be ` ` conjecture ' ' . Lord Howard , who be argue for Britain to leave the EU , say : ` ` there be no reason to suppose we wo n't make satisfactory arrangement for datum share with the EU when we leave because we have more to offer than the rest of the EU . ' ' Lessons from the Brussels attack will form part of the first counter-terrorism exercise stage since the atrocity in March . Police in Manchester will swoop on a shopping centre today as part of a three-day mock terrorist attack in the North West .
Scotland Sturgeon put independence on @card@ agenda ; First Minister to break pledge within month , claim Tory
Nicola Sturgeon be yesterday accuse of break a promise to put her independence plan ` ` on pause ' ' after she warn - only day into @card@ - that Tory Brexit proposal mean break up Britain ` ` must remain an option ' ' . attack what she call the Conservative ` ` horror show ' ' on leave the EU , the First Minister also claim there be a ` ` well than even chance ' ' that a hard Brexit could be stop . she predict a ` ` new spirit of Scottish assertiveness ' ' this year , add : ` ` we will resist as fiercely as possible the Tory plan for an extreme Brexit , outside the single market and custom union . ` ` the threat to Scotland ' S interest mean independence must remain an option . be tear out of the world ' s big single market against our democratic will - a market eight time big than the UK ' s - threaten to do untold damage . ' ' the Scottish Conservatives say her ` ` naive and arrogant ' ' approach to Brexit have already be punish by the electorate and claim her view that two democratic vote - the @card@ independence referendum and @card@ Brexit vote - could be overturn would ` ` damage her credibility further ' ' . Ms Sturgeon be force to ` ` reset ' ' her timetable for a new independence referendum after a disastrous general election last year that see the SNP lose @card@ seat , include that of Alex Salmond , after push for a fresh poll . however , Ms Sturgeon refuse to take the threat off the table , say instead that she would ` ` revisit ' ' the timing of a new vote this autumn . write in the Sunday Mail , she say @card@ could be one of the most significant in Scotland ' s recent history and a year in which it emerge as ` ` an embolden , more confident and assertive nation ' ' . she add : ` ` that be perhaps not the most obvious conclusion to be draw from the ongoing horror show of the Tories ' inept and chaotic Brexit plan , which threaten to do deep and lasting damage to our economy and society . ` ` but it be because of that overarching threat that I believe a new spirit of Scottish assertiveness be need and will come to the fore . ' ' she be speak ahead of talk today between the SNP , Lib Dems , Plaid Cymru and the Green Party on a common approach to keep Britain in the single market . John Lamont , Tory MP for Berwickshire , Roxburgh and Selkirk , say : ` ` after last year ' s general election , Nicola Sturgeon promise to put her plan for independence on pause and focus on her day job . it ' s clear from her word that she intend to break that promise within month , and once again put independence top of her agenda . ` ` as one of her own MP say last week , most Scot do n't give two hoot about independence . it ' S time Nicola Sturgeon listen for once . ' '
there be other Tory MP disappoint not to be call Brexit mutineer ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - your front page article ( ` ` the Brexit mutineer ' ' , November @card@ ) be mislead . we have accept the result of the EU referendum and accordingly accept that our country be leave the European Union . we do not seek to delay or thwart Britain ' s exit from the EU , however much we may regret it . many of us be lawyer ; we be all parliamentarian . we seek to make an important bill - the EU Withdrawal Bill - considerably good by lay amendment , in accordance with our duty as MP . the government lay an amendment late last week that seek to put the date of Brexit on the face of the Bill . what look at first blush like an uncontroversial proposal could accidentally harm our country ' S interest . put a date in law be too rigid . as negotiation reach their close , the government may need a small amount of additional time to conclude , for example , the well transitional deal . we be please Conservative colleague from across the Brexit divide accept our intention be genuine and note that some be disappointed you do n't include them in our number . Ken Clarke MP Dominic Grieve MP Nicky Morgan MP Tom Tugendhat MP Dr Sarah Wollaston MP Bob Neill MP Sir Oliver Heald MP Anna Soubry MP Stephen Hammond MP Jonathan Djanogly MP Vicky Ford MP Antoinette Sandbach MP Jeremy Lefroy MP Heidi Allen MP Paul Masterton MP sir - you say ( lead article , November @card@ ) that the Prime Minister will not tolerate wrecker on her own side use parliamentary process to reverse our departure from the EU . brave , fight talk , but what exactly can she do ? if she withdraw the whip from them , she lose her thin majority . only their own electorate can remove them , at a time when Brexit might be decide one way or the other . they be in a strong position than she be , and they know it . Myra Spalton Macclesfield , Cheshire sir - the Prime Minister must hold her nerve . like the EU , the Brexit mutineer have much to lose . if they force a constitutional crisis , many of them can expect to lose their seat in the ensue election , when their sophistry will not be forgive by the voter . Bryan Clark Ludlow , Shropshire sir - if the Tory mutineer neither support their government nor represent the wish of the majority of their constituent , what function be they fulfill as member of Parliament ? Philippa Hayden Maidstone , Kent
Scotland do n't let EU dictate Brexit , warn us ; Trump ' s trade chief offer UK hope of quick deal if it avoid compromise with Brussels ; US trade deal could follow Brexit ' quickly '
Britain must avoid too much compromise with the EU over the Brexit divorce settlement if it want a speedy free trade deal with the US , one of President Donald Trump ' s most senior adviser have say . Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , say a trade deal with Britain could be sign within month of Brexit , brush aside claim that it could take @card@ year for an agreement to be reach . but Mr Ross say there would be problem if the UK retain the current EU-wide ban on chlorinate chicken and genetically-modified food . speak at the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) conference , Mr Ross say his trip allow him to ` ` address with the UK some concern we have that they may be tempt to include [ provision ] in their agreement with the European Commission that could be problem for a subsequent Free Trade Agreement with the US ' ' . while he strike a friendly tone , he also issue a veiled warning that talk with Washington could go off the rail if Theresa May , the Prime Minister , align too closely with Brussels in design the post-Brexit settlement . it be a reminder that Britain risk have to pick side between two trade superpower with starkly different demand . Mr Ross accuse Brussels of impose high tariff than the US across the ` ` vast majority ' ' of trade good - include a @card@ per cent charge on car , compare with America ' S @card@ per cent - and try to enforce its regulatory code on third country rather than allow an open global system . ` ` while the EU talk a lot of freetrade rhetoric , it be really quite protectionist , ' ' he say . he pledge to avoid ` ` tit-for-tat ' ' bargaining when it come to negotiate a trade deal with Britain , but leave no doubt that there will be trouble if the UK sign up to core element of EU ideology deem most aggravating in Washington , not least the EU curb on chlorinate chicken and - far more important - genetically modify food . he say : ` ` the EU rule be not science-based . this could potentially create problem with us . what happen will be very much condition by the term of the departure agreement between the UK and the EU . ' ' he tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` any trade deal be important but especially one with a country with whom we have such intense relation as we do with the UK , from a geopolitical , military , and a commercial point of view . our two economy have $ 1.2trillion invest in each other . that be a very big number . ' ' he say of the timing of a trade deal : ` ` assume that there be no big landmine in the UK ' s exit agreement from the EU , it should n't take terribly long . ' ' refer to the North American Free Trade Agreement ( Nafta ) , which regulate trade between the US , Canada and Mexico , he add : ` ` we ' re try to redo Nafta in less than a year continue on Page @card@ business : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ and that be a much more complicated situation than we would have with the UK . ' ' Mr Ross ' S comment be a boost to Theresa May at a time when Brexit talk remain deadlock , increase the possibility of leave the EU without a trade deal . they come just day before the late round of negotiation between the UK and the EU , which will take place on Thursday and Friday . a free trade deal with the US will be vital to the UK ' s post-Brexit strategy for ` ` global Britain ' ' and to convince Europhile voter that Britain can forge a bright future outside the EU . the US and the UK can not legally conduct full trade talk until the day after Brexit , but the two side be already in ` ` scoping discussion ' ' to avoid a cliffedge in March @card@ . they be push for a smooth switch on ` ` Open Skies ' ' for air transport , on transfer of nuclear material , and on a host of technical issue . ` ` hopefully it can be do pretty quickly , ' ' he say . they be also tip-toeing towards a future framework , and flagging in advance where landmine may lie . ` ` we be address to the UK some of the concern we have on thing they may be tempt to include in their deal with the EU , that could complicate a free trade agreement with the US , ' ' he say . Mr Ross say it be vital that ` ` passporting ' ' right for bank and finance house operate in Europe be preserve . the system allow any firm register in the European Economic Area to do business in any other EEA country without need additional authorisation from individual state . ` ` it ' s be a great convenience for many American company to base themselves here in London , ' ' say Mr Ross . ` ` to the degree that it turn out there be a change and to the degree that it ' s a complication , that could become a real barrier in service . ' '
Starmer in talk to advise Gina Miller law firm ; MP warn of conflict of interest for shadow Brexit secretary who sit on the privy council
labour ' S shadow Brexit secretary be in talk to become an adviser for the law firm that bring the successful Article @card@ case against Theresa May , it have emerge . but Sir Keir Starmer have be warn not to take the lucrative job with Mishcon de Reya , which launch the case against the government on behalf of Gina Miller , the Remain campaigner . he work for the firm before Jeremy Corbyn appoint him shadow Brexit secretary last year , earn £4,500 for just six hour work . Conservative MP and John Mann , a senior Labour politician , say Sir Keir should turn down the role because as a member of the privy council and a shadow cabinet minister there could be a conflict of interest . in a public letter James Cleverly say Sir Keir ' s access to document and his role draft and amend legislation would be in direct conflict with the firm ' S work and demand an urgent clarification of his intention . Sir Keir will be free to view controversial and private document involve with the Brexit negotiation after the government admit him to the privy council this year . he have be offer the chance to work as an adviser in Mischon ' s inhouse think tank . there be concern that his access to such information be inconsistent with work as an adviser for the law firm which have be prominent in take action against the government in regard to Brexit . a spokesman for the firm say : ` ` we be in discussion with Keir Starmer about reappoint him as an adviser to the Mishcon Academy . ` ` his wide experience and previous association with the firm would enable him to play a key and unique role in shape the work of the Academy , which lead new thinking and develop the potential of everyone in the firm . ' ' but Labour MP Mr Mann say : ` ` one job per MP be enough for anybody . he should n't go for it if he be keep his current position . I do n't see how he would have the time to do both . ` ` it could become a conflict of interest . you ca n't be in the shadow cabinet and have a second job - that ' S totally untenable for anybody at any time , no matter who they be . ' ' Mr Corbyn have previously suggest that MP should not have a second job while serve in the House of Commons . Labour source say any appointment would be scrutinise closely to ensure it be appropriate . Sir Keir be hire by the firm as a consultant to the Mishcon Academy in June @card@ , but stand down when he be appoint to the shadow cabinet in October the same year . the former director of Public prosecution be pay £18,000 for @card@ hour work by the firm for his legal advice last year . he earn £4,500 for work six hour work a month . Mischon de Reya successfully challenge the Prime Minister ' s claim that she could trigger Article @card@ without a vote from MP and peer . Supreme Court justice rule , by a majority of eight to three , that she could not lawfully bypass Parliament by use the royal prerogative to trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty and start the two-year process of negotiate the UK ' s divorce from its EU partner . Sir Keir be contact for comment . editorial comment : page @card@
small business fear that May have ' lose sight of their interest ' ; Business tracker
Britain ' S small business be increasingly disillusion with the government , fear that Theresa May ' S administration have lose sight of their interest . the appearance of incompetence or indifference be feed into company ' perception of the government ' S performance elsewhere , too - a grow proportion be worry about Brexit . firm which be not worry about leave the EU at the time of the Article @card@ announcement be now increasingly concern . the Daily Telegraph Business Tracker have find that small business be voice their concern increasingly vocally , and sentiment among the firm be deteriorate . the tracker , which be compile by Impact Social , follow company and businesspeople online to monitor their social medium posting , and show large volume of complaint about the economic outlook . when the tracker first launch five month ago , firm have a positive view of the future . in February 42pc of business appear to feel positive while just 7pc be downbeat , leave a net balance of 35pc . by March - around the time of the bungle budget with its national insurance U-turn for the self-employed - the overall view be more balanced , with almost equal proportion of business post negative and positive statement online . since then the picture have deteriorate . now , 9pc be upbeat while 35pc be negative , with the overall senti-ment indicator at minus 26pc . ` ` it be n't just Brexit which be drive negativity , ' ' say Phil Snape at Impact Social . ` ` it be compound by a bad spring budget , the disastrous manifesto and then a strong negative reaction from business to the snap election . the negative sentiment have leak through into perception of the preparation for Brexit negotiation . in February , just 16pc of negative online chatter relate to Brexit . big perceive problem include business rate , rise inflation and red tape . now the proportion fear the Brexit talk have rise to 64pc with business afraid that the Prime Minister have no clear negotiating plan . in contrast to the pre-election period , there be now ` ` utter confusion over the form of Brexit be discuss with no alignment from what ' S leave of the political leadership , ' ' say Mr Snape , and ` ` very little trust in May to carry out the negotiation effectively ' ' . Mr Snape say there be clear question emerge from the business community which the government need to answer if it be to regain the support from company which conservative have traditionally enjoy . ` ` the writing have be on the wall for month . for a Tory Government this show a baffle blind spot , ' ' he say . ` ` be the new ' contrite ' leadership prepare to open its ear to the business community ? ' ' he add : ` ` talk of a consensual Brexit be pick up on with a rally cry that business must speak truth to power and demand a seat at the table in the negotiation . ' ' the Daily Telegraph Business Tracker be an analysis compile by Impact Social . it track the Twitter message of @card@ British company and business people , search their public post f or indicator of their sentiment towards the state of the economy , their own business performance , and their reaction to government policy . those aggregate search result be then analyse manually by Impact Social ' S researcher to assess whether the message be positive , negative or neutral . that process also strip out post that be promotional , leave only the firm ' opinion on topic in question . business tracker ( )
Carney : Britain ' s lead role after Brexit ; Bank Governor highlight the opportunity for more job and high growth across the world
the UK be in prime position to lead a new era of globalisation after Brexit , accord to Mark Carney , who also warn that cut off international finance risk inflict damage on the economy . in his first speech since Article @card@ be trigger , the Governor of the Bank of England say the global system be ` ` at a fork in the road ' ' as he urge politician to take the ` ` high road ' ' towards prosperity build on ` ` resilient ' ' and ` ` responsible ' ' rule . Mr Carney say ` ` all the building block ' ' be in place to create ` ` a system of enhanced access ' ' for Britain on a ` ` wide range of financial service ' ' after it leave the EU to ensure minimal disruption as the UK forge a new trading relationship with the bloc . it come as the Bank ' S Prudential Regulation Authority publish a letter send to finance boss across Britain conduct cross-border business in the rest of the EU ask them to hand over their Brexit contingency plan . Sam Woods , chief executive of the PRA , say while most firm ' plan be ` ` well advanced ' ' , they remain uneven , particularly relate to the possibility of a hard Brexit . speak in London , Mr Carney say Brexit negotiation that build ` ` on the foundation of a new responsible global financial system ' ' would ensure the UK and rest of the world remain open for business . as long as this be do safely and country recognise and trust each other ' rule , he say ` ` wholesale financial service could be bring more fully into bilateral trade agreement , keep the global financial system open and resilient , and support great trade , investment and innovation . ' ' Mr Carney note that this match the government ' s aim to create a more global , trading nation . ` ` this road lead to more job , high sustainable growth and good risk management across the G20 . ' ' traditionally , trade deal only cover good but a deal between the UK and EU could set up a framework for include service too , which would be useful for Britain ' S highly services-orientated economy . but that opportunity could be lose if Brexit talk turn hostile , he warn . ` ` there be another path - the low road - where trust and co-operation diminish , fragmentation harden , capital flow be disrupt , and trade and innovation be curtail , ' ' the Governor say . ` ` take the low road would be a suboptimal for all with few job , low growth and high domestic risk . ' ' Mr Carney , who be also head of the Financial Stability Board , say the UK be ` ` ideally position ' ' to take his ` ` high road ' ' because it start with the same financial rule as the EU . he say that it be important that business prepare ` ` for all eventual outcome ' ' , even as he stress that a good deal be in sight . sunny lull Higher import push trade deficit to £3.7bn Warm weather hit the energy industry in February and big import of erratic good such as oil and commodity push up the UK ' s trade deficit , write Tim Wallace . production output fall by 0.7pc compare with January , while the trade deficit rise from £3bn to £3.7bn . Construction also slow , but economist say manufacturing and trade both have a positive trajectory .
' Hard ' Brexit will be good news for Vauxhall
a ` ` Hard ' ' Brexit would be good news for Vauxhall ' s supply chain , the carmaker ' s new owner have say as he seal the long await £2bn purchase from General Motors . Carlos Tavares , chairman of PSA whose existing brand include Citroen and Peugeot , say that be the UK to leave the European union without any form of deal , it would lead to opportunity to increase the manufacturer ' s supply chain in the UK . ` ` a hard Brexit from UK plant will be a nice opportunity in term of business , ' ' Mr Tavares say . ` ` this be something that the UK government completely understand . if it be a hard Brexit , then the supplier base need to be develop . it be important that we source part from the UK , so that the cost structure will be more in pound . ' ' he make the comment as it emerge that the deal to sell Vauxhall and its fellow Opel brand to PSA could cost GM , the American car giant , more than £3.5bn . PSA say it will pay General Motors nearly £2bn for its European business as it issue long-awaited confirmation of a move that will make it the second-largest carmaker in Europe , behind Volkswagen . but GM will pay ( Euro ) 3bn ( £2.6bn ) back to PSA in order to cover a pension black hole that have threaten to scupper the deal , while it will also retain the bulk of the historic UK and German pension liability , believe to be cost it more than ( Euro ) 3bn . the deal be also likely to see Vauxhall worker ' exist defined-benefit pension scheme replace by a define contribution scheme under PSA . despite the agreement between the two company raise fear over the future of the @card@ Vauxhall staff at plant in Ellesmere Port and Luton , Mr Tavares allay fear over potential job cut or factory closure . PSA say it plan to return Opel and Vauxhall , which have be loss-making for the last @card@ year , to profit by @card@ . Matthew Lynn : page @card@ analysis : page @card@
bank retreat on ' hard Brexit ' worry
banking stock be among the hard hit yesterday after a slew of bearish broker note and ` ` hard Brexit ' ' fear rattle the sector , snap the FTSE @card@ ' s historic winning streak . Royal Bank of Scotland become the big laggard after Goldman Sachs slash its rating to ` ` neutral ' ' . remove the FTSE @card@ stock from its pan-European ` ` buy ' ' list , the US investment bank say RBS ' s upside potential be ` ` increasingly reflect ' ' in its valuation . it also describe the outstanding litigation settlement face the bank as ` ` the most significant unknown for the group ' ' . Martin Leitgeb , of Goldman Sachs , say : ` ` in light of recent US Department of Justice residential mortgage-backed security settlement with other bank , we see the possibility that RBS will book a significant provision as early as the fourth quarter . ' ' elsewhere , Deutsche Bank maintain Lloyds ' ` ` hold ' ' rating as it think the stock be trade at close to fair value . separately , the sector be also hurt by fear that Theresa May , the Prime Minister , will signal a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit during her speech today . a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit scenario would prioritise immigration control and bilateral trade deal that would see Britain leave the EU ' s single market and custom union . share in RBS slump 6.2p to 214.9p , Lloyds surrender 1.4p to finish at 64.7p and Barclays fall 4.2p to 231.1p . HSBC buck the trend , advance 2.3p to 680.3p , and Standard Chartered rise 5.8p to 724.3p . meanwhile , after a stellar 14-day run of successive gain , the FTSE @card@ close in the red , down @card@ point , or 0.15pc , at @card@ , despite a boost to overseas earner from the persistent pound weakness . broadcaster ITV also lose ground , down 4.4p to 204.2p , despite Citigroup raise its price target from 205p to 235p . analyst say commentary from ad buyer on the outlook for the TV ad market be now ` ` more optimistic ' ' . on the other side , mining stock rally as HSBC become more bullish on commodity . the bank upgrade Anglo American to ` ` buy ' ' and Antofagasta to ` ` hold ' ' . share in Anglo American jump 26p to £13.56 , Rio Tinto climb 70½p to £34.88 , Glencore advance 5.2p to 321.9p , BHP Billiton rise 23p to £14.78 and Antofagasta edge up 8½p to 733½p . safe-haven stock be also in demand . Randgold Resources make gain of 110p to £68.20 and Fresnillo inch up 23p to £14.36 after gold jump to a seven-week high on buy fuel by political uncertainty which dent investor confidence . elsewhere , gold miner Acacia rally to the top of the FTSE @card@ , 16.8p high at 435p , after it confirm it be in talk about a possible merger with Canadian peer Endeavour Mining on Friday . meanwhile , aerospace and defence company Cobham wobble 2.2p to 136p on the back of a rating downgrade . Goldman Sachs cut its rating to ` ` sell ' ' from ` ` neutral ' ' cite a ` ` challenging ' ' growth outlook . analyst also think the company ' s initial decision to suspend its @card@ final dividend will be follow by ` ` a much low dividend level from @card@ onwards ' ' . on Aim , share in WANdisco surge 22.3pc , or 50p , to 274p as the big data company deliver a 72pc rise in total booking for the year to $ 15.5m ( £12.9m ) thanks to new channel partnership with Amazon and Oracle . finally , a robust trading update lift share in Instem , a developer and vendor of software use to log clinical trial , 3.4pc to 231p .
Scotland Forecast Brexit fear downplay Body : Nicola Sturgeon ' s warning that she would not allow Scotland to be drive off a ` ` hard Brexit cliff edge ' ' be undermine yesterday after her own civil servant publish figure predict high economic growth . the projection , publish alongside Derek Mackay ' S budget , predict @card@ per cent growth in GDP next year , rise to @card@ per cent in @card@ , the year after Brexit be schedule to take place . domestic demand and earnings be also forecast to increase , although export be expect to fall after an initial rise . however , the report acknowledge that the Brexit vote ` ` greatly increase the level of uncertainty within these forecast . ' ' a separate analysis by the independent Scottish Fiscal Commission also predict that employment and earnings in both the public and private sector will grow every year until at least @card@ .
Scotland Minister leave SNP ' s position over Brexit ' clear as mud '
Nicola Sturgeon be last night urge to clarify her stance on a special Brexit deal for Scotland after a senior SNP minister say her key demand of single market membership be ` ` only possible if you be a member of the EU ' ' . the conservative say the Scottish Government ' S strategy be as ` ` clear as mud ' ' follow the intervention by Mike Russell , the SNP ' s Brexit minister , and appear to be get ` ` more and more confused ' ' . Ms Sturgeon have repeatedly say that Scotland must retain ` ` membership ' ' of the EU single market follow Brexit , a much high benchmark than mere ` ` access ' ' . but , challenge by a Commons select committee to explain the difference between the two term , Mr Russell say that ` ` in the strict sense , membership be only possible if you be a member of the EU ' ' . he then admit that if Scotland leave the EU along with the rest of the UK that ` ` membership be not possible ' ' . Mr Russell conclude that the Scottish Government ' s key test be actually ` ` involvement in ' ' the single market ` ` more than anything else ' ' . the confusion over the Scottish Government ' S stance come ahead of Ms Sturgeon shortly unveil her proposal for Scotland to stay in the single market even if the rest of the UK come out . her plan have already be dismiss as impossible by academic and politician , who have warn they would create a hard economic border with England . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have rule out any separate Scottish deal and a senior Spanish MEP have say his government would oppose one . John Lamont , the Scottish Tory chief whip , say : ` ` people in Scotland now deserve to know exactly what her position be , how it will work , and how it ensure Scotland retain access to our most important market , the rest of the United Kingdom . ' ' Mr Russell be ask by an SNP MP at last week ' S Commons Scottish affair select committee meeting to clarify the difference between the UK Government ' s test of ` ` access ' ' to the single market and the Scottish Government ' s demand of ` ` membership ' ' . he reply : ` ` in the strict sense , membership be only possible if you be a member of the EU , so on this trajectory of the UK leaving and a differentiate position be find for Scotland but Scotland continue to leave in that regard , membership be not possible . ' ' he say there be a ` ` range of other language ' ' use because single market membership be restrict to EU member , with the Welsh government refer to ` ` free and unfettered access ' ' and the Scottish government supposedly prefer ` ` involvement in ' ' .No respite Economic growth still ' weak ' economic growth forecast for Scotland have be increase but remain ` ` weak ' ' for the next few year , accord to a new report . researcher at Strathclyde University now forecast growth of @card@ per cent in @card@ , @card@ per cent in @card@ and @card@ per cent in @card@ , a marginal increase on the institute ' s July prediction . the revision be credit to ` ` sign the UK will press for a transition and not a ' cliff-edge ' when leave the single market ' ' , the fall in Sterling , Bank of England stimulus and a ` ` slightly less pessimistic environment for the North Sea ' ' .
in the age of Trump , we need the buccaneering Hammond of old ; America be about to embark on the great supply-side tax cut since Reagan . Britain ca n't stand still
it will be hard for some to believe but Philip Hammond be once a colourful , buccaneering entrepreneur , the opposite of the grey-suited bean-counter he now purport to be . as a schoolboy in Essex , the man who today serve as our Chancellor of the Exchequer make good money rent out church hall for disco , before graduate to trading car make at the local Ford factory . he have a knack for spot a profit opportunity and strike his first real deal age just @card@ , when he buy out his employer ' medical product division for just £1 . over the year , Hammond have his fair share of failure as well as success , like all entrepreneur , but end up make million from a range of property and construction , manufacturing and energy business . people do n't really change , which be why I ' m hopeful that Hammond may rediscover his risk-taking instinct and ditch the ultra-cautious , lugubrious and bizarrely pessimistic persona he have acquire since enter politics . the world have shift dramatically in the past five month , and Britain desperately need a dose of the old , glass half-full Hammond . government must deal with reality as it be , not as they hope it would be , and this apply even more to Trump ' S triumph - which Downing Street neither predict nor want - than it do to Brexit . nobody know , at this stage , whether Trump ' S presidency will implode in an orgy of demagoguery , protectionism and corruption , or whether it will confound its critic by govern in a neo-Reaganite manner . Realpolitik must thus be the order of the day . give the inflammatory element of Trump ' S campaign , the British Government need to remain vigilant ; but it should also seek to make the most of the new world order and the imminent pro- Brexit and pro-growth shift in Washington . this be where Hammond come in . Brexit alone would have require a radical response from the Chancellor ; Brexit , Trump and the grow likelihood that strain in the eurozone will eventually reach break point make this an urgent necessity . Hammond ' S first Autumn Statement next week be the first real opportunity for the May Government to regain the initiative and to show that it have an exciting , optimistic plan for our post-Brexit prosperity . Hammond can not afford to be hem in by the pessimistic consensus - the same duff prediction that claim the Brexit vote would trigger an immediate collapse in growth and job . he need to break free from the constraint of the Treasury ' S model . the Chancellor should start off by point out - diplomatically , of course - that the rise in the deficit be largely the do of his predecessor : the previous prediction never have any hope of come true , Brexit or no Brexit . he must then retain an iron grip on almost all area of current spending , while announce his own deliberate but carefully control loosening in fiscal policy . the first big change be that the Chancellor need to be much more radical on tax , and unveil at least one flagship measure to improve incentive to work and invest . he should commission a major review of the tax system , with the aim of drastically simplify and flatten it . Trump change everything here : America be about to embark on the great supply-side tax cut on business and worker since Ronald Reagan . the Republicans want to slash the top rate to @card@ per cent , increase the personal allowance and abolish the estate tax , among other thing . capital gain tax rate would be no more than @card@ per cent . corporation tax would be slash to between @card@ per cent ( under Trump ' S plan ) and @card@ per cent ( the House ' S alternative ) . a special @card@ per cent tax rate could be introduce for US multinational repatriate the money they hold overseas , suck trillion of dollar back into the US economy . Britain can not afford to stand still . combine with the possibility of a major pro-growth shift in the way Wall Street be regulate , and the big London-based investment bank ' fear that they will be freeze out of European market after Brexit , now be also the time for Hammond to ditch the banking levy supertax . second , trade . the UK need to take every opportunity to defend the World Trade Organisation against the new administration ' s troubling protectionist instinct , which be likely to be focus on emerge market . but in other respect the dream of many Brexiteers have suddenly come true : there be now a real chance of a bilateral trade deal with the US , as soon as we leave the custom union . Hammond should ignore the clueless naysayer who claim that we should reject or delay this historic opportunity to ensure we do n't alienate the EU ; talk with Washington should begin in parallel with those with Europe . a US-UK free trade deal would transform our negotiate position with the EU and would be game-changing in every possible way . Hammond should at the very least hint that he be excite by this next week . next , defence . Trump ' s lukewarm approach to Nato mean that Britain ' s strong military will become a major bargaining chip in our Brexit talk , especially when it come to convince eastern Europe country . defence spending as a share of GDP fall to @card@ per cent in @card@ ; Hammond should pledge to increase it to @card@ per cent by the end of the decade . the Chancellor must also move fast on energy , infrastructure and housing . he need to intensify and accelerate the development of shale , and speed up road-building project . as for housing , apart from release more land , tear down barrier to entry for new housebuilders and apply some of the lesson he learn in his construction business , Hammond should slash stamp duty across the board . the fiscal impact would be limit - it be one of those tax cut that could pay for itself , directly as well as indirectly . the number of housing transaction would rocket , more people would be able to upgrade or downsize their home and lot of other spending and tax revenue would be generate . in his original , swashbuckling incarnation , Hammond love to roll the dice , to take a calculated risk . electorate here and in America be certainly in that sort of mood . the Chancellor need to show them what he be really make of , and deliver an Autumn Statement fit for the time . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
this idea that EU worker may be boot out be bizarre and repugnant ; Theresa May should do a swift U-turn before the Tory party really do become the nasty party
my 75-year-old fatherin-law be use to up stick . he be raise in post-war rural Moravia in the kind of ruin and poverty that make austerity Britain seem like a promised land . after Russian tank crush the Prague Spring , he flee the Soviets and end up in a Swedish refugee camp . there he be look after , teach the language , become a geologist and could , now , retire and live by himself . but I have a good idea : that he move , yet again , to Twickenham and life with his three grandchild , who adore him . we have an attic room , where he have be stay , and we ' d like to make this arrangement permanent . if - and it ' S a big ` ` if ` ` - he can be persuade . it be all go to plan until Theresa May enter the Tory leadership contest . last weekend , she deliver a message that put the skid under all three million EU national live in Britain : she regard them as bargaining chip . as prime minister she would offer no guarantee about their staying in Britain ; that would all depend on what other government say about brit abroad . such a deal could , of course , take month - perhaps year - to negotiate . she might be force to unleash the British bulldog , and chase them out . it ' S a disgusting message , and the precise opposite of what the Brexiteers repeatedly offer during the referendum campaign . the Vote leave platform be explicit : Brexit mean good control over immigration inflow , but that be it . deportation be never an issue in the debate because Boris Johnson , Michael Gove and even Nigel Farage say that the status of every European already live here would not change . it be an easy promise to make . only the BNP think European should have no automatic right to stay : that seem a fringe , almost a lunatic , position . now , this be the position of the woman overwhelmingly likely to be the next prime minister . it ' S certainly a bold move , but a rather puzzling www.one.No one think she personally want to start deport Polish receptionist , or that she want to destabilise anyone . she just be too quick to follow official advice : that she should not concede the residency right of EU national in Britain until receive assurance about brit on the continent . her official be right : it ' s logical . but to play this game , and cast such uncertainty over so many , be deeply inhumane . even Mrs May ' s most senior supporter be worry that this have now become her great single liability . it underline a broad concern about her : that when she fall into a hole , she ca n't dig herself out very quickly . the idea of Britain boot out Polish child from our school while Spain boot out our retiree be bizarre . and , probably , illegal under the Vienna Convention . but , most of all , the idea be repugnant - and this be what Mrs May seem not to realise . to ` ` wait for reciprocal assurance ' ' may make bureaucratic sense in the Foreign Office , but it mean uncertainty for million of child , worker , colleague and pensioner . people who have , until recently , consider themselves new brit . Mrs May have grow fond of say that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' , but it ' S far from clear that she understand the agenda . the Vote leave campaign take great care to lay out an inclusive and compassionate manifesto . the enemy of Brexit understandably portray it as a derange manifesto for penury in a Little England . the question now face the Tory member during the nine week of the leadership election be what would happen if Brexit end up be implement by someone who never agree with it . and whether , as a result , the optimistic and open version of Brexit will be tear up , a casualty of Tory war . the recent debate over Mrs May ' s position on European immigrant have see a bizarre reversal of position . her most vocal critic be her rival , Andrea Leadsom , but those defend her hardline position tend to have vote for Remain . of course European immigrant be insecure now , they say : that ' s what the wretched Brexiteers vote for ! so they ought not to complain when Mrs May confront them with the ugly consequence of their own idea . but Brexit be only as ugly as the new prime minister choose to make it . the eye of the world be on Britain right now , and much depend on what we say . the case for guarantee every European ' s place in Britain be simple : we need them . they make up one in @card@ doctor , about half of construction worker in many area , and be the backbone of our public service . a unilateral declaration of support for European immigrant would send a crucial message : we want Brexit to be a friendly and amicable settlement , not an acrimonious divorce . and our openness to the world ought not to be in doubt . Mrs May may have disagree with Brexit , but the job she be now apply for oblige her to make the good of it . she should start talk about its advantage , and say how Brexit will allow her to scrap her awful rule that have non-EU immigrant deport after a while if they ' re not earn more than £35,000 a year . as Home Secretary , she should be do everything she can to reduce uncertainty , not make French businessman wonder if it ' s worth investing in a country that consider turf them out . every day that Mrs May keep open the prospect of deportation be a day that undermine British social cohesion - and a day where the Tories start to look less and less appealing . Ukip have join the fray , say it would be ` ` fundamentally wrong ' ' to turn someone who be here legally into someone who be illegal . if Nigel Farage can understand this , why ca n't the Home Secretary ? Mrs May have be perhaps the most consequential home secretary of recent time . but to apply to be prime minister she need to show that she understand Brexit , she understand people - and that she ' s capable of calm an unsettled country . until she drop her indefensible ambivalence towards the status of European , many of those who ' d normally be incline to support her ( myself include ) will find it impossible to do so . it would be tragic if the woman who invent the phrase ` ` nasty party ' ' be to end up hang it around Conservative neck once more . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
one in five chairman of blue-chip company plan to vote leave
one in five boardroom boss intend to vote leave next week , a poll of FTSE @card@ chairman have find . business consultant Korn Ferry survey @card@ company , which together make up £700bn of the market , and find that six boss plan to vote for Brexit , @card@ to remain , while four be undecided . only two say they have change their mind during the lengthy referendum campaign , in which side have battle over Brexit ' s potential impact on the market , house price , immigration level and the cost of a weekly shop . in the anonymous interview , one chairman say : ` ` I have barely hear a single economic , political or social argument for leave that be in any way convincing . ' ' around half of the @card@ chairman survey think Boris Johnson , a lead Brexit campaigner , have help the leave campaign , while @card@ of the chairman believe he have inadvertently bolster support for Britain ' s EU membership . one Remain supporter say the former mayor of London be ` ` as dangerous as Donald Trump ' ' after Mr Johnson ' s campaign of rally speech as well as his controversial claim that the EU prevent banana from be sell in bunch of more than three . business leader have become less certain a Brexit vote will spell disaster as the campaign have wear on . a survey of FTSE @card@ board member last month show 43pc of respondent describe Brexit as ` ` potentially damaging ' ' , while 70pc hold this view last December . last month @card@ business leader call on British voter to leave the EU in a letter publish by the Daily Telegraph . its signatory include Peter Goldstein , a founder of Superdrug . 6The number of FTSE @card@ chairman who say they plan to vote for Brexit , accord to an anonymous survey of @card@ company
leave the EU be like Nazi appeasement , say peer ; Tory call for Lord Adonis to be sack as government adviser after warning of risk face over Brexit
conservative MP have call for Lord Adonis to be sack as an adviser to the government after he compare Brexit to the appeasement of Adolf Hitler . the chairman of the government ' s national infrastructure commission say Britain be in ` ` serious danger ' ' of get it wrong as it leave the European Union . he warn Brexit could lead to ` ` a serious relative decline in our live standard compare with France and Germany ' ' . in an interview with House magazine on Thursday , the peer say : ` ` my language be usually pretty subdue in politics but anyone with a historical sense - and I ' m a historian - recognise that leave the economic institution of the European Union , which have guide our destiny as a trading nation for half a century , be a very big step and the importance ca n't be over-emphasised . ` ` to my mind , it ' S as big a step that we ' re take as a country as decolonisation in the 1950s and 1960s and appeasement in the 1930s . we get it right on decolonisation ; we get it wrong on appeasement and I think we ' re in serious danger of get it wrong in the way that we leave the EU . ' ' his comment prompt a furious response from Brexit-backing MP and call for him to lose his £85,200 a year government role . but Theresa May reject call to fire the former Labour Cabinet member and peer yesterday , despite the controversy cause by his remark . Iain Duncan Smith , a former Tory Cabinet Minister , tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` this be a democratic vote and a democratic debate . for him to turn round and compare leave the EU to Nazi Germany be insult to the British people and it ' S cheap . it be an outrage and what he say be simply appalling . ` ` if he be a decent person he would simply apologise and accept he make a major mistake . ' ' Andrew Bridgen , the Tory MP for North West Leicestershire , add : ` ` of course he should be remove from any advisory role to government . he do n't really believe in democracy - just like Hitler . ' ' Lord Adonis maintain his position yesterday morning during an interview on today on BBC Radio @card@ . ask if he stand by his remark , he say : ` ` Leaving the European Union be clearly go to have very , very serious economic consequence . ` ` the point I ' m making be that it ' S the bad economic mistake we will have make in this generation if we do leave and do a hard Brexit . ` ` my view be that the Labour Party should stand behind stay in the single market and the custom union - I ' ve argue that in the House of Lords , I could n't have be clear . ' ' a spokesman for Mrs May say the Prime Minister ` ` completely ' ' disagree with his comment , but would not be remove him from his post . the spokesman add : ` ` he be not a member of the government . he be not a Conservative peer . ` ` his job be to provide independent advice to government on infrastructure . that do n't have anything to do with the view he express on Brexit . ` ` she completely disagree with those view . his view on Brexit have no bearing on the position that he hold . it be down to him to explain his view . ' ' the peer be appoint to his advisory role by George Osborne , then the chancellor , in @card@ . Charles Moore : page @card@
Brexit getaway under cloud ; as Britain decide its EU future , Tim Pitt assess the likely impact on motorist of vote to leave Body : Easyjet be cheap and Eurostar be quick , yet there remain something alluring about a European driving holiday . every summer , million of motorist head east on to French autoroute and beyond , ignore refrain of ` ` be we there yet ? ' ' and curse have a car without air-con . if Britain leave the EU , could this venerable tradition be under threat ? driving epitomise personal freedom , yet also hit us hard in the pocket , so it touch upon many key area of the In/Out EU Referendum . here be the main point that could affect motorist after June @card@ . Ports Brexit would mean the imposition of additional custom control at port . this could lead to delay both side of the Channel , particularly for van and lorry . once inside the passport-free Schengen area - which cover @card@ state , from Norway to Malta - driver be unlikely to notice much difference . they will be able to move freely , although stays may be limit , possibly to @card@ day without a visa . a post-Brexit Britain would almost certainly join Iceland , Norway , Switzerland and Liechtenstein in the European Economic Area . in the event of accident or illness , driver ' healthcare cost would therefore be cover , at least in part , by the exist European Health Insurance Card . Fuel Filling your tank , especially with diesel , have traditionally be cheap in Europe . a litre of petrol or diesel currently cost around £1.09 in the UK , compare with £1.06 for petrol and 92p for diesel in France . this price gap be likely to increase if Britain leave the EU , at least in the short term . the AA have predict a ` ` worstcase ' ' of petrol price soar 18.7p per litre , leave a two-car family that refuel twice a month £494 bad off each year . that claim be base on calculation make by Goldman Sachs and HSBC that Sterling ' S value could fall by @card@ per cent after Brexit . however , RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams dispute this , say : ` ` the impact on fuel price of Britain exit be not likely to be as dramatic . ` ` while the strength of the pound be a significant factor ... oil price be currently a great influence . ' ' Whichever way the vote go , Jason Lloyd of www.PetrolPrices.com say uncertainty be already take effect : ` ` I think Sterling will continue to be volatile all the way to June @card@ and we will see petrol price nudge upwards as a result ' ' . insurance aside from rule on the curvature of banana , one of the EU ' s more controversial policy be a ruling from the European Court of Justice that insurance company could not take the gender of driver into account . as male driver be consider higher-risk , this lead to increase price for woman driver , with low premium for man . the policy could be abandon post- Brexit but nothing be guarantee . likewise , last year ' s hike in insurance premium tax from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent , justify by the Chancellor as bring Britain into line with other EU state , could be reverse . neither the AA or RAC expect their ability to rescue strand driver to be affect . change in the exchange rate could push up the cost of policy , however . car price a recent survey by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and trader find @card@ per cent of motor industry business be oppose to Brexit . BMW even warn its UK staff that job may be at risk . for motorist , a devaluation of the pound and UK/EU trade tariff could increase the cost of new car import from Europe . could Brexit see a return to unofficial ` ` grey import ' ' car ? popular in the Nineties , these lead to a ` ` Great British Car Rip-Off ` ` campaign from which ? . in @card@ , the consumer group say Briton pay £4,000 more for some car than buyer in the EU . BREXIT Bad News for the BOOZE cruise ? Briton regularly cross the Channel to plunder French hypermarket , take advantage of low alcohol tax ( 23p per 750ml of wine in France , versus £2.08 in the UK ) that effectively halve the cost of a bottle of cheap plonk . the rule state you can bring back @card@ cigarette , @card@ litre of beer and @card@ litre of wine without raise the eyebrow of UK Customs . however , exit from the EU be likely to see this allowance drastically reduce . those arrive from outside Europe be restrict to @card@ cigarette , @card@ litre of beer and four litre of wine . if such limit be impose on EU passenger , it could be the end for the British booze cruise . yet there be a light at the end of the ( Euro ) tunnel : the possible return of dutyfree shopping . Eurotunnel chief executive Jacques Gounon be upbeat on Brexit . ` ` Dutyfree would be an incredible boost for our business , ' ' he tell the Financial Times . bad RECEPTION Mobile COSTS COULD INCREASE WITH BREXIT a mobile phone be an essential part of the modern travel toolkit . yet a report from the Association of British Travel Agents ( ABTA ) and Deloitte say use your phone abroad could become more expensive if Britain quit the European Union . roam charge within the EU be currently cap at 4p per minute for call , 2p for text message and 4p per MB of datum . and fee will be cut to zero from June @card@ . but leave the EU would exempt the UK from these regulation , mean cost may increase . the uncertainty be a particular worry for those who use their mobile phone as satnavs . Data-heavy navigation apps such as Google Maps could land driver with a big bill upon their return from holiday . ' Oil price be the big influence on pump price '
dishearten cacophony in the Cabinet do not bode well for Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Boris Johnson ' s description of the Cabinet as a ` ` nest of sing bird ' ' ( report , September @card@ ) be remarkably - perhaps unintentionally - apt . the cacophony of nestling be far more reminiscent of juvenile squabbling than a chorus in harmony . Anne Cranfield Heathfield , East Sussex sir - follow the disastrous general election last June , Theresa May say that she have learn her lesson on the danger of rely on a small clique of adviser at the expense of involve the whole Cabinet in decision-making . however , it seem that she have already forget that lesson , have seemingly replace her adviser , Nick Timothy and Fiona Hill , with the First Secretary of State , Damian Green , and the Home Secretary , Amber Rudd , while keep the same isolationist method of control . this have be demonstrate in the draft of her forthcoming speech in Florence this Friday , in which she will set out the government ' s vision for future trade and relationship with Europe and the rest of the world follow Brexit . you have to question why , in the draft of a speech about foreign affair , trade and Brexit , the view of the Home Secretary should take precedence over those of the Foreign Secretary , the International Trade Secretary and the Brexit Secretary . Paul Lewis Edinburgh sir - for @card@ year the British establishment have capitulate to the EU . voter recognise this , and it be one reason why the leave vote prevail in June ' S referendum last year . your report ( September @card@ ) that Theresa May be ` ` prepare to offer the EU £20 billion in budget contribution until at least @card@ ' ' show that the government still have n't grasp the lesson . Brexit negotiate by Remainers be , unsurprisingly , turn into a disaster . Nick Martinek Huddersfield , West Yorkshire sir - my political outlook be global , socially liberal and fiscally conservative . I recoil in horror at the present state of the Tories , particularly Boris Johnson and his fellow Brexit knucklehead . for whom do I vote now ? Nick Judd Kersey , Suffolk sir - Boris Johnson seem to polarise voter , both Tory and non-Tory . may I just say that he be an exceptionally popular and ` ` hands-on ' ' MP in his Henley-on-Thames constituency , where I live for @card@ year . he be bright and measure , he listen and he believe in a freemarket economy with limited state intervention . he be the last true conservative speak up for everyone , regardless of background . he also be exceptionally kind and capable of act of generosity which do not reach the public domain . Dr Alistair A Donald Watlington , Oxfordshire
Scotland Scotland ' risk legal cliff edge ' if Sturgeon oppose repeal Bill ; Tories warn nationalist over ' legal gap ' after Brexit
Nicola Sturgeon ' S government risk push Scotland to a legal ` ` cliff edge ' ' if it oppose the EU repeal bill as the gap leave by thousand of redundant European law may not be seamlessly plug , Theresa May ' S deputy warn yesterday . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , say the Bill be try to avoid the ` ` hugely undesirable ' ' situation where Brexit lead to huge hole in Scotland ' s statute book cover area such as food safety . he refuse to confirm that the UK Government would step in to plug the legal gap if Ms Sturgeon make good her threat to withhold consent for the Bill , say it be ` ` new territory ' ' . but he express confidence that the SNP government would end up reach a deal , argue it would result in a swathe of new power repatriate from Brussels for the Scottish Parliament , some of which he say would be deliver on day one of Brexit . Mr Green also reject a call by Ruth Davidson in the Daily Telegraph for the Tories to review their target of cut immigration to ` ` ten of thousand ' ' , say that one of the ` ` force ' ' behind the Brexit vote be the feeling it be too high and ` ` we should respect that ' ' . he make the intervention the day after hold talk with Mike Russell , the SNP Brexit minister , and John Swinney , the Deputy First Minister , to try and break the impasse . however , Mr Russell emerge from the meeting to warn that Holyrood would vote against the repeal bill without ` ` serious and significant change ' ' , argue it be a ` ` blatant power grab ' ' by Westminster . although Mrs May could press ahead without the Scottish Parliament ' S consent , this risk a constitutional crisis as the Bill impinge on dozen of devolve responsibility . the SNP be demand that all EU power link to devolve area , such as replace the Common Fisheries Policy ( CFP ) and Common Agricultural Policy ( Cap ) , be automatically pass to Scotland . but the government be concern this would fragment the UK ' s internal market by create different system north and south of the Border . as well as create UK framework to ensure this do not happen , the Bill will replicate thousand of EU regulation that will cease to apply the day after Brexit cover area such as health and safety and food standard . at a press briefing in Edinburgh , Mr Green say the current devolution settlement be predicate on EU membership and ` ` what we ' re try to do be find a practical way through ' ' . he say : ` ` one of the reason for have this Bill absolutely be that we want to avoid anywhere in the UK a cliffContinued on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ edge on Brexit day where there be gap in the statute book . the last thing anyone want be to suddenly discover we have n't get regulation cover food safety , to take an example . obviously that ' s what we ' re try to avoid with this Bill . ' ' ask whether the gap would be plug by Westminster if the Scottish Parliament withhold consent for the Bill , he say : ` ` we ' re in new territory so it ' s clear that it would be hugely undesirable for Scotland to have any gap in Scots law . that ' S one of the reason it ' S so important that we do bring these discussion to a successful conclusion before we get to April @card@ . ' ' he insist that the ` ` difficulty that appear now ' ' between the UK and Scottish government would ` ` disappear ' ' as the talk progress , argue ` ` it ' S hugely in the interest of Scotland ' ' to reach an agreement . but Mr Russell say : ` ` we have make our position crystal clear to UK minister , who should be in no doubt whatsoever that we will not recommend that the Scottish Parliament give consent to the bill as it stand . ` ` as draft , the proposal undermine the founding principle of devolution and amount to a power grab - we will not accept that and it be inconceivable we would recommend acceptance of such a bill . ' ' the SNP also seize on Mr Green ' s dismissal of Ms Davidson ' s call for the UK Government to look again at its immigration target , which he describe as ` ` sustainable ' ' . Joan McAlpine , an SNP MSP , say : ` ` this just show how little authority Ruth Davidson have - she can make a lot of noise but nobody ' S listening . ' '
firm to defy Brexit fear with science spending boom ; CBI say most want to invest in research , as Prime Minister unveil £2bn boost for innovation
British business be press ahead with plan to spend hundred of million of pound on research and development ( R & D ) , in a vote of confidence in the UK economy follow the Brexit vote . the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) say 70pc of company intend to maintain or increase spending in new technology to grow their business , despite the EU referendum result . it describe corporate access to research and R & D tax credit as ` ` world- class ' ' . in a survey of more than @card@ business , just 7pc plan to reduce their investment in innovation , while large company be more likely to increase spending than those with few than @card@ employee . the government will welcome the result , but the CBI also describe the UK as ` ` a follower rather than a leader ' ' in term of government support for innovation , include grant . Theresa May will set out plan today to transform Britain into the ` ` global goto place for scientist , innovator and tech investor ' ' . speak at the CBI ' s annual conference , the Prime Minister will pledge to boost government investment in R & D by £2bn by the end of this Parliament to ` ` help put post-Brexit Britain at the cut edge of science and tech ' ' . the CBI say a three-pronged plan be need in Wednesday ' S Autumn Statement to transform the UK into an ` ` innovation powerhouse ' ' , with high growth and improve living standard . Britain ' s big business group call for a ` ` funding road map ' ' for ar-eas currently finance by Brussels , and urge policymaker to follow through on a pledge to create a ` ` modern industrial strategy ' ' . Mrs May will address the CBI ' s call today as she announce fresh support for start-up and innovation in field such as robotic and artificial intelligence to ` ` break down the obstacle to get long-term investment into innovative firm ' ' . Carolyn Fairbairn , director-general of the CBI , describe the finding as encourage . she say company be ` ` roll up their sleeve and look to make the good of Brexit ' ' . however , Ms Fairbairn urge the government to help business make the most of post-Brexit opportunity . ` ` the UK will need to work hard to become the front runner in global innovation , create a pioneer economic role for itself that drive prosperity in every corner of the UK , ' ' she say . last week , official datum show private sector R & D spending rise 5pc in @card@ to £20.9bn . while this represent an increase in cash term , private-sector R & D as a share of national income have remain broadly flat this decade . the International Monetary Fund have highlight that UK R & D spending be below many of its G7 peer . the CBI urge the government to raise public and private spend on R & D to 3pc of GDP by @card@ , from its current 1.7pc . it also call on the government to double the £500m-a-year budget of Innovate UK , the taxpayer-backed research agency . Downing Street cite research that show every £1 spend on R & D tax credit stimulate between £1.53 and £2.35 of investment in the UK . Philip Hammond yesterday reject call from Labour to indulge in a borrowing binge and raise business tax , suggest this would make UK ` ` an unattractive place to invest ' ' .
Brexit be nothing like the rise of Trump - whatever he might think ; the leave vote be outward-facing and optimistic ; the Republican candidate be anything but Allister Heath
all over the Western world , electorate be angry at their self-satisfied , arrogant political class ; they want their view reflect , include , of course , on immigration , and feel that they have be ignore for too long . manual worker and the low middle class be especially feed up , and feel under pressure financially as a result of the legacy of the great recession , automation and globalisation . first the leave campaign in Britain and now Donald Trump in America have seek to harness these populist rebellion . but I have news for Mr Trump : he may become the next US president but he never will be Mr Brexit . it ' S not even close . in all of the way that really matter , the Brexiteer agenda be dramatically at odd with what pass for Trump ' S world-view . the Donald want to walk away from America ' s free trade deal ; Brexiteers be desperate to sign as many as possible as quickly as possible . leaver here would love to join Nafta ; Trump want to quit it . almost all Brexiteers want to use Nato to help protect the west and project UK and US power ; Trump see it as a drain on resource . the utter incompatibility of vision ought to be obvious . Brexit be the politics of hope , of positive change , of radical reform ; Trump be the politics of despair , of powerlessness , of retreat . Brexit be primarily about regain Britain ' S selfgovernment ; it be a bold , powerful statement that liberal , independent , free-trading democracy be the good way for country and their people to prosper in a modern , complex world . it be a denunciation of post-war technocracy , a rejection of top-down rule , and a commitment to a massive increase in democratic control . in complete contrast , America selfevidently never relinquish its independence : this be just another election , albeit between two hopeless candidate . Brexit ' s massive repatriation of power to our own institution will strengthen and rejuvenate the UK ' s ailing democracy , which have become atrophy and pathetic ; the election of either Trump or Clinton , by contrast , could make America almost ungovernable . it be clear why Trump want to bask in the Brexiteers ' reflect glory : they triumph spectacularly on an antiestablishment , David-versus-Goliath message , and in the face of the receive wisdom . to get out his vote , Trump need to convince his supporter he have a real chance - and point to the referendum triumph and the explosive shock it cause to the elite they so despise be a great way of achieve this . it be in the interest , too , of the liberal-left intelligentsia in Britain to conflate Brexit - a pro-free trade , prodemocracy , pro-internationalist movement - with Trumpism - an antitrade , almost autarchic agenda . if nothing else , they hope that the market chaos a Trump victory would cause might derail or delay Brexit indefinitely , or make it much harder for Theresa May to sign global trade deal . such folk be also keen to focus on the demographic similarity between the two group of voter : those with more advanced academic qualification be more likely to back Hillary Clinton or to vote Remain . the intent here be obvious : to portray Brexit as a plot by dumb , uneducated suburban voter who be lead astray by a group of charismatic demagogue ( such as Michael Gove or Boris Johnson ) , thus discredit the movement to leave the EU . it be undeniably true that many northern and coastal community decide to vote leave partly as a protest against social change , and that many Midwestern state will do the same with Trump . but while his base be overwhelmingly white and male , and his campaign have further fan the flame of America ' s horrendous racial division , the leave vote be dramatically more diverse . a majority of woman ( and man ) vote to leave : in fact , accord to Lord Ashcroft ' s on-the-day poll , there be complete gender equality at @card@ per cent for Brexit . Trump have few vote in America ' s great city . the leave side ' S record here too be far good . even in London , leave grab @card@ per cent of the vote , hugely more than Trump will get in New York or Los Angeles . as to minority vote , take London ' s Newham , where under @card@ per cent of the population be white British and @card@ per cent be Muslim . leave still grab @card@ per cent of the vote . Harrow , a very different London borough with a white British share of @card@ per cent and the UK ' s large concentration of Hindu and Jains , vote @card@ per cent for leave , also well above the London average . plenty of leave campaigner hail from ethnic minority , not least the excellent Priti Patel ; and the majority of the Tories ' @card@ ethnic minority MP back leave . a majority of ethnic minority voter still back Remain . but the proportion be incomparable to the racially-divided US election , where an astonishing @card@ per cent of the African-American vote be likely to go to Clinton , who also have a massive 50-point lead among Hispanics . there be , tragically , a despicable spike in instance of abuse and even attack on migrant in the immediate aftermath of the vote , apparently direct primarily at eastern European worker . this be a disgusting development and the government should have condemn it even more forcefully than it do , but it be a very different phenomenon to the extreme racial division that we be currently see in the US . most importantly of all , modern British Euroscepticism be a wellestablished doctrine . it date back to Margaret Thatcher ' s Bruges speech of @card@ . dozen of book have be write on the subject since then ; it be a proper movement with its own historian , philosopher and economist , its activist and its supporter . by contrast there be no real Trump ideology , no coherent thinking , no meaningful movement . he be a poujadiste , an operator in the mould of Ross Perot , the independent anti-free trade candidate who grab @card@ per cent of the vote in @card@ . Trump be a pure opportunist who will say anything to get elect , and then do whatever he be able to get away with . so Mr Trump . come up with good answer to the challenge face America - and stop appropriate our victory . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Acting BCC boss confirm in top job six month after predecessor quit over Brexit
the British chamber of Commerce have pick an insider to replace its director-general John Longworth , who quit in March in a row about his support for Brexit . the BCC say Adam Marshall , an American who have work as a policy expert at the chamber since @card@ , will take charge with immediate effect ` ` follow a robust recruitment process ' ' . Dr Marshall have be act director general since Mr Longworth ' S resignation earlier this year . the BCC consult with its @card@ regional chamber before assess a list of internal candidate for the job . ` ` Adam have a detailed knowledge of the Chamber Network and a strong understanding of the opportunity and challenge face Chamber member across the country , ' ' say president Francis Marshall . ` ` at a time of great political and economic uncertainty , I be confident that Adam have the ability and passion to enable the BCC to thrive under his leadership . ' ' the BCC decide to remain neutral on the outcome of the EU referendum and Mr Longworth quit after declare his support for Brexit at the business group ' s annual conference , accept that his view be ` ` likely to cause confusion ' ' about the BCC ' S stance . he chair the business council for the Vote leave campaign . trade body have be grapple with how good to represent their member in the wake of the Brexit vote . the manufacturing firm JCB announce this week that it be quit the CBI over its pessimism about leave the EU . ` ` at this time of national transition and change , BCC will ensure that the diverse voice of business be hear - regardless of size , sector , region or nation . we will act to ensure that British business get every opportunity to grow and thrive , both here at home and across the world , ' ' say Dr Marshall . before join the BCC , he help set up the Centre for Cities , a thinktank focus on the economy of UK city , and carry out a PhD in international study at Cambridge .
Chancellor should wait for the dust to settle ; Brexit The economy
so , George Osborne say the government wo n't be run a surplus by the end of this Parliament any more , because of the Brexit vote . give that his achieve a surplus require a large amount of fiscal tightening ( more than £30 billion in extra tax and low spending ) in the final year before the @card@ General Election , many of us have be pretty sceptical that he would do it anyway . some folk be say this mean the end of our post-2010 ` ` Age of Austerity ' ' or Osborne abandon his ` ` surplus rule ' ' ( require that the government run a surplus every year in normal economic condition ) . not so fast ! the surplus rule never apply until the government have first run a surplus anyway , and it allow for there be a deficit if the economy suffer a slowdown . furthermore , if the past six year of enormous deficit ( fall from @card@ per cent of GDP in @card@ to @card@ per cent this year ) have count as an Age of Austerity , there ' s no reason we ca n't have more ` ` austerity ' ' at the same time as run large deficit in the future , either . abandon a political target do not take away the financial and economic need to get the budget back to balance . there be a lot of jump the gun go on in interpret the economic impact of Brexit . the main pro-Leave economist ( such as myself and Gerard Lyons ) always say there ' d be some depreciation in sterling and some short-term economic slowdown if we vote to leave , with recovery later . Gerard call this the ` ` Nike tick ' ' . nothing so far have be a surprise . Sterling have drop about @card@ per cent in recent month , which should add around @card@ pc to GDP next year , but that will probably be offset by low investment in the short term , and there may even be slightly slow growth in @card@ and @card@ . the main lost GDP growth , however , will occur in @card@ , when we actually leave the EU - albeit ( in my view ) recover during the 2020s . Mark Carney , the governor of the Bank of England , have say monetary policy will loosen this summer . if it do , that will not be on the basis of any evidence of a Brexit www.slowdown.No post-referendum economic datum will even be available by then . the economy probably will slow , and that will probably mean some extra borrowing later this parliament and early next . but that be no surprise and do not mean government spending cut should not continue . they should and will do so . where Mr Osborne ( or whoever become chancellor under the next prime minister ) might reasonably change policy a bit in response to Brexit could be on infrastructure . the government have talk a good infrastructure game , but do relatively little . we need to ease planning rule and give the go-ahead to more infrastructure project . if the government really believe Britain can make a go of Brexit , that would be a good way to prove it than by any premature change in fiscal or monetary policy . those can wait until the Brexit dust settle . Andrew Lilico be executive director and principal of Europe Economics ' the main pro-Brexit economist always say there ' d be some short-term economic slowdown '
Brexit be a non-starter , lead City investor insist
one of the City ' s good known investor have brush off the idea that the UK will separate itself from the European Union , say there be ` ` no way ' ' that British voter would accept the risk that come with Brexit . ` ` there ' s just absolutely no way that the UK be leave Europe . it ' S that simple , ' ' say Richard Buxton , the chief executive and head of equity at Old Mutual Global Investors . ` ` as in the Scottish referendum , the market be much smarter than the pollster . watch the bookie , not the pollster . ' ' the most recent odd from Ladbrokes suggest that continued EU membership be more likely than Brexit , with odd of @card@ offer on a vote to remain , and @card@ on a vote to leave . Mr Buxton ' s comment on the EU be echo by Mark Wood , the former boss of Prudential , who suggest that the depth of the UK ' S link to the continent make the idea of complete withdrawal almost meaningless . ` ` if we be to come out of the EU it would be a decade ' S work , ' ' he say at a financial service panel debate organise by the accountancy firm EY . meanwhile , the boss of the investment house Schroders have take a more sanguine view of Brexit , although he also see only a remote chance of a vote to leave . ` ` as far as Brexit be concern , I wait to see what be on the table when the referendum come around . ` ` both polarise Eurosceptics and Europhiles use emotional language about a decision which should be make on fact and good information , ' ' he say in an interview with the writer Alain Elkann . ` ` I think it unlikely we will vote to leave . if we do , we will reach an accommodation with the EU after a couple of year , one that work for both side . ` ` talk of economic suicide or catastrophe be very wide of the mark . ' ' but the Central Bank of Ireland have flag up the potential damage to the UK ' s neighbour if it decide to separate from the rest of Europe , in its first analysis of what a vote to leave would mean . ` ` Analysis undertake in the Central Bank suggest that Brexit would have a negative impact on export , GDP and labour market development in Ireland under a number of different scenario consider , ' ' say the bank in its bi-annual financial review . the institution say Ireland ' s five retail bank have about 21pc of their total asset , or ( Euro ) 64bn , tie up in the UK economy , primarily in property . the insurance sector be also heavily reliant on tie to Britain , leave it vulnerable to an economic slowdown or major legal change in the wake of a break from the EU . the central bank concede that there could be a silver lining for Dublin ' s fi-nancial centre if large company decide to relocate from a post-Brexit UK . the government have pledge to hold a referendum on whether to remain part of the EU before the end of @card@ . David Cameron continue to lobby European institution in his attempt to secure a package of reform ahead of the vote , although hope be fade for concrete progress on the renegotiation this year . poll both of politician and the public suggest that opinion be split . a recent study by Open Europe find that the majority of Tory MP be still undecided about whether the benefit outweigh the cost of EU membership . meanwhile , a poll of party member by Conservative Home last month produce a 71pc vote to leave .
a long transition will only prolong uncertainty ; corporate titan be sit on their hand over Brexit , but Jeremy Corbyn be still the one they fear
for a parable that perfectly sum up the hope of ` ` exit from Brexit ' ' die-hard Remainers , it be hard to beat this little piece of homespun wisdom from the 13th-century Persian philosopher , Mulla Nasreddin . sentence to death by the Sultan , Nasreddin beg forgiveness and promise , ridiculously , that give a year ' s stay of execution , he could teach the king ' s horse to sing . an amused Sultan agree . Nasreddin ' S cellmate tell him he be a fool , as a horse can never be teach to sing . to which Nasreddin reply : ` ` a lot of thing can happen in a year . the king might die . the horse might die . I might die . and , who know ? maybe the horse will sing . ' ' while Remainers play for time , the economy must nonetheless keep chug along ; continued uncertainty over Britain ' s future relationship with its near neighbour mean it be do so with ever-less enthusiasm . any article that address the economic uncertainty of Brexit must begin by acknowledge that , so far , thing have hold up remarkably well . neither consumer spending nor business investment have be notably damage by the outcome of the referendum , and employment have continue to grow . but all good thing come to an end ; Brexit euphoria be wear off , to be replace by sharpedged reality . what gross domestic product growth there have be in recent quarter be largely the result of enhanced consumer spending . this in turn have be drive by increase employment , a rundown in household saving and an unrestrained consumer credit boom - influence that may now largely have run their course . job growth be slow , real wage be be hit by elevated inflation , and the Bank of England have crack down on unsecured , household credit growth . these negative be be partially offset by an export-lead revival in manufacturing , support by the very same devalue pound that be eat into take-home pay . the trouble be that manufacturing be a relatively small part of the UK economy these day . its present success , moreover , be substantially down to a cyclical recovery from near depression-like condition in its major export market - Europe . worryingly , there be still very little sign of the sustained upturn in business investment to match . survey repeatedly show that Brexit uncertainty have damage investment intention - not for everyone , but for a significant minority . the great paradox here be that although business and the City have broadly welcome the idea of a two-year transition after Brexit - in which nothing much will change in the UK ' s trading relationship with the rest of the EU - the effect be simply to prolong this state of uncertainty ; the immediate cliff edge be remove , but only to be shunt further out into the future . do n't get me wrong . I ' m not seriously advocate that we forgo the transition and opt instead for an immediate hard Brexit on WTO term . this could prove too much of a shock for the economy , and the government , to bear . but there be , nonetheless , something to be say for rip the stick plaster off in one go , and thereby get the process over and do with . the immediate consequence would no doubt be painful but , in time , the economy would adjust and move on . slow death by a thousand cut , which may well be the alternative , be scarcely a more appetising prospect . one of the great worry be that Brexit ' s all-consuming nature would sap the nation of energy for almost anything else . so far , that ' s exactly how it have turn out . in a fastchanging world , the current state of political infighting and introspection be close to economically lethal . Brexit be front and back of virtually every conversation with any topdrawer chief executive these day , as if all other potentially gainful activity have grind to a halt . many company be just sit on their hand wait to see how thing pan out . while Britain attempt to negotiate its future trading relationship with Europe , all other potential free-trade agreement ( FTAs ) have to be put on hold . nobody be go to agree an FTA with the UK until they know just how constrain Britain ' s FTA with the EU be likely to be . the one determine the other . in a recent speech to the CBI , Wilbur Ross , the US commerce secretary , warn that the close Britain end up to Europe , the more problematic its future trading relationship with the US be likely to be . this sense that Britain must choose between Europe and the US further add to the pall of uncertainty . over it all hang what international capital regard as an even great threat : an unashamedly hard Left Government in Downing Street , lead by someone who say that City banker be right to fear him because he ' s out to get them . do I really need to be invest in such a country , many overseas investor be ask ? whatever form of Brexit Mrs May eventually negotiate , it may be at the expense of her own government . a further four to five year of economic uncertainty and stagnation be not go to play well at the poll . follow Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ jeremywarneruk ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Davis ridicule Barnier ' S ' silly ' Brexit claim ; Tory anger at negotiator ' s comment that the British need ' educate ' on what leaving EU really mean
David Davis have accuse Michel Barnier of make the European Union look ` ` silly ' ' after he say Britain need to be ` ` educate ' ' about the peril of leave the bloc . the EU ' s chief negotiator reportedly tell a conference in Italy that he view the Brexit process as an opportunity to ` ` teach the British people and other what leave the EU means ' ' . he also warn of the ` ` extremely serious consequence ' ' of leave the single market . but Mr Davis yesterday issue a stern rebuke to his counterpart while Tory MP greet Mr Barnier ' s late comment with fury . the Brexit Secretary ridicule the tough tone adopt by his counterpart at the close of negotiation last week when a frustrated Mr Barnier claim no significant progress have be make on key issue . Mr Davis tell the Andrew Marr Show on BBC one : ` ` he can take whatever line he like on the way we conduct the negotiation - that be up to us , not up to him . ' ' he add : ` ` Bluntly , I think it look a bit silly because there plainly be thing that we have achieve . ' ' David Jones , a former Brexit minister , say Mr Barnier ' s view of the negotiation be evidence that the UK have make the correct decision when it vote to leave the EU . he say : ` ` Michel Barnier ' s patronise remark exemplify the Quai d'Orsay arrogance that most Briton find repellent . his job be n't to ' educate ' anybody ; it ' S to work towards an outcome of the current negotiation that will be to the mutual benefit of the UK and the EU . as it be , he be merely provide confirmation that we do the right thing when we vote to leave . ' ' the escalate war of word point to ever increase tension between the EU and the UK as Brexit talk risk slide further into acrimony after Liam Fox , the Trade Secretary , suggest Brussels be try to ` ` blackmail ' ' Britain . negotiation be deadlock over the UK ' S so-called Brexit bill with a number of newspaper claim yesterday that Mrs May be ready to sign off on a settlement worth up to £50billion but Mr Davis dismiss the claim and say : ` ` it ' S nonsense . the story be completely wrong . ' ' meanwhile , Mr Davis offer Tory rebel an olive branch in a bid to avoid a defeat over the use of ` ` Henry VIII ' ' power . he say the power , outline in the European Union ( Withdrawal ) Bill which MP will debate this week , will not be use on anything ` ` significant ' ' . critic fear the measure could be abuse by minister to push through law change without full parliamentary scrutiny . a few Tory MP be believe to be consider join force with opposition party to block the bill over the issue . but Mr Davis move to assuage concern on the government bench by insist the power will not be use inappropriately . he say : ` ` everything that be significant in term of change - not technical change but significant change - will be do in separate primary legislation . immigration bill , custom bill , you name it . ' ' Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , say yesterday that Labour will seek to scupper the passage of the bill unless the government listen to the party ' S concern . Anton Muscatelli : page @card@ Brexit timetable the next two month Tuesday Sept @card@ David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , be expect to deliver a statement in the House of Commons detail progress make in the late round of talk . he be likely to face a grill over the government ' s handling of the talk with progress appear to have stall . Wednesday Sept @card@ the government be expect to publish its late Brexit position paper . it will set out the UK ' s stance on future scientific cooperation . Thursday Sept @card@ the first of two day of debate will start in the commons on the government ' S European Union ( Withdrawal ) bill which will transfer more than @card@ EU law and regulation into British law . the Bill include plan to hand minister so-called ` ` Henry VIII ' ' power which opposition MP and some Tories fear will be use to push through change to legislation without full parliamentary scrutiny . Monday Sept @card@ the second day of debate on the second reading of the Withdrawal Bill . Opposition MP be expect to try and block the Bill ' S passage . MP will also vote on how much time should be give for future debate of the Bill , with a fierce battle expect . time could be set aside for MP to debate the Bill ' s content - and try to amend it - every week in the run up to Christmas . Monday Sept @card@ The UK ' s negotiate team will return to Brussels for the fourth round of talk . Monday Oct @card@ the fifth round of talk and the point at which it be initially hope a breakthrough could be secure on the term of divorce . this seem unlikely give the current impasse . Thursday Oct @card@ European leader will meet for a summit in Brussels and will decide whether sufficient progress have be make on the key issue of the Brexit Bill , the Irish border and citizen ' right for talk to move onto future trading arrangement .
sideline banking and Brexit will fail
whether you be a Leaver or a Remainer , one thing that almost everyone can agree on be that the Brexit process need to be handle very carefully . the UK ' s departure from the European Union may hurt the economy in the short-term or it may not ; if there ' S to be pain , it could be mild or severe . we can sit around argue about such forecast until we ' re all blue in the face . but one thing be certain : if the process be bungle , it will be catastrophic . that be the case you would have think that the government would have a laser-guided focus on what Brexit mean for the economy ' s most important sector . they should be swaddle it in cotton wool , tissue paper and bubble wrap and then place it on fluffy cushion during the Article @card@ process . unfortunately , the opposite appear to be the case . in fact , the economy ' s most important sector have be stuff in the back of the wardrobe and forget about . the reason , of course , be that the sector in question be financial service . and banker be politically toxic . since Brexit be , at least in part , a reaction to the pressure place on society by the austerity result from the financial crisis , how can the government be see to be prioritising the industry that cause the crash in the first place ? the answer , of course , be that it be also the industry that have help power the recovery and which fund our vital public source . Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , spell out the reality in stark term at last month ' S Mansion House speech : the tax pay by the financial service industry cover two-third of the annual run cost of the NHS . we neglect this golden goose at our peril . it be bad enough if such heedlessness be the result of political expediency , it be something quite different if it be the result of naivety . Senior City figure who have ( on too few occasion ) meet with minister be at their wit ' end . initially , politician understand the importance of the City to the economy but refuse to believe that banker would up stick and move to Frankfurt . ( I mean , have you ever be to Frankfurt ? ) more recently minister , especially those in the Treasury , have begin to realise that it be a tiny bit more nuanced than that . many of those who work in the City be bear abroad and have be make to feel unwelcome by Theresa May ' s attack on ` ` citizen of nowhere ' ' . highly pay banker also tend to go where the high pay be . and it ' S not so much the people that will be move from the UK to the EU as the job . just when City lobbyist feel they be get somewhere , May call a snap election . this press the pause button on discussion and then throw all the piece of government up in the air . four out of five minister in the Treasury either lose their seat or be move out of the department ; all of the minister in the Brexit department , bar David Davis himself , have move on for one reason or another . the City have to start all over again explain why , if it end up be a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit , then there will be a whole load of stuff that use to be do out of London that will legally have to be do somewhere else . it ' S a thankless enough task bang your head against a brick wall without be present , some @card@ month before the Article @card@ deadline , with fresh brickwork . there be potential cause for optimism in the EU ' s recent move on euro-clearing . these stop short of the ` ` land grab ' ' that many in the City have fear and could set up a workable model for future cooperation on financial service . but it be tell that the first move come from the other side of the channel . British politician need to get their head around what Brexit mean for the City and soon . otherwise the HMS Brexit will be hole below the waterline before it have even leave port . ben.wright @ telegraph.co.uk ' politician need to get their head around what Brexit mean for the City '
Scotland Dover queue if there be no Brexit deal , warn EU chief ; Brexit
the European Union and the UK will face ` ` severe consequence ' ' if Britain leave without a deal , Europe ' S chief Brexit negotiator have admit . these could include ` ` severe disruption to air transport and long queue at the Channel Port of Dover , ' ' say Michel Barnier . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have say repeatedly that ` ` no deal ' ' be good than a ` ` bad deal ' ' and say that the UK be prepare to walk away if necessary . tomorrow she will trigger Article @card@ and begin the formal process of leave the European Union . Mr Barnier , write in the Financial Times , say he want an ` ` orderly withdrawal ' ' and hope for an ` ` ambitious free trade agreement ' ' after Brexit . he say : ` ` it go without say that a nodeal scenario , while a distinct possibility , would have severe consequence for our people and our economy . it would undoubtedly leave the UK worse off . ' ' he add : ` ` we believe it be in the good interest of both side to reach a deal . ' ' he also say that while there be ` ` no price to pay ' ' for leave the EU , ` ` we must settle our account ' ' , a suggestion that he want to present the UK with a Brexit divorce bill .
May attack Deloitte and BBC over leak memo ; Deloitte memo have no place on BBC news bulletin , say no @card@
Theresa May yesterday launch direct attack on one of the world ' s big consultancy firm and the BBC after a leak memo claim the government could not cope with Brexit . the memo from Deloitte say that an extra @card@ civil servant may be need to cope with the additional workload , add that Whitehall be work on @card@ Brexit-related project . the report in the Times newspaper , which claim that the memo have be ` ` prepare for the Cabinet Office ' ' , be at the top of the news bulletin on BBC Radio @card@ ' s today programme yesterday morning . however , the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman say the memo be ` ` unsolicited ' ' and that the consultant who write it have not be work for the government . she accuse Deloitte of ` ` tout for business ' ' and criticise both the Times and the BBC for the way in which they report the story . Iain Duncan Smith , a former work and pension secretary , say that Deloitte should be strip of government contract . Senior Eurosceptic Conservative MP say the story be ` ` patent nonsense ' ' and suggest the release of the document be part of a plot by Remain campaigner to frustrate Brexit . after a day of criticism Deloitte release a statement admit that the memo be ` ` not commission by the Cabinet Office ' ' and be ` ` conduct without access to no @card@ or input from other government department ' ' . it say that the memo , which be write on Nov @card@ by Keith Leslie , apartner at Deloitte , have be intend for an ` ` internal audience ' ' . Mr Duncan Smith say : ` ` it ' S the same people try every device they can to tell the world it ' S all miserable and too difficult . ` ` this non-commissioned report be utterly bogus , glean from newspaper cutting . the government do n't need any more civil servant . I do n't think this be an accident . they be determine to do as much damage as possible . be n't it time for those people , the institution that be very pro-Remain , to take a step back ? ' ' Eurosceptic Conservative MP highlight a survey carry out by Deloitte during the European Union referendum which claim that Brexit represent the big risk that their company face . David Sproul , the chief executive of Deloitte UK , be a prominent Remain campaigner and sign a letter call for the UK to remain of what the impact of Brexit could be - and its plan to cope with the ' bad case'.Although necessary , this fall considerably short of have a ' government plan for Brexit ' because it have no prioritisation and no link to the overall negotiation strategy . ' ' Mrs May ' S spokesman , however , insist Mr Leslie have not speak to anyone in no @card@ since the Prime Minister enter office . she say he conduct some work for David Cameron ' s government in the immediate aftermath of the referendum . in an unusually frank response , the Downing Street spokesman say : ` ` I struggle to understand why such an unsolicited memo that have no credence can make front page news or indeed the broadcast bulletin in the morning . ' ' a BBC spokesman say : ` ` the early morning bulletin include that the memo report in the Times be prepare by a consultant . as the story develop , our coverage have reflect Downing Street ' S position . ' ' amid the row , a think tank also make claim that Brexit represent an ` ` existential threat ' ' to the operation of some government department , accord to key figure inside and outside Whitehall . the Institute for Government say Brexit preparation would be ` ` unsustainable ' ' unless Philip Hammond use the Autumn Statement to commit more resource .
hard Brexit be a threat to Ulster peace process , Irish warn
a Hard Brexit would endanger the Northern Ireland peace process and be unworkable for the Irish Republic , the country ' s foreign minister warn last night , urge Theresa May to ` ` engage sensitively ' ' with other European state to avoid a destructive Brexit . ` ` the concept of a ' hard ' Brexit , with a return to ' hard ' border be not something that be either desirable or workable from our perspective , ' ' Charlie Flanagan tell the Daily Telegraph . he add that the return of a hard border with Northern Ireland threaten to undermine @card@ year of normalisation since the end of the Troubles that see @card@ border crossing per day . ` ` the peace dividend of the ' invisible border ' can not be underestimate , ' ' he say . speak ahead of an all-Ireland Brexit conference in Dublin today , Mr Flanagan caution Britain against take a confrontational approach . ` ` a willingness to engage sensitively with partner , and try to understand their perspective be always helpful in find a manageable solution , ' ' he say . his remark will be take as a thinly veil criticism of Mrs May ' s speech to the Tory Party conference last month , which rile leader across Europe . however , Mr Flanagan , who also hold the trade portfolio , indicate that Ireland be not take the speech at face value , advise that no one ` ` should read too much ' ' into the speech , which delight Brexiteers by promise an end to free movement . whilst decline to comment on possible UK demand until the Prime Minister have formally set out her stall in her Article @card@ letter next year , Mr Flanagan say that any British move that create tariff or ` ` any other trade restriction ' ' would be ` ` unwelcome ' ' to Dublin . some £1.2 billion worth of trade pass between the UK and Ireland each week and official fear that a hard Brexit would lead to job loss and fall tax receipt . the @card@ per cent fall in the pound have already cause business closure among UK-dependent Irish agricultural exporter . among the big fear be that UK demand to control immigration from continental Europe will lead to the end of the Common Travel Area that have allow British and Irish citizen to move freely between the two country since @card@ .
Scotland Davidson : Brexit may take decade just like devolution ; Independence ' bandwagon ' have go backwards
ruth Davidson yesterday warn that Britain ' s exit from the European Union could take decade to resolve as another opinion poll show no surge in support for Scottish independence . the Scottish Conservative leader compare the Brexit negotiation to the devolution process , which she say start with a referendum in @card@ and be still continue this year with the transfer to Holyrood of new tax and welfare power . in a speech at the European Council on Foreign Relations in London , she argue this lengthy process be a ` ` good parallel ' ' for Brexit and say the deal strike with the EU could still be change after the two-year Article @card@ process to leave be complete . Ms Davidson also announce a new expert panel to advise her on Brexit and argue that what appear to be an independence ` ` bandwagon ' ' in the wake of June ' s EU referendum have since go backwards . her analysis be bear out by another opinion poll today , show continued on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ @card@ per cent of Scot be oppose to independence and @card@ per cent support it , with @card@ per cent unsure . kantar TNS , which conduct the survey between Aug @card@ and Sept @card@ , say the finding show ` ` little evidence ' ' of any growth of support for separation . when the ` ` do n't know ' ' be remove , support for independence be at @card@ per cent and opposition @card@ per cent . although this be marginally high than the @card@ per cent the nationalist receive in the @card@ referendum , the pollster say this be not statistically significant . refer to the Scottish Parliament , Ms Davidson say : ` ` when it be first set up in @card@ , it become a cliché to declare that this be a ' process not an event ' . the point be , while power be be transfer from London to Edinburgh in the form of a Bill , devolution would take time and would evolve . ` ` and indeed it have : later this year , we will adopt tax and welfare power than be never even conceive when devolution be first propose . the legal framework be one thing . the change in political culture be another . I believe the same thing will be true of Brexit . ' ' the Tory leader also defend the UK Government against ` ` unfair ' ' criticism that it have fail to clarify what Brexit mean , argue it be right that Theresa May do not want to ` ` limit her option ' ' ahead of talk with Brussels . Ms Davidson say politician who back the Remain campaign have a duty to seek out opportunity for Scotland in area such as fishing or farming . ` ` we should take our time in order to negotiate a bundle of bespoke agreement which be tailor to our national interest ' ' she say . Ms Davidson say Nicola Sturgeon have ` ` get it wrong ' ' in the aftermath of the referendum by declare independence be ` ` highly likely ' ' and her hope of a snap rerun of the @card@ vote have be ` ` park in a lay-by ' ' in the face of referendum fatigue . the Scottish Tory leader ' s new advisory panel include Gavin Hewitt , the former chief executive of the Scotch Whisky Association , as well as Sir Iain McMillan , the former director of CBI Scotland . Mike Russell , the SNP ' s Brexit negotiation minister , accuse Ms Davidson of a ` ` sell-out of enormous proportion ' ' after she warn of the danger of leave the EU during the referendum campaign . he say : ` ` Scotland ' S Tory be act as a smoke screen for a UK Tory government that can not answer a single question about what Brexit mean and who be put job , investment and Scotland ' s economy at risk . ' '
dishonesty on both side of the debate be harm Brexit ' s chance ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - I be disappoint to read that the Brexit share of the poll be fall ( report , May @card@ ) . the leave campaign be not get its message across . many people , particularly the young generation , who have never know Britain outside the EU , believe that Brexit would leave us virtually cut off from Europe , and that even visit would be difficult . in reality we would not notice much difference - we already need passport and different currency . study in Europe be perfectly possible before we join the EU . unfortunately , the leave campaign be exaggerate the money that would be save by leave . we would not save £350 million a week , as some of that money come back to us . however , we would be free to spend the money as we wish . a promise to continue provide support to those who currently rely on EU funding ( such as farmer and scientific researcher ) would be helpful . Richard Unwin Amport , Hampshire Sir - it be not surprising that the poll suggest a fall in support for Brexit among the old generation . the British be cautious by nature and many will succumb to the fear tactic of the Remain campaign . only voter with determination , vision and courage - and who believe in our country - will do the right thing . Gerry Walsh South Rauceby , Lincolnshire Sir - a memorable soundbite for the leave campaign ( Letters , May @card@ ) might be ` ` SOS - save our sovereignty ' ' . a Z Miller Edgware , Middlesex Sir - I think the leave campaign might regain some lose ground if it be to replace the word Brexit with Brescape . Glenn Mitchell London SW16 . sir - I have help to run several street stall for the leave campaign in our area , and the result of our straw poll show a consistent support for Brexit of over @card@ per cent . the most passionate and committed supporter be of the old generation . Colin Bullen Tonbridge , Kent Sir - I have ask relative , friend and acquaintance , but nobody know anyone who have ever be poll , at any time , about anything . our age range be @card@ to @card@ . who be be poll ? Dr Ian Perry Shaftesbury , Dorset Sir - David Cameron ' s late scare tactic be to predict that holiday will cost hundred of pound more if Britain vote to leave the EU . this wo n't be true if people choose to take their holiday in Britain . Mr Cameron go to Cornwall , where the sun shine , the beach be clean , accommodation be reasonably price and everyone speak English . what could be good than Brexit and a Cornish holiday ? Mick Ferrie Mawnan Smith , Cornwall
we must seize the opportunity of Brexit , not kow-tow to a Davos elite
as the week roll by , the evidence be pile up that the UK economy be do really rather well . last week ' S publish economic statistic include a rise of @card@ in employment in three month , record VAT receipt and growth of GDP in Q4 of 0.5pc , slightly fast than in the previous quarter and above expectation . last week Lord O'Neill , a former Treasury minister and prominent Remainer , admit that the economy have do a lot well than expect . nevertheless , he suggest that it have be bolster by the dynamic performance of the North West , doubtless help by the ` ` Northern Powerhouse ' ' project , drive by George Osborne , the former chancellor , aid and abet by none other than one Lord O'Neill - and , perhaps more importantly , by the strength of the world economy . the UK would be do even good than it be , he say , if we have not vote to leave the EU . this have become the Remainers ' lament . unsurprisingly so , because it have the merit of be unfalsifiable . we do not know what would have happen without the Brexit vote . the idea have some superficial support from the fact that the UK have slip down the international growth league . whereas we use to be at the top of the G7 , recently we have surpass only Italy and Japan . some people have suggest that this change in ranking give at least a crude measure of the size of the Brexit effect . but the key word here be ` ` crude ' ' . the UK ' s relative position before the vote be unsustainable , since it rely upon rapid growth of domestic demand , lead by consumer spending , in advance of what be occur in our major market overseas . hence the large and grow current account deficit . moreover , when you look at the component of GDP , it be difficult to find convincing evidence of a pure Brexit effect . investment spending be supposedly go to collapse . it do n't . indeed , in @card@ the growth of investment be fast than it have be in @card@ . true , the growth of consumer ' expenditure fall back from 3pc in @card@ to 1.5pc last year . but there be no mystery about why this happen . real income be squeeze by the rise of inflation which derive from the fall of the pound . admittedly , Brexit be widely credit as the trigger for this , but the pound have be overvalue for year , as manifest in a yawn current account deficit . we desperately need a weak pound in order to rebalance the UK economy . and the rebalance have begin , with net export now boost GDP . as this effect build up and the squeeze on consumer abate , while the cyclical burst currently enjoy in the eurozone subside , there be every chance that the UK will rise in the league table again - and this time on a more sustainable basis . nevertheless , official forecaster be still envelop by gloom . Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be evidently angle for a minimal Brexit , doubtless support by the expert in the Treasury who fear some sort of catastrophe from a full Brexit . but should we take any notice of what they be say ? it be worth recall that in @card@ the treasury say : ` ` the analysis in this document come to a clear central conclusion : a vote to leave would represent an immediate and profound shock to our economy . that shock would push our economy into a recession and lead to an increase in unemployment of around @card@ , GDP would be 3.6pc small ... compare with a vote to remain . ' ' to be fair , it do forecast a major fall in the pound but it appear to view this as a bad thing . to recognise the range of possible outcome , the Treasury also present an alternative prospect , as follow : ` ` in this severe scenario , GDP would be 6pc small , there would be a deep recession , and the number of people make unemployed would rise by around @card@ compare with a vote to remain . ' ' curiously , there be n't an upside scenario . Funny that . oh well , good luck next time ! this ingrained pessimism apparently extend to big business . Jeremy Warner , my colleague , have report that at Davos last week many corporate leader be nonplus at the idea that Brexit Britain could believe that it be embrace free trade while walk away from the large free trade area in the world . let me clarify this issue for them . the EU be not a free trade area ; it be a customs union . this mean that although it bring free trade between its member , it inhibit trade between member and country outside the union through the imposition of tariff and other restriction , except where there be a free-trade agreement ( FTA ) . and , lest they have somehow miss this point , let me emphasise that the EU do not have many significant FTAs . the reason why it be so bad at trade policy be the same as the reason why it be bad at just about everything else : manage its own budget , agricultural policy , fishery policy , immigration policy and the common currency . it be a profoundly dysfunctional entity . accordingly , when we leave the EU we can move towards free trade by either enter FTAs with other country , include with the EU , or by unilaterally drop our tariff and other trade restriction . for the government to kow-tow to the leader of big business and their lobby group in myopic pursuit of their perceive self-interest would be a total dereliction of duty . the government must raise its sight . it keep bang on about the need to increase productivity . the good way to achieve this would be to unleash great competition , a refashion regulatory regime and free trade as a result of Brexit . this can not be achieve by seek regulatory alignment with the EU and forego the right to forge our own trade policy . the government also keep bang on about the need to boost investment in the UK . it should heed its own advice by invest in a full Brexit . Roger Bootle be chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com ' The EU be not a free trade area ; it inhibit trade between member and country outside the union through the imposition of tariff '
schoolboy excuse be not enough , Mr Davis ; Sketch
David Davis and the mystery of the missing homework : the story so far . Dec @card@ , @card@ : Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , tell MP he ' s ` ` in the midst of carry out about @card@ set of analysis ' ' on the impact of Brexit on different sector of the economy . June @card@ , @card@ : Mr Davis tell the BBC : ` ` we ' ve get @card@ , nearly @card@ sectoral analysis already do . ' ' Oct @card@ , @card@ : Mr Davis tell MP that these analysis offer ` ` excruciating detail ' ' . Nov @card@ , @card@ : MP vote for Mr Davis to hand over the analysis , so they can be examine by the Brexit select committee . in response , Mr Davis say that , ` ` as we have make clear ' ' , it be ` ` not the case ' ' that these analysis ` ` exist ' ' . he do , he say , have ` ` a range of document ' ' , but MP will need to give him ` ` time ' ' to ` ` bring together this information in a way that be accessible ' ' . so , to recap : Mr Davis both have and have n't produce almost @card@ report , and each one be simultaneously detailed , sketchy , and non-existent . welcome to Schrödinger ' S government . on Monday , a tranche of document be finally deliver to the Brexit select committee . they be , however , heavily redact . yesterday , Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , demand that Mr Davis come to the Commons to explain himself . yet , to outcry from Labour ( ` ` WHERE be HE ? ` ` ) , he do n't appear . instead Robin Walker , an anxiouslooking young squirrel of a junior minister , be send to speak on his boss ' S behalf . ` ` we be clear from the start that the document do not exist in the form request , ' ' pipe Mr Walker , gamely . ` ` indeed , there have be some misunderstanding about what the sectoral analysis actually be ... ' ' if any schoolboy be watch , they ' ll have pick up some useful tip . ` ` Jenkins ! where be your book report ? it be due in last Friday . you have read the book , have n't you ? ' ' ` ` as I have make clear from the start , Sir , my report do not exist in the form request . I have conduct a wide range of analysis of the blurb on the back of the book , and the author ' s Wikipedia page , but it will take time to collate and bring together this information in a way that be accessible . ' ' the Commons be begin to boil . the government , snap Sir Keir , lack ` ` transparency and accountability ' ' . but it be n't only Remainers who complain . Jacob Rees-Mogg ( Con , N Somerset ) and Philip Hollobone ( Con , Kettering ) - both Brexiteers - say that if the government have n't want to hand over the information in full , it should have amend the motion require this . it have n't . a succession of MP ask John Bercow , the Speaker , whether Mr Davis be guilty of contempt of Parliament . Mr Bercow turn to Mr Walker , and tell him to clear Mr Davis ' S diary : he would be question by the select committee ` ` very soon indeed ' ' . it sound as though Mr Davis will need to do some serious prep . I hope the dog do n't eat it .
EU threat to City risk new crisis ; Stock market say the global economy will suffer if London be strip of financial role the path to Brexit firm need clarity or they will leave , say City grandee
France and Germany risk start a new financial crisis if they try to use Brexit to dismantle the London-based heart of the global economy ` ` just to make a political point ' ' , one of the City ' s most senior figure warn today . Xavier Rolet , the chief executive of the London Stock Exchange Group , say European leader who demand tighter global regulation after the @card@ financial crisis be now threaten to ` ` fragment ' ' those same standard to punish Britain for Brexit . write in the Daily Telegraph , Mr Rolet call on the Bank of England and regulatory body in Europe to speed up talk to ensure the carefully construct system of global regulation develop to stop unexpected risk emerge do not collapse . he call for an ` ` update ' ' on the progress of these talk to reassure international financial firm . the head of the stock market use today ' s article to welcome Theresa May ' s call for a transition period to give business certainty but say that the detail must be agree before the end of the year . British job will begin relocate abroad next year if the uncertainty continue , he warn . Mr Rolet intervene as it emerge last night that Germany be secretly work on proposal for a ` ` comprehensive free trade accord ' ' with Britain . there be also evidence that Brussels be prepare to begin talk within the European union over what trade discussion may look like , but it will not agree to formal negotiation beginning . Mrs May will travel to Brussels tomorrow for a crucial meeting with EU leader who be under intense pressure to begin trade talk amid fear over the impact on the global economy cause by the diplomatic stand-off . with Brexit talk deadlock , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , accuse Brussels yesterday of use time pressure to see if ` ` they can get more money out of us ' ' . his counterpart , Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , hit back by blame Britain for the delay , say Mrs May ' s decision to call the snap election have cost time . Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , also appear to hand European leader a boost by say that a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit be ` ` unthinkable ' ' - despite Mrs May ' S claim to the contrary . Mr Rolet will today address a crossparty group of MP and business leader when he give a speech on Brexit in the palace of Westminster . he will make a direct appeal to European leader not to make ` ` protectionist ' ' move to strip London of its status as a clearing house for trade carry out in euros - a move first moot by France ' S then-president François Hollande within day of the EU referendum . London have be the global centre for clearing - in which financial trade be carry out through a third party - since the G20 demand well financial regulation in @card@ . leader include Angela Merkel be among the architect of the system that put London at the heart of the clearing system , which make it far easy for regulator to monitor million of daily trade through a centralise system . it also save company billion of pound by pool risk . Mrs Merkel say at the time that ` ` we have to make sure we learn the lesson of the crisis and make sure it be not repeated ' ' . Mr Rolet say take back euro trading into the eurozone would ` ` increase systemic financial risk ' ' because ` ` the global monitoring of risk would be impair and that risk more heavily concentrated ' ' . he add : ` ` to those who want to dismantle rather than build on a system of global regulatory standard that protect taxpayer and reduce the cost of capital we say : do not willingly diminish systemically important global financial market infrastructure just to make a political point . ' ' Mr Rolet say it be ` ` imperative ' ' firm be give certainty on the Brexit implementation phase so they can plan ahead . Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank of England , tell MP yesterday that Europe ' s financial stability would take a big hit than Britain ' S in the event of a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit .
Scotland Madness to cut EU trade , say Hammond
Philip Hammond have say it would be ` ` madness ' ' not to seek ` ` the close possible arrangement ' ' with the EU in comment that appear to widen the gulf between the Chancellor and Theresa May over Brexit . Mr Hammond , who fly to Hamburg with the Prime Minister for the G20 summit , suggest that leave the EU be a ` ` political argument ' ' and stress that the EU ` ` will remain our large trading partner ' ' . his comment jar with Downing Street ' s outward-looking trade agenda and come as Mrs May use the G20 to talk trade with leader of the world ' S three big economy : President Trump , President Xi Jinping of China and President Shinzo Abe of Japan . today she will hold a one-to-one meeting with Mr Trump . Mr Hammond , a former Remain campaigner who favour a soft Brexit than Mrs May , appear to prioritise the importance of keep strong trading link with the EU yesterday without mention other major nation . he say those who vote , like him , to remain in the EU ` ` want to see a Brexit that look sensible to them ' ' . he add that they want ` ` a Brexit that be focus on protect job , business , prosperity , trade , a Brexit that recover sovereignty for the UK but also recognise the reality that ... the EU will remain our large trading partner and continue on Page @card@
no Brexit deal ' chaos for aerospace industry '
growth in Britain ' s aerospace indus­ try , the world ' s second large , will be hurt by failure to secure a good Brexit deal , sector chief have warn . the prospect of Britain crash out of the European union in @card@ have not negotiate an exit deal be de­ scribe as ` ` chaos ' ' and ` ` the bad pos­ sible outcome ' ' by trade body ADS . launch its annual assessment of the industry , ADS say UK aerospace company ' combined turnover rise by 8pc last year to £31.8bn , place Britain behind only the US . almost 90pc of demand be from overseas , make the sector one of the UK ' s big good exporter . the ind­ ustry employ @card@ people directly , mostly in highly skilled and well­paid job , with a further @card@ position support by aerospace company . Paul Everitt , chief executive of ADS , say the election present an opportu­ nity for politician to rethink their approach to Brexit negotiation . ` ` last week the country signal it want a more collaborative approach , ' ' he say . ` ` no deal be the bad possible outcome for the UK and Europe . in no way shape or form be it acceptable . find the good agreement will require compro­mise and pragmatic decision by the UK and its European partner . ' ' ADS want Britain to remain within the single market , maintain free move­ ment of good and staff , and to a retain a voice in regulation of the sector . Aerospace be uniquely expose to Brexit . international agreement mean it be largely exempt from trade tariff likely to be impose on other sector if Britain leave the EU without a deal . although no entire aircraft be build in the UK , British company be ex­ perts in certain area and component . for example Rolls­Royce ' s jet engine and the wing for Airbus ' S airliner be design and build at base in Bristol and Broughton , North Wales . should a hard Brexit mean custom border be impose , it will most likely result in an increase in cost from extra red tape , as company will have to track component and their origin at a level of detail not previously see . control on immigration could also hamper the industry because of a skill shortage for the specialise work , Mr Everitt say . the industry be likely to feel the pain of a hard Brexit on a long­ term basis as company decide against base new project in the UK . ` ` we be an industry that work on a fairly long­ term cycle , ' ' Mr Everitt say . ` ` it be likely to be an incremental effect feel in @card@ to @card@ year . ' ' last week Fabrice Brégier , chief operate officer of Airbus , which employ about @card@ staff in the UK , say if there be an unfavourable Brexit deal , the plane maker would find it ` ` very easy to have a new plant some­ where in the world for new project ' ' . £31.8bn last year ' s combined turnover of UK aerospace company , a rise of 8pc , accord to ADS
city leader add commitment to stay in London
business and banking leader have offer further commitment to the UK post- Brexit , as manager report growth in British business have fall to a four-year low . Google executive Matt Brittin and Barclays chairman John McFarlane praise the UK ' s expertise in technology and financial service respectively , say this give business a reason to stay here . it come as just 39pc of UK firm survey by the Chartered Management Institute say they experience growth follow June ' S referendum , the low figure since @card@ . of the @card@ manager survey , 65pc be pessimistic about the economy over the next @card@ month while 49pc expect Brexit will weigh on growth over the next three to five year . some 35pc also say they lack confidence in ` ` UK leadership and management ' s ability to capitalise on post-Brexit opportunity ' ' . but only 25pc be pessimistic about prospect for their own business over the next year , in line with level record over the past year . Barclays ' chairman Mr McFarlane meanwhile tell the BBC Radio @card@ today programme that it make sense for both Britain and the EU that certain service stay in the City of London after Brexit . fund manager Helena Morrissey add : ` ` the City be successful long before the EU be create , and it have all the potential to be successful for decade if not century to come . we have have people before flex their muscle and say they ' re out of here and then realise , actually , London be the place to be . ' '
Brexit be an opportunity to set migration level that work for everyone ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Warnings from business about the damaging effect of limit immigration be www.alarmist.No one have make the presumption that Brexit will lead to a complete end to immigration . what Brexit should do be ensure that those people from other country who wish to work here do so after proper entry control be apply . that be a very positive step to take for business , and one which should benefit the country immensely . Mick Ferrie Mawnan Smith , Cornwall Sir - Angela Merkel say that if an exception be make for Britain over freedom of movement it would put that fundamental EU principle in danger - because everyone would want the same exception ( report , November @card@ ) . but if everyone would want the same exception , what support can there be in the EU for the principle in the first place ? and if the principle have so little support , why not abandon it ? if the principle be abandon , the reason why many vote for Brexit would disappear , and there would be a majority for stay in the EU.Mike Lightfoot Northallerton , North Yorkshire Sir - it seem that many would like Theresa May - unilaterally and well in advance of formal negotiation - to assure European live and work in Britain that they will be able to carry on do so after Brexit . I disagree . act without a similar assurance from the EU place British expats live in EU country in a more precarious position - and remove a lever by which we can secure right for them . to secure these right later may involve a price we would much prefer not to have to pay.Ralph Griffiths New Malden , Surrey Sir - Justice Hale , a Supreme Court judge , be correct that referendum be not legally binding ( report , November @card@ ) but she forget that they be electorally bind . she be also wrong about right be automatically lose . it be a peculiarity of English law that , once a right be give , it can only be remove by legislation , not the repeal of legislation . a right be a matter of common law , even when grant by legislation , and common law can only be amend by legislation.Bozidar Zabavnik London W12 Sir - Reis Mitchell ( Letters , November @card@ ) suggest that it would be a sad reflection on our democracy if a number of MP vote to invoke Article @card@ purely in order to save their job . surely it would be a fine example of democracy if , by voting for Brexit , they put their view aside in order to follow the wish of their constituent . Alistair Mackay Dunoon , Argyllshire Sir - the Brexit formula be simple : stop pay and stop obeying.Sandy Pratt Dormansland , Surrey
Scotland Cabinet at loggerhead over life after the EU ; Ministers express their frustration as Prime Minister disallow talk over Britain ' s ' end state '
cabinet tension over Brexit emerge last night after Philip Hammond disclose that Theresa May have not allow her minister to discuss the ` ` end state ' ' of life beyond the EU . source have express ` ` frustration ' ' over Brexit negotiation , with trade talk with the EU possibly just day away . the Chancellor say that senior minister have only hold ` ` general discussion ' ' about Britain ' s post-Brexit relationship with the EU but insist it would be ` ` premature ' ' to hammer out the government ' S desire destination before the second phase of negotiation . he also clash with Downing Street over the so-called Brexit divorce bill , tell MP that Britain would pay regardless of the outcome of the negotiation - a position that have not be support by Downing Street . Mr Hammond ' s admission that the Brexit ` ` end state ' ' have not be discuss come during an appearance before the Treasury Select Committee . he tell MP : ` ` that be something that will be do first in the sub-committee that have be constitute to deal with this issue and of course logically that will happen once we have confirmation that we have reach sufficient progress and that we be go to begin the phase two negotiation with the EU @card@ . ` ` we be not yet at that stage and it would have be premature to have that discussion . ' ' Downing Street say Cabinet will discuss the Brexit ` ` end state ' ' before the end of the year . but another Cabinet source say : ` ` there be voice from both the leave and Remain supporter in the Cabinet that would welcome the chance to discuss the end state before we move onto the next phase . there be frustration that that still have n't take place . ' ' Mr Hammond be also ask by the committee whether settle the divorce bill depend on the UK and Brussels strike a trade agreement . he reply : ` ` nothing be agree until everything be agree ... but I find it inconceivable that we as a nation would be walk away from an obligation that we recognise as an obligation . ` ` that be just not a credible scenario . that ' S not the kind of country we be and frankly it would not make us a credible partner for future international agreement . ' ' the Prime Minister ' S spokesman say that negotiation have be take place ` ` in the context of build a future relationship ' ' with Brussels but do not go as far as Mr Hammond , add that ` ` nothing be agree until everything be agree and that apply to any financial settlement ' ' . Mr Hammond ' S comment appear to contradict Liz Truss , the Chief Secretary to the Treasury , who tell MP on Nov @card@ that ` ` any settlement that we make be contingent on us secure a suitable outcome ' ' . a draft copy of the withdrawal agreement state that Britain would pay no upfront Brexit bill but would have to pay for ` ` ongoing liability ' ' over the decade as they arise , accord to the Politico website .
Labour MP jeer Field for claim their constituent want to leave EU ; Brexit debate ; Veteran heckle by own party as first of eight Brexit session lay bare division in both main party
labour MP turn on their veteran colleague Frank Field in the House of Commons yesterday for dare to suggest that voter in the party ' s electoral heartland support Brexit . Mr Field be heckle by Labour MP as he tell them they ` ` need educate ' ' to accept that the majority of their constituent vote to leave the European Union . division in both the Labour and Conservative party be lay bare as MP begin the first of eight session in the commons about the European Union ( Withdrawal ) Bill which formally write into British law thousand of Brussels regulation after the UK have leave the EU . Mr Field , the Labour MP for Birkenhead , say that as a Brexiteer - while he be back by most member of the public - he be not support by most Labour MP . to jeer and catcall from fellow Labour MP , he say : ` ` I be support by people largely whose constituent agree with me and not their view . and how they deal with that be not my problem . I agree it be a difficult problem . ` ` generally speak , the large the Labour majority in a general election - and the one before that and the one before that - the more likely they be to vote leave . labour voter - the large the majority generally speak - the more clearly they speak about Brexit . ' ' as Labour MP react with fury , and try to interrupt , Mr Field , a former minister in Tony Blair ' S government , say it be the ` ` Labour side that need educate as to where Labour voter be ' ' . during the debate Sir Bill Cash , the veteran Tory chairman of the EU scrutiny committee , say million of people have die for the freedom offer by Brexit . he say : ` ` we have just have Remembrance Day . I just want people to reflect on the fact that those million of people who die in those two world war die for a reason - it be to do with sustain the freedom of democracy in this House . ` ` my own father be kill in Normandy fight for this country ... people understand the real reason why self-government be so important . the European Communities Act be the great power grab since Oliver Cromwell . ' ' Kenneth Clarke , the pro-EU former Tory chancellor , win cheer from Labour and SNP MP when he declare he be now the ` ` rebel ' ' in the Tory party . he say : ` ` he [ Bill Cash ] now represent orthodoxy , party loyalty . I ' m the rebel . I espouse the policy that the Conservative Party have follow for the @card@ year of my membership of it until we have a referendum @card@ month ago . ' ' Mr Clarke say that amend Brexit legislation to include Britain ' s exit date from the European Union could be ` ` positively harmful to the national interest ' ' and be ` ` ridiculous and unnecessary ' ' . Dominic Grieve , the former attorney general who be lead a group of Tory MP who want to amend the Bill , say Brexit be a ` ` great and historic error ' ' and a ` ` process of national self-mutilation ' ' . and he attack the decision by Theresa May , the Prime Minister , last week to back a ` ` mad amendment ' ' to the Bill to set a time and date when the UK leave the EU . Mr Grieve , who himself have table @card@ change to the Bill , say the amendment have not be discuss with other Cabinet minister say it be table ` ` without any collective decision-making in government at all ' ' . it have also be ` ` accompany with blood-curdling threat that anybody who might stand in its way be in some way betray the country ' S destiny and mission . I be afraid I be just not prepare to go along with that . ' ' Anna Soubry , another pro-EU MP , reiterate her determination to rebel : ` ` the date go into the Bill have really upset a lot of really top-quality backbench Conservative MP . ` ` there be some people there who have never rebel and they be now talk , for the first time ever , of rebel . ' ' Ms Soubry also call Bernard Jenkin , a senior Tory MP who back Brexit , a ` ` disgrace ' ' when he say MP who vote to trigger Article @card@ but do not back a leave date and time ` ` be open to the charge that they do not want us to leave ' ' the EU . speak for the government , Steve Baker , a Brexit department minister , say it be ` ` an essential bill in the national interest which will ensure that whatever the outcome of the negotiation the statute book can continue function . ` ` the amendment would have the consequence of destroy this Bill ' s capacity to function in the event a withdrawal agreement be not conclude , ' he say . ` ` and let me be clear , as a consequence of these amendment the bill ' s crucial provision could not come into effect until a second act be pass . ` ` the consequence would be legal chaos in the event that the second act be not pass before March @card@ @card@ . ' ' Rebel MP do they follow their constituent ' wish ? ? Heidi Allen , @card@ intake Voted : remain how South Cambridgeshire vote : remain with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Anna Soubry , former minister Voted : remain how Broxtowe vote : leave with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Nicky Morgan , former education secretary Voted : remain how Loughborough vote : leave with @card@ vote , ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Dominic Grieve , former attorney general Voted : remain how Beaconsfield vote : remain with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Kenneth Clarke , ex-chancellor Voted : remain how Rushcliffe vote : remain with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted against Article @card@ Bill ? Stephen Hammond Voted : remain how Wimbledon vote : remain with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Bob Neill , former justice minister Voted : remain how Bromley vote : remain with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Jeremy Lefroy Voted : remain how Stafford vote : leave with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Oliver Heald , former solicitor general Voted : remain how North East Hertfordshire vote : leave with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Vicky Ford , @card@ intake Voted : remain how Chelmsford vote : leave with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Tom Tugendhat , chairman of the foreign affair select committee Voted : remain how Tonbridge and Malling vote : leave with @card@ ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Jonathan Djanogly , former junior minister Voted : remain how Huntingdon vote : leave by @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Sarah Wollaston , chair of liaison committee Voted : remain how Totnes vote : leave with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Paul Masterton , @card@ intake Voted : remain how East Renfrewshire vote : remain with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ? Antoinette Sandbach , @card@ intake Voted : remain how Eddisbury vote : leave with @card@ vote ( @card@ % ) Voted for Article @card@ Bill ' I be support by people largely whose constituent agree with me and not their view . and how they deal with that be not my problem '
let me be clear : Brexit be happen on Friday , March @card@ @card@ , at 11pm ; Comment
the government have this week publish a cross-party-backed amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill which put on the face of the Bill the date of our departure from the European Union . let no one doubt our determination or question our resolve , Brexit be happen . it will be there in black and white on the front page of this historic piece of legislation : the United Kingdom will be leave the EU on March @card@ @card@ at 11pm GMT . the EU Withdrawal Bill be the single most significant piece of legislation in this Parliament because it be fundamental to deliver a smooth and orderly Brexit . first , the Bill will repeal the European Communities Act from our statute book . in our future relationship - the deep and special partnership I want to see - our law will once again be make in Westminster , not in Brussels ; and the judge interpret those law will sit in court in our country , not in Luxembourg . second , this Bill will convert the body of existing EU law into British law . this provide the great possible clarity and certainty for all business and family across the country from the very moment we leave the EU . it say that from the outset , the same rule and law that apply to them before Brexit will apply to them after Brexit - and that any change we want to make in the law will be subject first to due scrutiny and proper parliamentary debate in Westminster . so as this Bill head into committee stage next week , I have a very clear view about the approach this government will take . whether people vote Remain or leave , I believe that what most people want now be for us to come together and negotiate the well possible Brexit deal for our country ' S future . so it be right that as we seek to bring our country together , member on all side should come together in scrutinise this Bill . that parliamentary process be important and I be clear that where member of Parliament think they can improve the Bill , this government will listen to them . indeed , this amendment to put the date of our departure on the face of the bill be itself a great example of that - come as it do with cross-party backing . but I be just as clear of this : we will not tolerate attempt from any quarter to use the process of amendment to this bill as a mechanism to try to block the democratic wish of the British people by attempt to slow down or stop our departure from the European Union . the British people have be clear . Parliament itself vote for Article @card@ - and for this bill at its second reading . we be leave the European Union on March @card@ @card@ . it will be vital for the prosperity and security of our nation to secure the well possible Brexit for our country ' S future . as Prime Minister , that be precisely what I be determine to do .
work with the opposition ? what an extraordinary notion ... ; Brussels leak ; Sketch
the House of Commons be just settle down to another day ' s fruitless bickering about Brexit , when someone venture an unexpected suggestion : what if , instead of sniping at each other , everyone try work ... together ? ` ` damage will be cause if we do n't make progress soon , ' ' explain Kenneth Clarke , the veteran Tory MP for Rushcliffe . ` ` so have [ the Prime Minister ] consider ask some trust minister to make approach to lead member of the opposition party , so that in the national interest we can have a consensus in Parliament on the outline of a transition deal ? ' ' the Commons scratch its collective head . approach political opponent ? consensus ? national interest ? what an extraordinary notion . politely , Theresa May decline . her recent speech in Florence , she assure Mr Clarke , have give EU leader all the ` ` clarity ' ' they need . Mr Clarke look unconvinced . for all his good intention , though , an MP of his experience must appreciate that talk between the Tories and Labour would n't necessarily achieve the consensus he dream of - especially when it come to Brexit . I think we can imagine roughly how they would go . Tories : ` ` hello , Labour . first of all , just so we ' re clear , because we ' ve be wonder for a while now : what exactly do you want from Brexit ? ' ' Labour : ` ` well , we certainly do n't want what you want ! ' ' Tories : ` ` Very possibly . but what do you want ? ' ' Labour : ` ` well ... not what you want , that ' S for sure ! ' ' Tories : ` ` no doubt . but could you possibly be a bit more specific ? ' ' Pause . labour : ` ` we want a good Brexit . unlike you , who want a bad Brexit ! ' ' Tories : ` ` Very well . how much money would you offer the EU ? ' ' Labour : ` ` Simple . we would offer the right amount . ' ' Tories : ` ` of course . and how much be the right amount , precisely ? ' ' Labour : ` ` not too much . ' ' Tories : ` ` no . ' ' Labour : ` ` but also , not too little . ' ' Tories : ` ` Quite . so , just out of interest , what would it be , this amount that be not too much but simultaneously not too little ? ' ' Labour : ` ` as we have already make perfectly clear : we would offer the right amount . the right amount exactly - and not a penny more . unlike you Tory - who keep get the amount completely wrong ! ' ' Tories : ` ` thank you . would it be grossly unfair to suggest that , for all your criticism of the government ' s negotiate strategy , you actually have n't a clue how you would do any good in our position , and be privately thank the Lord that you do n't win the election , otherwise Brexit would be destroy your party in much the same way that it ' S destroy ours ? ' ' Labour : ` ` typical Tory . we come here for constructive cross-party discussion , and you immediately resort to childish personal abuse . we ' re leaving ! ' '
Scotland give me a deal to defend , May implore EU
Theresa May have appeal to EU leader to give her a deal that she can ` ` defend ' ' to the British people as she reject their demand to accept a huge Brexit divorce bill . the Prime Minister say at a dinner in Brussels last night that there be a ` ` clear and urgent imperative ' ' for the EU to break the Brexit deadlock and move on to trade talk . a succession of EU leader tell Mrs May that she must make a clear commitment to pay a Brexit divorce bill if she want talk to progress . Mrs May reject demand by lead figure in the leave campaign to declare formally that she be prepare to walk away from the EU if talk do not progress . she instead call for ` ` joint effort and endeavour ' ' and for negotiation to be conduct in a new spirit so that Britain and the EU can ` ` move forward together ' ' . a senior government official acknowledge , however , that she be ` ` work against a difficult political backdrop ' ' amid grow call for her to walk away without a deal . Mrs May say : ` ` both side have agree subsequent round will be conduct in a new spirit . there be increasingly a sense that we must work together to an outcome we can stand behind and defend to our people . ' ' Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany say earlier that there be ` ` encouraging ' ' sign of progress in Brexit negotiation and suggest there could be a breakthrough in December . however , Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister and one of Britain ' s strong ally in Europe , reveal that he have personally appeal to Mrs May for more clarity on the Brexit divorce bill . ` ` as long as that be not happen I do n't see how we can move forward , ' ' he say . Michael Fuchs , the vice-chairman of Angela Merkel ' s CDU party , say yesterday that he believe the figure should be between ( Euro ) 60billion and ( Euro ) 100billion ( £54billion and £90billion ) . he say the ( Euro ) 20billion ( £18billion ) the UK have offer ` ` be definitely not enough ' ' . the Daily Telegraph understand there be still fundamental difference over whether the European Court of Justice should be able to guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK . the Prime Minister tell EU leader that she ` ` take stock ' ' in the summer after she ` ` recognise the difficulty the negotiate process be in ' ' . Damian Green , the First Secretary of State , say yesterday that there be no prospect of Britain walk away from Brexit negotiation in ` ` come week ' ' . the Government yesterday confirm that it have delay its flagship Brexit Bill amid concern it would be defeat after Labour and Tory rebel table @card@ amendment . there be mount fear that it will not be enact until after Christmas . report : page @card@ Liam Halligan : page @card@ ' there be increasingly a sense we must work together to an outcome we can stand behind '
Labour ' s Brexit stance do n't go far enough Body : to describe Labour ' s position on Brexit as inconsistent would be to assign it a coherence that it do not merit . at various time in the past year , the party leadership have give the impression that it both support leave the single market and the custom union and stay in them . whenever one senior figure have emphasise the former , another have pop up to say the opposite . now the shadow cabinet have reportedly agree a settle position that Remainers have hail as a ` ` game changer ' ' , but which in essence be very similar to the policy be pursue by the government . Labour want to retain the current trading relationship with the EU for a transitional period , while also curb immigration . this would involve stay in a custom union and observe the rule of the single market for a period of three or four year . the government seek something similar , but on a bespoke basis . what be still not clear be whether this be a position that Labour propose should continue after the transition period that Sir Keir Starmer , the party ' S shadow Brexit secretary , say should be ` ` as short as possible but as long as necessary ' ' . what do that mean ? moreover , the party ' s vision for the future of the country post-Brexit be no more evident today than it have be for the past @card@ month . what would Labour suggest should happen , for instance , if the deal on offer be consider unacceptable to the UK ? be it Labour ' S position now that we stay in the single market come what may ? Labour MP overwhelmingly vote for trigger Article @card@ , and do so on the basis that the UK would leave both the single market and the custom union . both party now agree that there should be a transition period before that happen , though there be difference - include in the Cabinet - over how long that would last . but what we be not hear from Labour be what happen next . talk be due to get under way again this week , with Britain anxious to get on to the next stage . as Peter Foster , our Europe Editor , report today , there be pressure on the Commission negotiator to move the process on to trade by October , rather than wait for a final deal on the amount to be pay by the UK as a price for leave . if Labour have the interest of the country at heart , it should throw its support behind the government ' S effort to begin serious talk about the UK ' S post- Brexit future , rather than cause fresh confusion over Britain ' S intention .
Brexit be for all age ; establish @card@ body : Sir Vince Cable think that , when it come to Brexit , ` ` the old have comprehensively shaft the young ' ' . give that only last month Sir Vince , @card@ , be name leader of the Liberal Democrats ahead of candidate include Jo Swinson , @card@ , he certainly know a little about the subject . but when it come to Brexit he be sadly misguided . certainly a great proportion of old people than young vote leave . but would Sir Vince deny them a say ? to do so would be neither liberal , nor democratic . instead he might ask himself why more old people vote for Brexit . and the obvious answer be that these be the voter who can themselves remember what life be like before Britain hand increase chunk of its sovereignty away to Brussels by join the EU . these be the people who be most look forward to a restoration of such sovereignty , because they have experience of how much it matter , and how profound have be its loss . but that do not mean that they alone will appreciate Britain ' s resurgent independence when it come . as Rishi Sunak and his quartet of fellow , young , Tory MP , point out on the page opposite , re-establish British sovereignty and embrace the opportunity for national renewal that come with it , be a concept that appeal to all age , so the sooner it happen the well .
Blair ' S Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : Sir - you report ( March @card@ ) that ` ` Tony Blair admit he do not realise how many migrant would come to the UK after the EU expanded ' ' . the Blair administration ' s decision to allow immediate free entry to citizen of the @card@ new EU state in @card@ be greet with astonishment in central and eastern Europe . in Germany , Austria , France and Italy , month of public discussion lead to seven-year transitional control - the maximum possible - largely because of pressure from the trade union and left-wing party . by avoid prior debate , Blair make his policy widely unpopular - and the groundwork for Brexit be lay . Dr John Doherty Vienna , Austria Sir - I would not call it lie ; but there seem to be a false memory syndrome go on with Mr Blair ' S protestation . I recall that a former adviser of his , Andrew Neather , confess later that Mr Blair cynically let in thousand ` ` to rub the Tories ' nose in diversity ' ' - the expectation be that the migrant would become Labour voter . David Prole London W1 Sir - why do the broadcast medium assume a moral equivalence between Brexit , Donald Trump and the far-right European political party ? the latter two , and element of those who vote for Brexit , may stand for insularity , protectionism and bigotry , but the concept of Brexit , in my view , mean the exact opposite . to conflate the three element be to betray lazy and bias groupthink . Christine Ward Stone , Staffordshire
Blair ' s Brexit revolt insult voter , say Boris ; Former PM call for broad movement to take place of Corbyn ' S weak Labour and make the case for Europe
Boris Johnson yesterday accuse Tony Blair of ` ` insult the intelligence ' ' of the British public after the former prime minister urge people to ` ` rise up ' ' against Brexit . Mr Blair yesterday attack both the Government and Jeremy Corbyn ' S Labour Party as he warn that the UK be head for ` ` Brexit at any cost ' ' . speak in the same London location where David Cameron announce his plan to hold an EU referendum , Mr Blair say voter have the ` ` right to change their mind ' ' . he pledge to form a cross-party movement to fight Brexit , although he insist he be not try to build a new political party . Mr Blair reserve his strong criticism for Mr Corbyn , say the ` ` debilitation of the Labour Party ' ' that he once lead be now a ` ` facilitator ' ' for Brexit . he admit that he be likely to face a ` ` volley of abuse ' ' for his comment but say Britain be a ` ` free country ' ' and he have a right to his opinion . he speak as an ICM poll find that @card@ per cent of all voter , and a majority of Remain voter , now want the government to get on with implement the EU referendum result . Mr Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say : ` ` we hear all these argument last year . not a thing have change . I think it be insult the intelligence of the British people to say they get it wrong . ` ` Be in no doubt that the people of this country be tell all sort of claptrap about the economic consequence of leave the EU . the very opposite have happen . ` ` as for Tony Blair , whatever his merit as a former prime minister , this be the guy who would have take our country into the euro with what would have be catastrophic consequence ; this be the guy who dragoon the UK into the Iraq war on a completely false prospectus ... ` ` I urge the British people to rise up and turn off the TV next time Tony Blair come on with his condescending campaign . ' ' speak earlier at Bloomberg , Mr Blair say : ` ` Yes , the British people vote to leave Europe , and I agree the will of the people should prevail . I accept right now there be no widespread appetite to rethink . ` ` but the people vote without knowledge of the true term of Brexit . as these term become clear , it be their right to change their mind . ' ' he have criticism for Theresa May as he continue : ` ` nine month ago she and the Chancellor [ Philip Hammond ] be tell us that leave would be bad for the country , its economy , its security and its place in the world . today , it be apparently a ' once in a generation opportunity ' for greatness . ' ' and Labour be not spare . Mr Blair say he be set up his movement in the ` ` absence of an opposition which look capable on the poll of beat the government ' ' . he add : ` ` the debilitation of the Labour Party be the facilitator of Brexit . I hate to say that , but it be true . what this means be that we have to build a movement which stretch across party line ; and devise new way of communication . ' ' it come after Baroness Chakrabarti , the shadow attorney general , tell the BBC ' S Question Time programme on Thursday night that she expect peer of all party to water down the Brexit Bill in the House of Lords .
riddler May leave us all puzzling again over her policy on Brexit ; Sketch
after a speech , Theresa May take as few question as possible from journalist . you ' d think we ' d be grateful . after all , we know that no matter what we ask - particularly if it ' S about Brexit - she ' S only go to give us the same old semi-answers , so really she ' S just save our time . but no , still we grumble that more of us do n't get call . we ' re like the woman in that Woody Allen joke from Annie Hall . ` ` Two elderly woman be at a Catskill restaurant . one of them say , ' Boy , the food at this place be just terrible . ' the other one say , ' Yeah , I know . and such small portion . ' ` ` yesterday , after a speech in London , the PM take question from just two journalist . they ask three each , for all the good it do . the day before , she ' d again hint heavily that Britain must leave the single market . this time she deny that a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' - the term Remainers use for withdrawal from the single market - be ` ` absolutely inevitable ' ' , and ` ` those who print thing say I ' m talk about a hard Brexit ' ' be ` ` get it wrong ' ' . in a way , I do n't mind her talking in riddle . I just wish she could make them more interesting . ` ` Prime Minister , can you confirm that you intend to withdraw Britain from the single market ? ' ' ` ` well , Tom , let me put it like this . my first be in ' horror ' , but never in ' awe ' . my second ' S in ' escape ' , but never in ' door ' . my third be in ' scream ' , but never in ' clap ' . my fourth be the letter on a child ' s pointy cap . what kind of Brexit be I ? ' ' ` ` thank you , Prime Minister . Sir Ivan Rogers , who resign as British ambassador to the EU , say your thinking on Brexit be ' muddle ' . what do you say to voter concern about your lack of clarity ? ' ' ` ` Riddle-me ! Riddle-me ! Riddle-meree ! perhaps you can tell what this riddle may be ! I ' m what the poor have , and what the rich need . and if I ' m what you eat , you ' ll be hungry indeed ! ' ' ` ` thank you , Prime Minister . one final question , if I may . how concerned be you by the late drop in the value of the pound ? ' ' ` ` Ape hold gull ( anag ) . ' ' her speech itself be largely devote to her mission to build ` ` something that I call ' the shared society ' ` ` . this would prize ` ` fairness and solidarity ' ' , reject ` ` the cult of individualism ' ' , allow government to ` ` repair ' ' free market ` ` when they be n't work as they should ' ' , and ` ` take action ' ' against corporation that ` ` tear away at the social contract between business and society ' ' . it sound strikingly like the sort of thing Ed Miliband use to say . but , while she express sympathy for people who feel they ' re ` ` get by , but not get on ' ' , Mrs May do not reveal exactly how she plan to make wage rise . another riddle to ponder .
small firm look for Brexit boost
almost two third of British business be ` ` optimistic ' ' about their future in the wake of the Brexit vote , a major survey disclose today . a poll of @card@ company by the Institute of Directors find that @card@ per cent of business be ` ` optimistic ' ' or ` ` very optimistic ' ' about the year ahead . the business , mainly small or medium sized , concede there be ` ` uncertainty ' ' around the vote to leave the European Union . however , their positivity be in marked contrast to comment by the boss of Britain ' s big company , some of whom have criticise Brexit and even threaten to relocate out of the UK . the finding come as the late edition of the World Economic League Table say that Britain will overtake France ' s economy in the year after Brexit despite the fall in the value of the pound . the table put Britain in sixth position , after be overtake by France follow the Brexit vote because of currency fluctuation . the forecast , by the Centre for Economics and Business Research , predict the UK will overtake France by @card@ . accord to the IoD survey , the ` ` net optimism ' ' figure for British business be the high since the June referendum . about @card@ per cent of company expect to increase revenue in @card@ compare with @card@ per cent expect a fall . however , many of the respondent say they have concern about the economy ` ` that could see their expectation prove over-optimistic ' ' , the IoD say . half of the company survey say that UK economic condition be affect their growth , and @card@ per cent feel the uncertain trading status with the EU be hold them back . four in @card@ complain of a skill shortage , demonstrate the need for an immigration system that give business access to people they need . if barrier to growth prove significant and revenue be squeeze , more than a third of company suggest that they would consider reduce staff ( @card@ per cent ) or postpone planned investment ( @card@ per cent ) . many UK business want the government to ensure Britain have access to the single market after Brexit . however , Brussels leader insist that continued access to the single market would mean Britain be force to accept freedom of movement . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have make clear that freedom of movement be a ` ` red line ' ' and she want Britain to be able to control EU immigration . Simon Walker , Director General of the IoD , say : ` ` business be become use to uncertainty , and while some speculate on what our relationship with Europe might look like , employer be get on with the job of grow their business and deliver job for the UK . ` ` Business will now look to Government to lay the groundwork for growth , and consider the skill shortage reveal in this survey , it should start by guarantee the status of EU citizen work for British business . ' ' the World Economic League Table predict the United States will remain the world ' s lead economy until @card@ , when it be overtake by China . business : page @card@
Scotland Four judge to rule on Brexit have previous tie to Europe ; Brexit turmoil ; Supreme Court under scrutiny before appeal on whether Theresa May need parliamentary vote
four of the Supreme Court judge who will decide whether Theresa May can trigger Brexit have previous link to Europe , it have emerge . one of the judge - who will have the final say over whether a parliamentary vote be need before Brexit can begin - be a co-founder of an EU legal group , while another help to choose judge for the European Court of Justice and two more have serve in the European Court of Human Rights . the independence of the judiciary will come under intense scrutiny next month when the Supreme Court ' s full panel of @card@ judge sit . they will be ask to overturn the High Court decision that prevent the Prime Minister from use the royal prerogative to begin Britain ' s withdrawal from the EU . the three High Court judge who make that decision on Thursday have be describe as an ` ` elite band ' ' who ` ` declare war on democracy ' ' . leave campaigner be now pin their hope on the Supreme Court to restore the status quo and avoid any delay in invoke Article @card@ . they will hear the government ' s appeal from Dec @card@ to Dec @card@ , but be not expect to give their judgment until the new year , which could delay Brexit even if they find in Mrs May ' S favour . the judge include Lord Carnwath of Notting Hill , @card@ , an old Etonian who be the Prince of Wales ' s principal legal adviser in the late 1980s and early 1990s , be one of four co-founder of the EU Forum of Judges for the Environment and serve as the forum ' s secretary general from @card@ . the body exist to ` ` promote the enforcement of national , European and international environmental law ' ' . its president from @card@ be Lord Reed , @card@ , another of the Supreme Court judge who will hear the Brexit appeal . Lord Reed serve as a judge in the European Court of Human Rights , where he be on a panel that decide that Robert Thompson and Jon Venables , the child killer of toddler James Bulger , have not receive a fair trial . he also act as an expert adviser to the European Union Initiative with Turkey on Democratisation and Human Rights between @card@ and @card@ , and then become chairman of the Franco-British Judicial Co-operation Committee . Lord Kerr of Tonaghmore , @card@ , also sit as a judge in the European Court of Human Rights , rule on a case in @card@ involve aircraft noise from Heathrow . the former Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland previously work as senior counsel to the Attorney General . Lord Mance , @card@ , begin his career work for a law firm in Hamburg , before qualify as a barrister in @card@ . his time in Germany give him a taste for international legal affair and he have represent the UK on the Consultative Council of European Judges , which be set up in @card@ to advise the Council of Europe on the ` ` independence , impartiality and competence ' ' of judge . he have also serve as a member of a seven-person EU panel that help select judge and advocates-general of the European Court of Justice and General Court . also on the panel will be Lord Sumption , once describe as the ` ` clever man in Britain ' ' , who advise the then home secretary Jack Straw over the extradition of the former Chilean dictator General Augusto Pinochet . Pinochet be eventually allow to leave the country freely in @card@ . Lord Sumption also represent the government during the @card@ Hutton Inquiry into the death of Dr David Kelly , the UN weapon inspector . the president of the Supreme Court be Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury , whose deputy be Baroness Hale of Richmond , the most senior woman judge in British history . the remain
Duncan Smith tell Tory to get on with Brexit
Tory tension over the EU re-emerged yesterday as one of the party ' s senior Eurosceptics call on Theresa May to speed up Brexit and issue a series of demand about the shape of a deal . in a sign of rise annoyance over the handling of negotiation , Iain Duncan Smith demand that the UK leave the single market and Brexit talk start no later than early @card@ . division be emerge over fear that Mrs May want a more limited departure from the EU than many Tory backbencher , give that she campaign against Brexit . despite early goodwill for her premiership , Mrs May continue to have a work majority of just @card@ - few than the number of minister she sack after take office . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , yesterday become the most senior party figure to float the idea of an early election as she cite concern about rebellious backbencher . she say the ` ` usual suspect ' ' on the backbenches could ` ` cause problem ' ' for Mrs May and add that there be a clear ` ` temptation ' ' to call an election sooner than @card@ . when Parliament return from recess in a fortnight , the detail of what Britain want out of the negotiation to leave the EU be expect to be at the top of the political agenda . Mr Duncan Smith , the former work and pension secretary , attack ` ` arrogant ' ' Europhiles who want to delay trigger Article @card@ , in an article in the Sun on Sunday . ` ` we need to get on with trigger Article @card@ , as the government have say , in early @card@ , ' ' he insist , add that wait until the German and French election next year be over would risk turn the referendum result into a ` ` never-endum ' ' . Mr Duncan Smith also say Britain should leave the single market , adopt a working permit system on immigration and ensure the UK be not ` ` under control of European law ' ' . concern about backbench rebellion have lead to call for Mrs May to hold an early election , with poll put the Tory more than @card@ point ahead of Labour and some expert say she could win a 100-seat majority . ` ` I can see the temptation , ' ' Ms Davidson say , during an interview with the Observer . ` ` she [ Mrs May ] know if people want to cause problem , they can do that quite quickly . I would like to think that the usual suspect might behave [ now ] in a different manner , but we shall see ... ' ' Fox ' s Boris takeover boast Liam Fox boast of take over a ` ` wing ' ' of Boris Johnson ' S Foreign Office , during an overseas trip . Dr Fox , the International Trade Secretary , tell a US radio show last month his department would be near Downing Street to show how importantly the brief be take . Dr Fox have be accuse of a ` ` land grab ' ' as he demand control over key part of foreign policy .
the reformation offer a good lesson for Brexit ; Our history tell us that adopt a loose link with Europe can produce fresh way of think
one month on from the Brexit vote , and we ' re do fine . the fundamental be unchanged : a strong economy , a cohesive society and , lest we forget , we have n't actually leave the EU yet . despite this , some people still talk as though Britain detach itself from the continent and sink into the ocean . they need to relax - open a beer and enjoy the sunshine . history suggest that rupture in geopolitics can be the start of something beautiful . take the 16th-century reformation . as a Catholic , I be duty-bound to say that Henry VIII ' S divorce and the subsequent establishment of the Anglican Church be a disaster . the enormity of its change - the abolition of the monastery , sectarian conflict - dwarf Brexit , imply that leave the EU just be n't the big deal that Remainers insist . but the reformation do have two characteristic that hold out hope for a bright future in @card@ : continuity and the unleash of the English imagination . England do n't cease to be European after the reformation , much as it wo n't cease to be European after Brexit . follow our break with Rome , we seek allegiance with Protestant power and play host to Protestant refugee , such as the Huguenot - among them , a distant relative of Nigel Farage . Catholicism do not evaporate . element of Catholic theology remain embed in the Anglican tradition , while popery creep back into the Royal family . just as the Protestants struggle to rid England of Catholic influence , so the Catholic recusant accept aspect of the reformation as vital . even when Mary I , the most vicious persecutor of Protestants , launch her counterreformation , she find the only politically feasible way to do it be through Parliament . England immediately follow the reformation be thus still deeply Catholic , but a new political idea be take hold - that England should be sovereign in all affair . certain Reformation-era myth about Englishness remain powerful today . one be geographic . the physical separation from Europe define our identity , conclude many Protestant , while the proximity of Scotland , Wales and Ireland translate into some English right to dominate them - our equivalent of the America ' Manifest Destiny . another fantasy be that the persecution under Mary and the suppose tolerance of Elizabeth ' s Anglican settlement confirm that England tilt towards liberty , while Catholic Europe prefer violent tyranny - a view later confirm in some mind by Napoleon and Hitler . perhaps most importantly , the Reformation cause us to investigate ourselves . the emergence of English as an evangelical language spawn the most wonderful literature : the book of Common Prayer , Paradise Lost , the Pilgrim ' S progress and the visionary poetry of William Blake . this be not to say that Brexit be go to spark an English renaissance : the hymn of Charles Wesley can hardly be compare to Mike Read ' S Ukip Calypso . but rupture prompt nation to rethink who they be and how they govern themselves . and there ' s no doubt that the reformation empower Parliament . at the height of the British Empire , the Victorian conclude rather arrogantly that they have a duty to spread the march towards democracy and capitalism around the globe . as regard Europe , they want to live peacefully with their neighbour but , ultimately , in ` ` splendid isolation ' ' . the break from Rome be weave into a narrative of Great Britain as a naval power , sail westward from the continent into the sunset . Brexit contain the seed of a similar revolution in the English imagination . the Leftist Euroscepticism of Tony Benn see Brexit as a chance to build a socialist commonwealth . the Rightist tradition of Enoch Powell dream of a Britain that be small and free - although no one now see Powell ' s grim monoculturalism as a necessary part of that package . both of these be root in reformation utopianism ; both overlook the practical upside to Brexit . one be that Parliament will once again be sovereign , but the people increasingly want democracy to be more local . to save the Union , we may have to devolve it completely . federalism be on its way . but the most obvious benefit to Brexit be that it compel us to look beyond Europe for our market . I do n't like use history to make prediction , but decoupling from economic alliance have often prove beneficial . when we abandon the Gold Standard in @card@ , everyone predict disaster - but it actually help us get out of the great depression . when we slip out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism in @card@ , it feel like the sky have fall in , but @card@ year of astonishing growth follow . crucially , the future be only as bleak as we allow it to become . Brexit be a vote to reaffirm British self-governance . we may choose to shrink the state and become a big , rich Hong Kong . we may choose to nationalise and build the socialist Jerusalem . what we must not choose be what so many Remainers seem to be willing on : we must not choose to fail . follow Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
inflation : how high will it go after Brexit ? ; what will happen to inflation after Brexit ? Richard Evans canvass expert opinion in the City
amid all the prediction about the effect of Brexit , one area of consensus exit : inflation will rise because the fall pound make import more expensive . but how high could it be drive ? we look at what City economist expect . Bank of America Merrill Lynch : RPI to reach 3.8pc the bank point out that effect of Brexit could push inflation in opposite way : while the fall in sterling would cause price to rise , a recession cause by the vote to leave would push them down , as business compete amid consumer ' shrink desire to spend . ` ` with the course now set for the UK to leave the EU , inflation face conflicting pressure : the disinflationary influence of the recession we now expect versus the inflationary impact of sterling ' S fall . we expect the latter to prevail , in the same way it do in the previous crisis , ' ' say Mark Capleton and Sebastien Cross of the bank ' s global research team . this will lead to a rise in inflation to 3pc before the end of this year , then almost 4pc by the end of @card@ on the retail price index ( RPI ) measure . JP Morgan Asset Management : CPI to hit 3pc or 4pc ` ` we think that [ CPI ] inflation could jump to 3pc or 4pc by the second half of @card@ , ' ' the firm say , although it do n't expect high rate to last long . ` ` this would be a temporary reaction to a fall in sterling , ' ' say David Stubbs of JP Morgan . ` ` inflation should come back to the Bank of England ' s 2pc target quickly . ' ' he say inflation be already trend upwards as the effect of fall in the oil price drop out of annual comparison . pantheon macroeconomics : CPI to reach 3pc the consultancy say the outlook for inflation have be ` ` transform by sterling ' S collapse ' ' , and that the ` ` tradeweighted ' ' sterling index - an average of exchange rate that give great weight to those of our large trading partner - have fall by 10pc in a week and by 15pc compare with a year ago . Samuel Tombs , Pantheon ' S chief UK economist , say the Bank of England have already forecast that inflation would overshoot its 2pc target slightly in two year ' time and by a big margin in three year ' time . ` ` but those forecast assume that sterling would follow a path that be 11pc above its current level , ' ' he say , imply that inflation would now rise even more . the Bank of England estimate that a 10pc fall in sterling lift CPI inflation by @card@ of a percentage point after two to three year , Mr Tombs say . ` ` so the pound ' s 15pc fall be set to boost inflation by just over @card@ percentage point . we think CPI inflation will overshoot the [ Bank ' s ] 2pc target substantially , hit 3pc in the second half of @card@ . ' ' he add : ` ` the depreciation of the pound will boost petrol price immediately . Sterling ' S fall will also boost food price - about 40pc of the UK ' S food be import - albeit after a lag of about six month . ' ' Pantheon say the Bank would probably ` ` look through ' ' the rise in inflation , rather than raise interest rate . if it instead reduce Bank Rate from its current level of 0.5pc , as the Bank ' s Governor , Mark Carney , have hint at , sterling would fall even further , add to inflation . however , it say it expect the UK to stay in the single market , let the economy recover . a rise in Bank Rate would keep inflation down towards the end of @card@ . Capital Economics : CPI to hit 3pc the consultancy make a similar prediction , although it say the pound could fall further . ` ` Sterling ' S 10pc or so slide could boost the consumer price level by about @card@ percentage point , ' ' say Ruth Miller , a UK economist at the firm . ` ` and continued economic and political uncertainty , combine with additional monetary easing by the [ Bank of England ] , could push the pound even low , perhaps to $ @card@ . ' ' the pound currently trade at $ @card@ .
Scotland No tax rise for rest of the decade , pledge May ; Front-runner ; Home Secretary open her leadership campaign by ditch Osborne ' S target and rule out second poll
Theresa May will rule out new tax rise for the rest of this decade by drop government plan towards achieve a budget surplus by the end of this parliament if she become prime minister . the Home Secretary , who be a ` ` reluctant Remainer ' ' during the European Union referendum campaign , say that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' and rule out any prospect of a second referendum or an election before @card@ . Mrs may set out her stall to around @card@ Tory MP in the campaign to succeed David Cameron , present herself as an experienced and hard-headed politician who be ` ` ready and able to do the job from day one ' ' . Mrs May , who be the odds-on favourite after Boris Johnson ' S decision not to run for the leadership , make it clear she will not attempt to back away from last week ' s vote to leave the EU , say ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . she say she would not kick off the two-year process of negotiate withdrawal until the UK government ' S strategy be agree - probably not before the end of this year . she say she would create a new government department , head by a Cabinet-level minister who have campaign for leave , to oversee the country ' s departure from the EU . Mrs May tell her audience that she would not order an emergency budget in response to the Brexit vote and she also say that , if it be necessary , she be ready to ditch Chancellor George Osborne ' s target of achieve budget surplus by @card@ to avoid tax rise . she say : ` ` while it be absolutely vital that the government continue with its intention to reduce public spending and cut the budget deficit , we should no longer seek to reach a budget surplus by the end of the Parliament . ` ` if before @card@ there be a choice between further spending cut , more borrowing and tax rise , the priority must be to avoid tax increase since they would disrupt consumption , employment and investment . ' ' ask if there might be a situation when people from the EU will not be welcome to live and work in the UK , she say ` ` it will be part of the negotiation ' ' between the UK and EU . in a surprise move , Mrs May say she would ditch her proposal to pull the UK out of the European convention on Human Rights . but she stand by the goal of reduce net migration , despite her failure as Home Secretary to help Mr Cameron reach his target of cut it below @card@ . Mrs May say that any attempt to ` ` wriggle out ' ' of leave campaign promise to control immigration would be ` ` unacceptable ' ' to voter . Mrs May also take several swipe at the man who , when she speak , be her rival for the Conservative leadership , Mr Johnson - as well as Michael Gove . while some politician be drive by ` ` ideological fervour ' ' or ` ` ambition and glory ' ' , she be the unshowy daughter of a vicar who have public service at the heart of her belief . in a jibe clearly direct at the former mayor of London , Mrs May say politics be not a ` ` game ' ' . she say : ` ` if you be from an ordinary working-class family , life be just much harder than many people in politics realise . ` ` frankly , not everybody in Westminster understand what it ' s like to live like this and some need to be tell that it be n't a game . ` ` it ' S a serious business that have real consequence for people ' S life . ' ' Mrs May try to make a virtue of not be a ` ` showy ' ' politician , who tour the television studio , in implicit contrast to the former mayor . ` ` if ever there be a time for a prime minister who be ready and able to do the job from day one , this be it , ' ' she say . mock Mr Johnson ' s purchase of riot control equipment without secure her permission - eventually withhold - to use it , Mrs May joke : ` ` Boris negotiate in Europe . I seem to remember last time he do a deal with the Germans , he come back with three nearlynew water cannon . ' ' she conclude : ` ` my pitch be very simple . I ' m Theresa May and I think I ' m the good person to be prime minister of this country . ' ' ' if you be from an ordinary working-class family , life be much hard than many people in politics realise '
Rees-Mogg to lead Eurosceptic MP group ; ' true believer ' in Brexit vow to challenge the government as head of European Research Group
Jacob REES-MOGG have be elect as leader of an influential Eurosceptic group of Tory MP and promise to hold the government to account over Brexit . Eurosceptics say that Mr Rees-Mogg , who stand unopposed to head the European Research Group ( ERG ) , be the ideal candidate for the role because he be a ` ` true believer ' ' in Brexit and the benefit it can bring for Britain . it come amid concern that the group of more than @card@ Eurosceptic Tory MP have recently be too weak and fail to do enough to challenge the government . he commit to support the ` ` principle ' ' of the Prime Minister ' S Lancaster House speech last year , in which she set out plan to control immigration and build new trade agreements.Mr Rees-Mogg say : ` ` I be delight to have be elect in succession to Suella Fernandes and Steve Baker who be both superb chairman . in this role I be keen to help the government implement the principle lay down by the Prime Minister , Mrs Theresa May , in her Lancaster House speech . ` ` it be especially important to achieve control of our law , control immigration and achieve new trade agreement with other country . the ERG speak individually , not with the collective view , but have considerable support across the parliamentary party . as chairman I intend to be helpful , vigorous and supportive towards government policy of make a success of Brexit . ' ' his appointment come at a critical time in negotiation , as Mrs May seek to reach an agreement with her divide Cabinet over Britain ' s future relationship with the European Union . he tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` the ERG have an important role to play in represent back-bench Eurosceptic view both to the government and the wide public . there be a strong desire to ensure that the positive emphasis of Brexit be maintain and we focus on the ambition of Brexit to create a more prosperous Britain rather than be bogged down in the minutia of negotiation . ' ' the ERG play a key role in the EU referendum as it mobilise Eurosceptic Tory MP against David Cameron and his pro-Remain Cabinet minister , include George Osborne , the chancellor at the time . however , senior Eurosceptics say that the group have be far less effective under the leadership of Ms Fernandes , who chair it while also serve as an aide to Philip Hammond , the Chancellor . one senior Eurosceptic and supporter of Mr Rees-Mogg tell the Telegraph : ` ` we be go to look at Cabinet member and make them stand up for Britain . there be a lot of thing that need to be argue for as we enter the next phase of negotiation . we must be at the forefront of the debate . ' ' the appointment be a significant move for Mr Rees-Mogg , who have be hail as a potential future leader of the Conservative Party .
thanks for the war heroics , say Juncker , but now pay up
JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker yesterday thank Britain for liberate Europe during the Second World War before warn the UK would have to pay up for Brexit if it want to begin talk with the EU over trade and a transition deal . the European Commission president ' s demand that Britain meet budget liability estimate at £47billion to seal a Brexit deal with Brussels come the day after it emerge that EU leader be consider take the first step towards trade and transition negotiation with Britain . ` ` I be not hate the British . the Europeans have to be grateful for so many thing Britain have bring to Europe , during war , before war , after war , everywhere and every time , but now they have to pay , ' ' Mr Juncker say to laughter from his audience at a university in his native Luxembourg . ` ` if you be sit at a bar and order @card@ beer and then suddenly some of your colleague be leave , it ' s OK but they have to pay , they have to pay , ' ' say Mr Juncker , who have deny have an alcohol problem . he insist he be not in a ` ` revenge mood ' ' , but add : ` ` I be the first to be impress by the numerous disadvantage the Brexit , and Brexit mean Brexit , be entail for the British . ' ' the fifth round of negotiation end in deadlock on Thursday with huge division remain between the two camp , particularly over the financial settlement the EU believe could be as high as ( Euro ) 100billion ( £89billion ) . in her Florence speech , Theresa May promise ( Euro ) 20billion to ensure no EU member state would pay more or receive less in the current budget cycle , which end in @card@ . while that bring renewed momentum to negotiation , EU leader , who meet next week in Brussels , be refuse to start fully fledge talk over transition or trade until the EU judge that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make in the three issue of the cocalled Brexit bill , Ireland and citizen ' right . accord to draft conclusion for the summit , they will call on the European Commission to begin internal preparation for future talk but stop short of allow fully-fledged negotiation on trade and transition to begin .
Scotland Stop bias against Brexit or face fine , BBC warn
the BBC will face sanction and fine from its new regulator unless it end its Brexit bias , a former culture secretary and creator of its impartial Royal Charter warn . John Whittingdale say he be concerned that the corporation be ` ` constantly look for negative and highlight the challenge ' ' of Brexit . he warn that , if its negative coverage persist , MP could ` ` escalate ' ' their complaint to Ofcom , which take over regulation of the BBC in a fortnight . the regulator have the power to impose sanction include broadcasting correction , ban repeat of coverage and impose a £250,000 fine . more than @card@ MP write to the BBC warn its ` ` perverse and skewed ' ' coverage risk undermine Brexit . Lord Hall , the BBC ' S director-general , say : ` ` we go to great length to ensure that we balance our coverage . ' '
Scotland May plan to trigger Brexit in two week ; Defeat in Lords over right of EU citizen fail to disrupt PM ' s Article @card@ timetable Article @card@ rebellion Lords accuse of posturing on Brexit some peer indulge in chest-beating , say IDS , but Corbyn insist that amendment be ' good news '
a DEFIANT Theresa May be determine to push ahead and trigger Article @card@ within two week as plan despite the House of Lords last night inflict her first parliamentary defeat over Brexit . peer vote to amend the Bill to force the government to guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK . seven Tory peer - include Baroness Altmann , the former pension minister - back the amendment . however , the Prime Minister be confident it will be reject by the commons later this month and Downing Street insist the timetable for open negotiation to leave the European Union remain unchanged . lord who vote to alter the Bill be accuse by critic of ` ` play with fire ' ' , pointless ` ` posturing ' ' and ` ` a disservice to the national interest ' ' . the scale of the government ' s defeat in the Lords , where the proposal to amend the Bill be pass by @card@ vote to @card@ , prompt speculation Mrs May could face a fresh Tory rebellion when the Bill return to the Commons . Conservative whip be confident , however , that no more than a handful of Tory MP will support the amendment . the Prime Minister have already tell MP that she want to protect the right of the three million EU citizen live in the UK , but will only issue that guarantee once the EU have grant reciprocal right to the @card@ Briton live in member state . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader who vote to leave the EU , say of last night ' S vote : ` ` it be a bit of posturing by some people in the Lords who be beat their chest and puff out their own sense of self-importance . my answer to that be ' jolly good , nice to hear from you , but it have no bearing on Theresa May ' S article @card@ negotiation ' . ` ` it speak volume about who some of these people in the Lords think they be and absolutely nothing about Brexit . ' ' Labour ' s amendment to the EU ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill , table with Liberal Democrat and crossbench support , call for minister to bring forward proposal ensure the right of EU citizen live here will continue post- Brexit , within three month of trigger Article @card@ . Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , who order his MP to support the bill unamend when it go through the Commons , describe last night ' s vote as ` ` great news ' ' , raise the possibility that he might tell his MP to back the amendment in the Commons . ` ` the government must now do the decent thing and guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK , ' ' he say . the Lords will vote next week on a further amendment which would give MP a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the outcome of Mrs May ' s negotiation with the EU - a vote which could also go against the government . the Prime Minister could then come under pressure from her own MP to agree to that amendment pass into law . the amend Bill will return to the commons on March @card@ and March @card@ when MP will debate whether to keep the change . Mrs May intend to notify the EU of Britain ' s intention to leave on March @card@ , trigger two year of negotiation that would end with Brexit in @card@ . last night Downing Street say that the timetable for Brexit would not be change by the Lords vote . John Penrose , the former Conservative constitution minister , say : ` ` the Commons vote decisively that the right of brit abroad be just as important as the right of EU national live here . people will find it hard to understand why the unelected House of Lords think that be wrong . ' ' Baroness Smith of Basildon , the Labour Leader of the Lords , have already make it clear peer be unlikely to fight further if MP vote down their amendment . this should allow Mrs May to declare on March @card@ that negotiation about Brexit can begin . Lord Lamont of Lerwick , the former Tory chancellor , say of the Lords vote : ` ` I think they be do a disservice to the national interest . you should n't be impose condition [ on the government ] . the negotiation need flexibility . ` ` I hope that it will be reject by the Commons and send back here . if that be not the end of the matter I think the Lords will be play with fire . ' ' Sir Bill Cash , the chairman of the European Union scrutiny committee , say he be confident that MP would overturn the amendment . ` ` it be outrageous that these unelected people should undermine the vote in the House of Commons and the right of British voter who live abroad , ' ' he say . Tory peer include Viscount Hailsham and Lord Bowness speak in favour of the amendment under the glare of Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , who write to all peer on Tuesday urge them not to stand in the way of the Brexit Bill . she watch from the step in front of the Queen ' s throne in the Lords . during the debate , Lord Tebbit , the former Cabinet minister , accuse fellow peer of put ` ` the right of foreigner ' ' above those of British people as he implore them not to back the amendment . he ask : ` ` why be everybody here today so excite about an amendment that look after the foreigner and not the British ? ' ' he be jeer by some peer as he refer to EU citizen in the UK as ` ` foreigner ' ' , while some on the Tory bench shout , ` ` quite right ' ' . he say the propose amendment to guarantee the right of EU migrant live in the UK would weaken Mrs May ' s power to negotiate for the right of British citizen live in the EU once Article @card@ be trigger . Lord Tebbit , who have a Danish sonin-law live in the UK and a son who have live and work in Germany , say : ` ` if we be to be concern about anybody ' S right after Brexit , to live anywhere on this continent of Europe , it should be our concern for the right of British people to live freely and peacefully in those other part . ' ' Lord Lawson of Blaby , the former Tory chancellor , who live in France , say it be ` ` quite clear ' ' there be ` ` no danger whatever to EU citizen in the UK ' ' and say it be ` ` wholly deplorable ' ' that the amendment have be table . vote for it would only ` ` stir up fear and concern among the EU resident in this country that they may not be able to stay , when there be no question they will be ' ' , he say . Lord Bragg , the Labour peer and broadcaster , say Brexit would be a ` ` disaster ' ' and suggest EU citizen live in the UK have be ` ` reduce to pawn in a Government tragedy ' ' . despite the presence of Ms Rudd , Viscount Hailsham , the Conservative peer and former agriculture minister , defy his party by speak in favour of the amendment . he say it ` ` offend natural justice ' ' to deny the right to EU citizen and call on the government to ` ` take the moral high ground ' ' . Lord Bowness , a fellow Tory , say : ` ` we be not deal with enemy alien in time of war . let us give the assurance and show that we be indeed the generous outward-looking country we be head for in these Brexit negotiation . ' ' a spokesman for the Department for Exiting the European Union say : ` ` we be disappoint the Lords have choose to amend a bill that the commons pass without amendment . the Bill have a straightforward purpose - to enact the referendum result and allow the government to get on with the negotiation . our position on EU national have repeatedly be make clear . we want to guarantee the right of EU citizen who be already live in Britain , and the right of British national live in other member state , as early as we can . ' ' ' Jolly good , nice to hear from you , but it have no bearing on Theresa May ' S article @card@ negotiation '
the Lords must learn the lesson of history or face a new revolution ; Obstructing Brexit would risk another political upheaval that could sweep the upper house away
the House of Lords be debate the legislation that trigger Brexit . it should return it to the Commons untouched and wrap up in a ribbon . as Theresa May remind them by attend the deliberation on the step of the royal throne , a fight against this Bill be a fight against democracy . a few Europhiles imagine that they can stuff the legislation with compromise and roadblock and pray for future reversal . this would be stupid . the Brexit revolution be grow and gather momentum . any institution that stand in its way risk be flatten . this be the way of revolution . they start out as a debate about one thing and wind up in a war about everything . consider the French revolution . in @card@ , the issue be whether or not Louis XVI could govern without consult all class of society . compromise be possible ; a constitutional monarchy be on the table . yet by the mid-1790s , the revolutionary have cut off Louis ' head , abolish nobility and be busy replace God with a Supreme www.Being.No one predict this ; it be n't plan . accident happen . one of those accident be Louis - and while it sound like victim-blaming to say he bring this on his own head , he really do . Louis could have make a constitutional monarchy work , but he do n't want one . on June @card@ @card@ , he and his family attempt to flee Paris in order to join rebel force and , it be allege , return as a despot . like Charles I or Tsar Nichola , Louis ' stubbornness condemn him . the narrative of every revolution be thus determine as much by its opposition as by its supporter . fast-forward to June @card@ @card@ . the issue on the ballot be membership of the European Union . most of us who vote leave see it as a simple , unemotional proposition : we judge that we ' d be wealthy and free outside the EU . of course there be radical and extremist on the Eurosceptic side - I shall come to them in a minute - but for most of us this be a rational choice . indeed , much of the heat in this debate since the vote have come not from a leave campaign that never even expect to win but from the Remain campaign , who be shock and appall by defeat . they be the one who have try to redefine what Brexit be all about . it ' S about racism , they say . English nationalism . retreat from the world . a conspiracy by the Right-wing medium . a plot to defund the NHS . even , and this be the good one , a coup d'état by the Russians . do you not realise that your Ukip-voting grandma in Cheriton Fitzpaine be a mole for the KGB ? well , now you know . now you know that Brexit be a vote on everything but the EU - it be a contemptible spasm of xenophobia and ignorance . if you believe that , as the liberal establishment do , then it make sense to try to reverse the vote . several peer have detail the plan openly . first , identify as many constitutional mechanism as possible to drag out debate and limit the government ' s negotiate position . secondly , use the next two year to run a PR campaign to influence the electorate . thirdly , establish the logic for a second referendum in which Briton will choose to stay in the EU after all . the strategy be technically possible and superficially clever . but Remainers be commit a terrible mistake - the same mistake make by Louis XVI . they be confirm the accusation of their most extreme critic . they be radicalising the situation . it be Nigel Farage who declare that Brexit would not end with Brexit - that it be just ` ` the first brick knock out of the Establishment wall . ' ' why ? because the sheer scale of opposition to Brexit have expose the existence of what he call a ` ` political class ' ' - not dissimilar to the aristocrat of old France . and every institution that house these counter-revolutionaries now find itself under scrutiny . the Lords have step into the spotlight , and the radical Eurosceptics have question . can we truly call peer such as Peter Mandelson or Neil Kinnock fair-minded when they receive such generous pension from the EU ? how can it be right that Ukip get @card@ per cent of the vote in the @card@ general election and yet have only three peer to speak for it - while the Europhile Lib Dems , who have just nine MP , enjoy more than @card@ member of the House of Lords ? the irony be that the Eurosceptics ask such question be overwhelmingly constitutional conservative : they vote leave out of love for Parliament and British tradition . to restore the greatness of the institution , they be now prepare to overthrow the institution themselves - and it be exactly that kind of iconoclasm that mark a revolutionary situation . the Eurosceptics be not the silly little fringe that Tony Blair and the Establishment still see them as be . they have the will of the people as express in a referendum behind them . and while the Lords do exist to question the action of the commons , it do not exist to contradict the verdict of the people . if the Lords be see to be do that , then there will be call for stuff them with Tory , make them elect , even abolish them altogether . the people will wave their little finger and they ' ll be go . I do n't want this . as I say , for most of us Brexit begin and end with Brexit , and be never suppose to be about anything else . but emotionally charge opposition be force voter to re-evaluate several aspect of our constitutional settlement . the Right be ask why they finance a BBC that , they allege , do n't give them a fair say . one half of the UK be ask why the other half should be allow to block the Brexit that they vote for . and the Labour Party , which be struggle to maintain a consensus that will get it through two perilous by-election , be split . Blair and his militant Remainers be help to kill it . one of the few institution that have emerge from Brexit with some strength be the Conservative party , even though it ' S probably the most divided party of all . Theresa May do the right thing . she hear the people sing and decide to make the song her own . for the sake of its own survival , I beg the Lords to join the sublime chorus of history . follow Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland PM : Isil would be glad if we leave the EU ; Cameron under fire as defence minister warn Europe undermine UK security
David Cameron provoke a furious response from lead Eurosceptics yesterday after say that the head of Isil would be ` ` happy ' ' if Britain leave the European Union . the Prime Minister say that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , as well as Vladimir Putin , the Russian president , would favour Brexit as he seek to ` ` demolish ' ' nine economic ` ` myth ' ' from the Brexit campaign . Boris Johnson , the former mayor of London and a lead Brexit campaigner , suggest he ` ` no longer recognise ' ' the Prime Minister and Remain campaign ' s ` ` negative ' ' vision of Britain . he add that it be ` ` a bit much ' ' to say that Brexit campaigner be ` ` ally ' ' with Mr Putin and Isil , and accuse the Prime Minister of ` ` collude ' ' with Britain ' S business to win their support during the referendum . it come as Penny Mordaunt , a Eurosceptic defence minister , say that it be ` ` almost impossible ' ' for the security service to keep jihadis out of Britain while it be a member of the EU . she say : ` ` it be really undermine our security and again this , as in so many area , we have the EU with the authority but none of the responsibility at all . ' ' last week Mr Cameron suggest that the EU could descend into war if Britain vote to leave it . he yesterday say in a speech at Mansion House in central London : ` ` I never say if we leave on Thursday , World War Three break out on Friday . it be worth ask the question who would be happy if we leave . Putin might be happy , I suspect al-Baghdadi might be happy . this be the time for strength in number - this be the time to stick with our friend and neighbour and our ally rather than break it [ Europe ] apart . ' ' he also defend the deal to give Turkey visa-free access to the European union after it be heavily criticise by Sir Richard Dearlove , a former head of MI6 , who compare it to ` ` store gasoline next to the fire ' ' . he say it represent the ` ` good of both world ' ' . address Sir Richard ' S comment , Mr Cameron highlight a recent article by Sir John Sawers , a former head of MI6 , and Lord Evans , the former head of MI5 , call for Britain to stay in . he say : ` ` I have huge respect for them and the work that they do to keep this country safe . those two individual be now say as clearly as they possibly could that Britain be safe from terrorism if we stay in the European Union . ' ' the Prime Minister dismiss claim by the leave camp that quit would lead to a bonfire of regulation as ` ` very , very weak ' ' and insist three million job be link to membership . ` ` we may have a deficit in the sale of good when it come to the EU but we have a very large surplus when it come to service and one of the thing that I think we should fear be that , of course , if we leave the EU they might offer us a deal on good , but it might take a very long time before they offer a deal on service , ' ' he say .
OECD warn Britain over Brexit : ' this will hurt you more than it will hurt the EU '
BRITAIN leave the EU would hurt the UK more than the rest of the European Union and could plunge Britain into a long period of stagnation , the OECD have warn . Catherine Mann , chief economist at the Paris-based think tank , say there would be no winner if Britain leave the 28-nation bloc . ` ` the OECD believe that Brexit be bad for the UK . it ' S also bad for Europe and it ' s bad for the global economy , ' ' Ms Mann say at an event in London . ` ` this will come through the channel of trade , but also through the channel of financial market uncertainty . ' ' the OECD will publish a detailed analysis of the cost of a Brexit in the come month . refer to the government ' s twoyear window to negotiate a new relationship with the EU if Britain vote to leave the bloc on June @card@ , Ms Mann say : ` ` that ' s a long time for uncertainty , and trade in good will become more costly . Europe be also a very , very important market for financial service , and country do n't have to offer an open market for service . ' ' Pro-Brexit campaigner have describe argument that Britain would suffer a prolonged economic shock if it leave the EU as scaremongering . Gerard Lyons , chief economic adviser to Boris Johnson , the Mayor of London , have say that the impact of a Brexit would resemble a ` ` V ' ' or ` ` tick ' ' , with an initial downturn follow by a strong rebound after Britain escape the burden of Brussels . however , Ms Mann suggest the impact of the shock be likely to be prolonged . ` ` I think an ' L ' would be a good way to characterise it , ' ' she say . ` ` there ' S cost to renegotiation , and two year be a long time . ' '
Labour bench cheer with delight ; Reconstruction
for Labour , it be a moment of raucous celebration . hour after Tory rebel help them inflict an historic defeat on the government over Brexit , the Christmas Party in Jeremy Corbyn ' S office be in full swing with music so loud it could be hear reverberate outside the building . for the Tories , however , it be a moment of bitter recrimination . while the @card@ pro-European rebel boast that their rebellion have enable Parliament to ` ` take control ' ' of Brexit , many of their colleague be absolutely furious . the rebel further incense their Eurosceptic colleague when they take to the Pugin room in the Commons and drink a bottle of white wine . as the dust settle the Prime Minister , her Cabinet and Chief Whip be leave ask the question - where do it go wrong ? the danger be obvious from the start . in September Dominic Grieve , a pro-European Tory and former attorney general , table an amendment demand that the government give Parliament a legal guarantee of a final vote on the Brexit deal . with the support of nine other Tory MP , the ` ` meaningful vote ' ' amendment soon draw the support of Labour and the Liberal Democrats . in a bid to defuse the rebellion David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , make clear in the commons that the government be prepare to offer a binding vote on the final Brexit deal . the concession , however , be not enough and after week of fruitless negotiation , matter come to a head in the most brutal fashion yesterday . in a bid to make a breakthrough , the Prime Minister take to invite the Tory rebel into Downing Street for one-to-one discussion about the bill . ` ` they be try to pick us off , ' ' one rebel say . ` ` it do n't work . ' ' it become clear that the government be not go to back down . accept the amendment , the Prime Minister tell Tory rebel , would put a ` ` smooth and orderly ' ' Brexit at risk . by the time the debate start at 1pm , the mood be toxic . when Bernard Jenkin , a senior Eurosceptic Tory MP , make an intervention he find himself heckle by pro-European Tory MP on all side . ` ` read it [ the bill ] and sit down , ' ' they shout at him . as rebel after rebel make clear that they be not back down , the government attempt one last climbdown . less than half an hour before the vote be due to take place Dominic Raab , the justice minister , pledge to include a commitment to a legally binding vote at a late stage in the passage of the bill . of the @card@ Tory poise to rebel , some be sway . Paul Masterton and George Freeman both abstain on the basis of the pledge . Vicky Ford , the Tory MP for Chelmsford , appear in two mind and seem on the verge of tear . in the end she be usher inside the Noe lobby by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who put his arm around her back and smile at her warmly as they walk inside . it be not enough . Mrs May lose the vote by @card@ vote to @card@ with the result be greet with cheer from the Labour bench as it be announce . the government ' S downfall do not just come from its rebel . a mere two Eurosceptic Labour MP support the government . within moment of the vote , the recrimination begin . Sir Desmond Swayne , a former Tory minister , call his colleague ` ` useful idiot ' ' and say their ` ` real motive ' ' be to delay Brexit . Mr Grieve insist after the vote that it have never be his intention to defeat the government . he say : ` ` do I otherwise feel good about it ? no , it ' S the first time I ' ve ever have to rebel on a national issue against the government ... I have to say it be the only thing open for me to do and I ' d like to emphasise - it do n't stop Brexit in any way . ' ' the defeat be likely to sour Theresa May ' s Brussels summit today . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator , give Mrs may a taste of what lie in store for her late last night , hail her defeat as a ` ` great day for democracy ' ' . rebel roll call the @card@ Tory MP who defeat Mrs May Heidi Allen South Cambridgeshire Ken Clarke Rushcliffe Jonathan Djanogly Huntingdon Dominic Grieve Beaconsfield Stephen Hammond Wimbledon Sir Oliver Heald North East Hertfordshire Nicky Morgan Loughborough Bob Neill Bromley and Chislehurst Antoinette Sandbach Eddisbury Anna Souby Broxtowe Sarah Wollaston Totnes
Britain embark on trade crusade ; China , India , Australia and nine other country already in talk to make deal after Brexit , say Fox UK ' can start to pencil in new trade deal '
Britain have already begin informal trade negotiation with several country across the world , Liam Fox reveal today as he say Brexit be ` ` the key to Britain ' s future prosperity ' ' . in an article for today ' S Daily Telegraph , the International Trade Secretary say Britain be conduct ` ` trade audits ' ' in order to prepare deal that can be announce as soon as the country leave the European union in @card@ . it be understand that minister and official be in talk with @card@ country , include China , India , Australia and South Korea , as well as Middle Eastern nation such as Saudi Arabia and Oman . EU leader have attempt to order Britain not to conduct any trade deal talk until after the Brexit process be complete . but , just a day after Theresa May promise that Britain would be ` ` bold and ambitious ' ' in its attempt to secure free-trade deal with nation across the globe , Dr Fox write : ` ` when we leave , we will want to develop new arrangement with country like Australia , New Zealand and India . ` ` we be conduct trade audits with a number of country to see how we can remove barrier to trade and investment to our mutual benefit . ` ` there be a big world for us to do business with , and we intend to do just that . we should do so with considerable self-confidence . ' ' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , confirm yesterday that the government be still pledge to bring net migration down to below @card@ , say that once immigration be ` ` under your control , anything be possible ' ' . on Tuesday , in her speech set out her 12-point plan for leave the EU , the Prime Minister say that Brexit ` ` must mean control of the number of people who come to Britain from Europe ' ' . yesterday , Mr Davis suggest that mean re-introducing the target . he say ` ` the simple truth ' ' be that the government would get net migration down to the ` ` ten of thousand ' ' , something David Cameron fail to do when he be in office . it also emerge that the Supreme Court will rule next Tuesday on whether Mrs May will be force to hold a vote in Parliament to trigger Article @card@ . if the justice find in the government ' S favour , the Prime Minister will not be force to ask MP to approve her plan to begin formal exit talk in March , but expert expect the court to rule that Parliament must be give a say . most MP have pledge to back Article @card@ in a vote , but the Liberal Democrats and a small number of other pro-Remain MP could frustrate the formal exit process . Mrs May use her Brexit speech to confirm that Britain would quit the single market . she also indicate that the UK would leave the custom union , allow the government to negotiate its own freetrade deal across the world . today , the Prime Minister travel to Davos where she will make a speech at the World Economic Forum . she will meet some of the world ' s most powerful company boss , and be expect to emphasise that the government intend to ensure Britain be open for business as it negotiate Brexit . in his article , Dr Fox write : ` ` this government will never compromise on the prosperity of the United Kingdom . we see that Brexit be not a threat to that prosperity , but the key . ` ` in a globalised world , Britain must stand ready to trade , to build a free and open network of commerce and trust that will not only safeguard our nation ' S prosperity , but spread wealth across the world . we have take our first step to establish ourselves as the champion of free trade and take our place , once again , as one of the great open trading nation in the world . ' ' write in the Sun today , Mrs May say Brexit will allow the UK to reach out ` ` to old friend and new ally alike ' ' . ` ` we will build a new trading relationship with our partner in Europe , but we will also be free to do new trade deal with country from outside the EU , too . ' ' speaking in India , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say Britain could start ` ` pencil ' ' in trade deal on the ` ` back of an envelope ' ' .
Scotland Hammond : UK could become tax haven ; Chancellor prepare for make tax cut to attract investment if EU close off access to market
Britain could cut tax to attract investment in a trade war after Brexit if British exporter be face with new tariff barrier , Philip Hammond have suggest . in an interview with a German newspaper , Mr Hammond say the government would do ` ` whatever we have to ' ' to ensure UK business remain competitive if European market be ` ` close off ` ` to them . his intervention come as Theresa May , the Prime Minister , be put the finish touch to a major speech set out her approach to the forthcoming Brexit negotiation at London ' S Lancaster House tomorrow . Mrs May will announce plan for a ` ` clean Brexit ' ' - withdraw from the single market and the European custom union - to regain control of immigration and end the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . the Chancellor tell Welt be Sonntag that the UK ` ` could suffer from economic damage at least in the short term ' ' if it be leave with no access to the EU after Brexit . he suggest that Britain could cut tax to encourage company to move to the UK in retaliation . ask if the UK ' S future be as the corporate ` ` tax haven of Europe ' ' , the Chancellor say minister be ready to change if they have to . ` ` if we have no access to the European market , if we be close off , if Britain be to leave the European union without an agreement on market access , then we could suffer from economic damage at least in the shortterm , ' ' he say . ` ` in this case , we could be force to change our economic model and we will have to change our model to regain competitiveness . and you can be sure we will do whatever we have to do . ` ` the British people be not go to lie down and say , ' too bad , we ' ve be wound ' . we will change our model , and we will come back , and we will be competitively engage . ' ' Mr Hammond also say there be a possibility of ` ` a time period between Britain leave the EU and the full introduction of a long-term future arrangement between the UK and the EU ' ' to allow company to prepare for the new regulatory regime . Lord Lawson of Blaby , who be Conservative chancellor in Margaret Thatcher ' s government in the eighty , warn that the EU would reject any offer of a free trade deal . write in a Policy Exchange pamphlet , publish today , he say : ` ` we must accept that our free trade offer will be reject and that no remotely acceptable post- Brexit trade agreement between the UK and the EU be negotiable . ' ' this be not ` ` out of hostility to the UK ' ' but because throughout the EU ` ` the political establishment be threaten by the rise of anti-establishment political party ' ' like the Front National in France . he say it be ` ` incontrovertible ' ' that ` ` in common with the rest of the world , we should be outside both the so-called single market and the custom union ' ' , add : ` ` this be not a ' hard ' Brexit : it be Brexit . ' ' Mr Hammond ' S comment be criticise by Jeremy Corbyn , the Labour leader , who say Mrs May be pursue an ` ` extremely risky ' ' negotiate strategy . he tell the BBC ' S Andrew Marr Show : ` ` it seem to me a recipe for some kind of trade war with Europe in the future . that do n't really seem to me a very sensible way forward . ' ' Nicky Morgan , the pro-Remain former education secretary , say Mrs May should be seek ` ` maximum participation ' ' and warn her not to damage the economy for the sake of control immigration . Johan Eliach : page @card@ Labour chaos Thornberry ditch Corbyn view Labour ' s freedom of movement position be in chaos again yesterday as the shadow foreign secretary say the party would not ` ` die in a ditch ' ' over it . Emily Thornberry speak just minute after Jeremy Corbyn refuse to accept that level of EU migration to Britain be too high . the party ' S view be in disarray last week after the Labour leader indicate he would announce his party favour ` ` reasonably manage migration ' ' . however , in his speech he say that the party do not ` ` rule out ' ' free movement in exchange for access to the single market . speak on ITV ' s Peston on Sunday , Ms Thornberry say : ` ` we ' re not go to die in a ditch about it , but Labour ' S principle have always be that the economy be the most important thing . ' '
Scotland Tory MP ' anger at EU chief who praise Lib Dems in election victory ; Brexit Britain ; IDS tell ' proud ' Brexit negotiator to ' mind his own bloody business ' and to stop moan
the European Union ' S chief Brexit negotiator be face a backlash from Conservative MP after express his admiration for the Liberal Democrat victory in the Richmond Park by-election . Guy Verhofstadt , a Belgian MEP , greet the result on Twitter by congratulate Sarah Olney , the successful candidate , on her victory , add : ` ` Europe be watch and we be proud . ' ' Tim Farron , the leader of the Liberal Democrats , say that his party ' s win in the south-west London constituency prove the case for a second referendum , as they accuse the conservative of ` ` pervert ' ' Brexit . Anna Soubry , a pro-European Conservative MP , describe the victory as ` ` sensational ' ' and say ` ` you can forget hard Brexit ' ' . Theresa May , however , make clear that the government will not be hold a second referendum and say that the ` ` message from the British people be loud and clear ' ' . Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pension secretary , tell the Daily Telegraph that Mr Verhofstadt should ` ` mind his own bloody business ' ' . he say : ` ` I assume this mean he be prepare to stand by the result of the EU referendum which mean that we be leave , so he should stop moan and carp and try to damage this . ' ' Steve Baker MP , a Conservative MP who help lead the win Vote leave campaign before the June @card@ referendum , say : ` ` it be foolish for an EU official to try to hijack this result . if every MP simply vote with their near counting area , Brexit would have a thumping majority in the Commons . for our EU exit , Richmond be a nonevent , whatever pro-EU voice may say . ' ' Sarah Olney defeat Zac Goldsmith by @card@ vote after overturn his @card@ majority . the by-election be call after Mr Goldsmith quit as a Tory MP in protest over plan to build a new runway at Heathrow airport . he stand as an independent candidate . however , it swiftly become a vote about Britain ' s decision to leave the European Union , which put Mr Goldsmith , who back Brexit , at a disadvantage against Mrs Olney , a Remainer . constituent in Richmond Park and North Kingston vote overwhelmingly in favour of remain in the European Union , with more than two third back stay in . Mr Farron say : ` ` the reality be wherever you be in this country there will be a balance of opinion but what be really striking over the last week be the number of Leave-voting , former conservative , vote for Sarah [ Olney ] . ` ` most of them do n't regret their vote in June but they do regret Theresa May take their vote and pervert it to something they never mean it to mean . ' ' however , Conservative MP say that Richmond be an ` ` outlier ' ' which do not reflect most of Britain . Andrew Bridgen say : ` ` we vote to leave the EU to keep the EU out of British politics . Richmond Park vote to remain but @card@ per cent of constituency vote to leave at the referendum . ' ' Bernard Jenkin , who also have a lead role in Vote leave , add : ` ` their reaction be understandable , but they be clutch at straw . ` ` Richmond Park as the seventeenthmost Remain constituency in the UK be far from typical . ` ` the vast majority of UK constituency vote leave . ' ' some pundit suggest the Lib Dem victory mean that the prospect of the Prime Minister call an early general election next year be recede . I-IMAGES Mr Goldsmith ' S brother , Ben , say on Twitter that the Liberal Democrats win the seat after voter have a ` ` Brexit tantrum ' ' . IMAGES/ Getty Mrs Olney yesterday walk out of a live radio interview after be repeatedly push on how she could justify call for a second EU referendum . AFP/ PA/ ' they be clutch at straw . Richmond be 17th most Remain constituency in UK and far from typical ' Europe divide Timeline of key event Tomorrow Matteo Renzi , the Italian prime minister , could resign if he lose a referendum on constitutional reform Monday : Supreme Court case open into whether Parliament should get a vote on trigger Article @card@ January @card@ Judges rule on Supreme Court case in move that could force parliamentary vote March @card@ Theresa May will invoke Article @card@ and formally begin Brexit negotiation April @card@ French presidential election begin , expect to end in battle between far-Right Marine Le Pen and mainstream Conservative Francois Fillon the Brexit judgment unparalleled event require unparalleled insight from Monday the Supreme Court will consider the most important constitutional decision in decade - should Parliament vote on trigger Article @card@ ? follow every moment online with Telegraph Premium . all the live coverage , unrivalled insight and instant analysis you need at www.telegraph.co.uk/brexit
Davis and Fox to manage Britain ' s exit from the EU
David Davis and Liam Fox , two of the most prominent Brexit supporter , be last night appoint to the Cabinet to manage leave the European union and secure new trade deal . in a remarkable political comeback , the two backbencher and former Tory leadership candidate be give newly create post to help define Britain ' s future outside of the EU . Mr Davis , who be beat to the leadership by David Cameron in @card@ , be appoint Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union - a role dub ` ` chief Brexit negotiator ' ' . he be John Major ' s Europe minster between @card@ and @card@ , give him both experience of Brussels negotiation and an awareness of the party ' s deep division over Europe . Dr Fox , who fail to win the leadership in both @card@ and this month , be name Secretary of State for International Trade . he be Mr Cameron ' s defence secretary for a little over a year before leave after a scandal over his adviser , and turn down at least one late chance to return to the front bench . the appointment be cheer by Tory backbencher and Eurosceptics as proof Mrs May , who support stay in the EU at the referendum , will stick to her promise that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit . ' ' Nigel Farage , the former UK Independence Party leader , praise the ` ` inspired choice ' ' and say he be now ` ` more optimistic ' ' that the vote to leave the EU would be follow through . while the remit of the new position remain unclear , previous suggestion for what would be need to secure Brexit give some insight into what the role will entail . Mr Davis , the MP for Haltemprice and Howden , be likely to head up a team of negotiator hold regular meeting with representative of the remain @card@ EU member state to discuss the term of the UK ' S exit . in a 2,000-word blog post on website Conservative Home just three day ago , Mr Davis outline his vision for secure Brexit . on access to the single market , Mr Davis say : ` ` the ideal outcome , ( and in my view the most likely , after a lot of wrangling ) be continue tariff-free access . once the European nation realise that we be not go to budge on control of our border , they will want to talk , in their own interest . ' ' the role of Dr Fox , MP for North Somerset , will be to head up Britain ' S effort to sign new trade deal with county across the role - something Eurosceptics repeatedly criticise Brussel for fail to do efficiently . one of his big challenge will be to win over the Americans .
Scotland Future will be bright after Brexit , say May ; Tory leadership frontrunner insist she be no ' Remainer ' and can take Britain out of EU ; May challenge Leadsom to sign ' pledge card ' in run-up to leadership contest
Britain will emerge from Brexit with a ` ` good , bright future ' ' , Theresa May pledge today as she warn that the country face ` ` tough time ' ' while it negotiate to leave the European Union . in her first interview since she and Andrea Leadsom be name as the final two candidate vie to become the next prime minister , Mrs May tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` Politics could do with some bloody difficult woman . ' ' the Home Secretary say that a female prime minister will bring ` ` honesty ' ' and a great focus on ` ` delivery ' ' in Downing Street , as she suggest that man tend to treat politics as a ` ` game ' ' . she also appeal to people not to consider her as a ` ` Remainer ' ' after she campaign to keep Britain in the EU , say that she be ` ` very clear that Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . she insist that she be not the ` ` new Margaret Thatcher ' ' , describe the former prime minister as ` ` absolutely unique ' ' . ` ` people love to draw parallel , but I just get on with the job and that be my philosophy , ' ' she say . Mrs May , the longest-serving home secretary in a century , top the second-round poll of Tory MP with the support of @card@ out of @card@ member . the decision on who will lead the country out of the EU and through negotiation with Brussels now rest with the @card@ member of the Conservative Party . Mrs May adopt a more cautious tone than her rival about leave the European Union , admit that ` ` difficult time ' ' lie ahead despite the fact that she be ` ` optimistic ' ' for the future . Mrs May say : ` ` if I be prime minister , we will come out of the European union and part of that will be control of free movement . but alongside that , it ' S important to show how we can come through what will be , I think , some difficult time with a good , bright future . ' ' she urge the party to drop the term ` ` Brexiteers and Remainers ' ' , echo the suggestion by Lord Hague last week that ` ` we be all leaver now ' ' . she say : ` ` we have a job to do in make the good deal we can in come out of the EU and I be very clear that I will deliver Brexit . ' ' she pledge to act on David Cameron ' s election manifesto by make a continue on Page @card@ interview : page @card@ editorial comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ decision on Heathrow and push ahead with HS2 . her approach contrast with that of Mrs Leadsom , who have question the need for the HS2 railway line and criticise gay marriage as part of an appeal to the Tory heartland . she also embrace Ken Clarke ' s description of her last week as a ` ` bloody difficult woman ' ' . she say : ` ` we [ woman ] just get stick in . Politics be n't a game . the decision we make affect people ' S life and that be something we must keep to the forefront of our mind . ` ` woman often focus more on delivery - what the outcome be go to be rather than what be the interaction people have in order to get there . I also think that right now people be look for an honesty in politics . we could go through some tough time and we need to be honest with people about that . ' ' she admit she like to keep her ` ` personal life personal ' ' but say she and her husband Philip ` ` deal with ' ' the fact they could n't have child and ` ` move on ' ' . ` ` I hope nobody would think that matter , ' ' she say ` ` I can still empathise , understand people and care about fairness and opportunity . ' ' Mrs May today challenge Mrs Leadsom to sign a five-point ` ` pledge card ' ' as she call for a ` ` clean campaign ' ' . it include a pledge not to ` ` co-operate in any way with other political party ' ' , include donor or member . Nigel Farage , the Ukip leader , and Arron Banks , the party ' S donor , have say they support Mrs Leadsom as next Tory leader . Mrs Leadsom last week refuse to rule out Mr Farage form part of her Brexit negotiating team . it come as President Barack Obama dismiss claim that the special relationship be be put at risk by Brexit as ` ` hyperbole ' ' . he say that Brexit negotiation should not be ` ` protracted ' ' .
the detail of today ' s Brexit triumph for Theresa May will tomorrow reveal a capitulation ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - at the last minute a deal have be reach to let the second stage of Brexit talk take place . Quelle surprise ! follow the usual pattern , Theresa May , the Prime Minister , will make a triumphant statement to the House on Monday proclaim her success and slowly , over next few day and week , the true level of her capitulation will be reveal . thirty year on , the release of government paper will show just how much the citizen of the UK have be deliberately mislead by the politician and their administrator , just as disclose in the Heath paper . Philip Honey Lound , Nottinghamshire sir - after day of negative press report , Mrs May should now be give the credit where credit be due . Anthony Haslam Farnham , Surrey sir - the only winner from Mrs May ' s surrender to the EU ( lightly disguise as negotiation ) be the EU itself , Mrs May ( politically , at least for the short term ) and her Remainer colleague . how can agree to tie the United Kingdom to EU standard ( regulatory equivalence ) mean Brexit ? Mrs May ' S deal simply mean we will continue to pose no competitive threat to the EU and remain fetter to its sclerotic regulatory dysfunction . the whole point of Brexit be to be free from EU fetter so we can forge an independent identity and prosperity with open trade across the world . Nicholas Dobson Bessacarr , South Yorkshire sir - Mrs May say there have be give and take on both side . we ' ve see that , use our money , she be the side that give ; the EU be the side that take . Martin Burgess Beckenham , Kent sir - at last Mrs May , the elect leader of the UK ' S elect Government , have be give permission by the unelected president of the unelected European Commission to move on , as Nigel Farage observe , to the next stage of her ( and the UK ' S ) humiliation . John GU Clark Southampton sir - what do Brexit mean ? I know what it do n't mean when I vote for it . it do n't mean ` ` continue regulatory alignment ' ' . it do n't mean hand over £761 for every man , woman and child in the UK for the privilege of leave . it do n't mean subjugate ourselves to the European Court of Justice . the current situation appear to be an attempt by the political class to thwart the express will of the people . in so do , they be play with fire . Tony Morris Newcastle upon Tyne sir - it seem the UK will continue to have no control over immigration from the EU and that Parliament will rubber stamp law issue by the EU . the main reason why we vote to leave the EU be to regain control of our border and make our own law . this agreement must be reject and if necessary the PM should go . Robert Stather Bromsgrove , Worcestershire sir - ` ` UK reach historic EU deal , ' ' say the headline . yes , the most shameful in our history . Brian Gilbert Hampton , Middlesex sir - once the ( entire ) UK have leave the EU and go past a transition period , what be to stop a future UK government from pass a law remove the ECJ from any input here and empower our Supreme Court to have the final say ? John Tilsiter Radlett , Hertfordshire sir - I fear that the picture of white smoke tweet by Martin Selmayr , an aide to Jean-Claude Juncker , indicate progress only because Mrs May have surrender . Adrian Waller Woodsetts , South Yorkshire
Spanish violence ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - be the brutality of Spanish police , in their attempt to stop Catalans voting peacefully , part of Spain ' s strategy to convince Gibraltarian about the delight of democracy Spanish-style ? Dominic Keown Cambridge sir - there be continue propaganda from the EU against Brexit . in the Canadian Globe and Mail on Saturday , I read a diatribe against the Catalan independence referendum by Ramón Luis Valcárcel , a vice president of the European Parliament . he compare the referendum in Catalonia to Brexit : ` ` Those responsible for this coup against democracy prefer to ignore reality , preach a form of populism akin to Brexit . ' ' for Mr Valcárcel , as for Jean-Claude Juncker and Guy Verhofstadt , the only reality can be theirs . it indicate what we face in hope that reason will prevail in the negotiation over Brexit . Richard Hayes Banstead , Surrey sir - if we need a clear motive for rapid departure from the EU , the action of the Spanish police in Catalonia be more than enough . could you imagine these scene on the street of Scotland ? Michael Wynn Prenton , Wirral
apart from blather about Florence , all we get from May be old banality ; May ' s Brexit speech
be that it ? seriously ? that be it ? really ? yesterday Theresa May drag her Chancellor , her Foreign Secretary and her Brexit Secretary , plus the British print and broadcasting medium , all the way to Florence in Italy , in order to read them a speech on Brexit that last @card@ minute . if she ' d boil it down to the only significant new information it contain , it would have last @card@ second . essentially : the Prime Minister want Britain to stay in the EU for an extra two year , to give her more time to sort out Brexit . this will be call an ` ` implementation period ' ' . during it , freedom of movement will continue , although there will be a ` ` registration system ' ' for new arrival . and that , more or less , be it . she do not say how much money she be prepare to pay Brussel in the ` ` divorce bill ' ' . nor do she say what sort of trade relationship with the EU she want - other than that it should n't be like membership of the European Economic Area , or a Canada-style free trade arrangement ( the two model most commonly moot ) . instead , pretty much all she do - apart from blather wetly about Florence and the Renaissance in the manner of an A-level history essay - be puff out the same old weary banality we ' ve hear from her countless time before . Brexit , she inform us , represent a ` ` define moment ' ' . it would be ` ` a new chapter ' ' . it offer ` ` opportunity ' ' . it present ` ` shared challenge ' ' , and require us to be ` ` creative ' ' . the future , however , be ` ` bright ' ' . Britain and the EU would form ` ` a deep and special relationship ' ' . what that ` ` deep and special relationship ' ' would be like , however , she once again neglect to reveal . ` ` the question , ' ' she say sagely , ` ` be how we get there . ' ' Honestly . I want to scream . of Course THAT ' S THE Question , PRIME Minister . it ' S YOUR Job To ANSWER it . that ' S why you ' Re GIVING This SPEECH . this be N'T A VOX POP in the Street WITH A BEWILDERED SHOPPER for a Regional LUNCHTIME News Bulletin . it ' S A Major SPEECH By THE PRIME Minister . who HAPPENS To Be you . it ' S NOW @card@ MONTHS SINCE THE REFERENDUM . so for PITY ' S Sake , do N'T Just STAND THERE WIBBLING ABOUT ` ` the question ' ' . tell us the answer . or AT LEAST GIVE US SOME SENSE , HOWEVER FAINT , THAT you ' Re ACTUALLY Working TOWARDS One . presumably to make this dust-cloud of vacuity seem ` ` optimistic ' ' and ` ` positive ' ' , she keep try to smile and speak at the same time , as if she be an American television weather forecaster . it be so squirmingly awkward and self-conscious , it make Gordon Brown look like Angelina Jolie . still , not everyone think so . as he shuffle out at the end , journalist leap upon Boris Johnson . ` ` Uplifting ... positive ... confident , ' ' he burble . ` ` attractive vision ... strong UK ... take back control ... ' ' Mrs May be no near reach a deal with the EU . but at least she seem to have reach some kind of deal with Mr Johnson . ' it be so awkward and self-conscious , it make Gordon Brown look like Angelina Jolie '
labour peer wo n't want to wreck Brexit ; the Salisbury Convention will survive despite the good effort of the undemocratic Lib Dems
if these seem like divisive time , cast your mind back to the Britain of @card@ ; a nation batter by war , a new Labour government elect on a platform of massive and radical reform , and a House of Lords so overwhelmingly Tory that Labour peer be describe as ` ` a tiny atoll in the vast ocean of Tory reaction ' ' . that Labour victory be lead by my grandfather , Clement Attlee . and it be hard today to understand the scale of Conservative opposition to his agenda . yet it be two peer - the Labour leader of the House of Lords , Viscount Addison , and the Tory , Viscount Cranborne ( the Marquess of Salisbury ) - who form what would become know as the Salisbury Convention . the opposition would not thwart major bill that have be in Attlee ' S manifesto , they agree , because that legislation reflect the will of the electorate . it would be constitutionally wrong - not to mention politically unwise - to do so . today , many be worry that the Lords will ignore the Salisbury Convention - that , because we have a minority government , Labour and Liberal Democrat Remainer peer will choose to wreck Brexit . let me say that the liberal Democrats do n't care and have n't care for year about the will of the people . but Labour Lords , skilfully and responsibly lead by their leader Angela Smith , will be very careful not to upset the convention . baroness Smith and her team understand that what benefit my grandfather also benefit the Labour government of Tony Blair , whose project of Lords reform be not block by the very Lords it seek to turf out . the Labour Party in the Lords will , as a result , be sensible . they know that the majority of voter choose to back party which back Brexit and that the Labour Party be one of those party . it be true that Lib Dem peer feel very differently , but while people could have choose to support the Lib Dems at the ballot box , they do not , and they should take that message . certainly , peer from the two main party will seek to ensure there be clarity . we may send legislation back to the commons if it do not do what it say on the tin and that be our constitutional role . but neither Labour nor Tory peer want to wreck Brexit . many of my fellow be , like me , deeply Eurosceptic . we acknowledge that the country have vote for Brexit and be content with that . in the short term we must adopt the great repeal bill , before take advantage of the long-term freedom that will come with Brexit . that have a popular mandate from the referendum and the last general election , and there be a constitutional justice in that . Labour , to be blunt , will not make a mess like an ill-trained spaniel because to do so will rebound upon them . only the Lib Dems will have no inhibition , and we in the Upper House recognise that the utterly disproportionate Lib Dem representation be a very serious problem . we ' ve get more than @card@ Lib Dem peer , even though they only have @card@ MP . however , we Tory only have ourselves to blame . it be David Cameron who keep stuff the Lords with Lib Dems without regard to the future position . there need to be a cull but we be capable of organise one for ourselves . sadly there be quite a few peer who turn up very regularly and claim their allowance even though it be not clear what they actually do . expect a plan where each bloc in the Upper House be assign a quota of peer , possibly depend on their representation in the Commons . but if we do reduce our number , we would need assurance that the prime minister of the day wo n't take up the slack and stuff the Lords again with relatively junior people . it use to be that only cabinet minister or very senior MP would get elevated . now the Lords be fill with worthy backbencher . there be far too many of them , frankly . not all peer should survive , but the Salisbury Convention will . it will do so , first , because most peer realise that it protect electorate-endorsed law from rejection by our unelected chamber . and secondly because it protect the very survival of our chamber , by encouraging restraint . the Earl Attlee enter the House of Lords in @card@ as a crossbencher and join the Conservative party in @card@ . he be one of @card@ remain hereditary peer read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland May prepare to walk away from Brexit talk to avoid ' bad deal '
Theresa May last night insist she want to regain the ` ` trust ' ' of the British people in order to have a ` ` strong hand ' ' in the Brexit negotiation . the Prime Minister make her appeal to the public after a dramatic drop in the Conservatives ' polling figure in recent day , follow the party ' s U-turn over cap the cost of social care. . follow repeated question from Jeremy Paxman over whether she would be prepare to ` ` walk away ' ' from the Brexit negotiating table , she finally concede that in the event of a bad deal , ` ` we have to be prepare to walk out ' ' . a central theme of Paxman ' S question be how the public could trust her when her party have reverse policy on social care and national insurance in recent month - as well as her earlier repeat claim that there would be no election before @card@ . to audience applause , the former BBC Newsnight presenter cite the conservative ' U-turn over national insurance earlier this year , ask if the Prime Minister be ` ` a blowhard that collapse at the first sign of gunfire ' ' . the Prime Minister insist she change her mind about whether to hold an election ` ` after it become clear ` ` that other party want to frustrate the process of Brexit negotiation ' ' . Mrs May say : ` ` I be go out across the country ask people , for me to gain their trust at this election . ' ' Paxman also ask when Mrs May realise she have the ` ` wrong answer ' ' over the question of whether Britain should leave the EU , after she campaign for a Remain vote . the Prime Minister insist the British people make a choice and it be important for politician to respect that . but ask repeatedly if she have change her mind over her vote - or still believe it be a ` ` duff idea ' ' she refuse to provide a direct answer , instead say Britain could ` ` make a success of Brexit ' ' . Paxman repeatedly ask if Mrs May be prepare to walk away without a deal . she repeat her mantra that ` ` no deal would be good than a bad deal ' ' before concede that , yes , she would ` ` have to ' ' walk away . one of the most passionate audience question come from Philip Webster , who say he have start his first job @card@ year ago on @card@ shilling a week , and ask why his generation should vote for the conservative despite the prospect of the value of his home being ` ` erode ' ' by the so-called ` ` dementia tax ' ' . the Prime Minister say her social care policy , now include a cap on the amount people have to spend on their care , be intend to take away the risk of people not be able to leave their home to their family . Paxman ask ` ` explicitly , unambiguously ' ' if Mrs May could say what the cap on social care would be . she face laughter from the audience when she do not provide a direct answer , instead repeat that it be fair to have a consultation first , and ` ` it ' S about think about what the right approach be to get to that figure ' ' . she defend her party ' s record reduce the number of police , say : ` ` we be live within our mean . ' ' Mrs May be also criticise by a teacher and mother-of-two over her ` ` damaging ' ' plan for school funding . face with heckle from the audience , she insist that people should focus on the achievement of school rather than funding . ' I be go out across the country ask people , for me to gain their trust at this election '
EU business chief ' sure ' UK will get free-trade deal ; Commissioner ' s upbeat prediction undermine warning bloc will try to punish country for Brexit
the European Union be certain to strike a free-trade deal with the UK after Brexit , the bloc ' s trade commissioner have say . Cecelia Malmstrom say that while Brexit represent ` ` uncharted territory ' ' the UK and the EU will reach an agreement on trade ` ` for sure ' ' . her comment be in stark contrast to other European leader who have repeatedly warn that Britain will be ` ` punish ' ' for leave the EU . Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , say yesterday that Britain be suffer from ` ` illusion ' ' and that Brexit be not the EU ' s ` ` top priority ' ' . Theresa May highlight the comment during an election rally in Leeds in which she warn that EU leader be ` ` line up ' ' to oppose Britain . she say : ` ` we have see Chancellor Merkel ' S comment today . she say the UK have ' illusion ' about the process and that the @card@ member state of the European Union agree . we can see how tough those negotiation be go to be at time . ' ' Mrs May make it clear that a vote for Jeremy Corbyn would only serve to help Mrs Merkel , say : ` ` Our opponent be already seek to disrupt those negotiation - at the same time as @card@ other European country line up to oppose us . ' ' however , Ms Malmstrom tell a conference in Denmark : ` ` it ' s uncharted territory but I ' m sure we will solve it . we will have a free-trade agreement , that be for sure . ' ' Steve Baker , a Eurosceptic Conservative MP , say : ` ` Cecilia Malmstrom ' S comment be very welcome and confirm the impression I ' ve be give when I have visit senior official in Europe . they do n't want tariff , they want free trade with us . the fundamental axis of this negotiation be the hole in the EU budget leave by our exit . that ' S why there have be so much sabre-rattling . ' ' it come as a document submit to the EU ' s General Affairs Council in Strasbourg , poposed that the @card@ British seat in the European Parliament due to fall vacant be transform into new seat represent a ` ` single European constituency ' ' . the proposal , table by the Italian foreign minister and see by the Daily Telegraph , would enable all ` ` the European political family to contend them on a trans-national basis ' ' . European leader be prepare to recognise the potential for a unite Ireland within the EU , the FT have report . EU leader will be ask at a summit tomorrow to endorse the idea of a smooth transition for Northern Ireland into Europe in the event of a vote for Irish reunification . ' they want free trade . the fundamental axis of this negotiation be the hole in the EU budget leave by our exit '
Market Insight Sterling Body : despite the cheer of success and wail of defeat as Article @card@ be sign and deliver , sterling sail on serenely , write Tim Wallace . the event be entirely expect and market perform their role of price this in in advance . but that do not mean the currency ' s future value be certain . Sterling drop sharply in the wake of the Brexit vote , then dip a little further in October when it become clear Britain really be go to leave as market anticipate a negative impact on Britain ' S economy . a weak pound help the economy adjust to new circumstance , make UK good cheap for foreign buyer , and boost exporter ' profit . as Ben Broadbent , deputy governor of the Bank of England , say this month , that may not last . if Brexit be not , after all , bad for the economy - and growth since the referendum may indicate this - then sterling will rise again . but if it impose unexpectedly big cost on business , the currency will need to fall further to reflect that and recover the lost competitiveness . with little detail on the path of Brexit talk , the pound be not set to move far for now . since late last year it have hover at around @card@ on Bloomberg ' S British Pound Index , a valuation of sterling base on the currency of Britain ' s key trading partner . but to underline how far sterling have fall since the financial crisis strike - that index begin at @card@ on the eve of @card@ . strength Britain ' S economy be grow at a steady pace International investor see the UK as a safe haven for their money other advanced nation come with their own risk Threats Brexit talk could go badly , dent the pound Donald Trump be push the dollar up , and the pound down an interest rate cut would depress sterling Weaknesses Brexit have damage the UK ' s reputation for political stability the negotiation be uncharted territory interest rate be at rock bottom level opportunity the Bank of England could hike interest rate , push up the pound a pro-trade Brexit deal would calm the doubter Trade deal outside the EU would raise optimism
Brexit water be muddy by confusion about the single market ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - could we have some clarity on the difference between be a member of the single market and have access to it ? many commentator conflate these two term as if they mean the same thing . after Brexit , we will want access to the single market but will ( hopefully ) not be member of it . access do not include be bind by rule such as free movement . country outside the EU which trade with it ( India , the United States , Canada , Japan , South Korea etc ) all have access to the single market but be not member of it . if we can not agree on terminology , how can we properly discuss Brexit ? Andy Bebbington Stone , Staffordshire Sir - Angela Merkel say that Britain will not be allow to cherry pick in Brexit negotiation ( report , December @card@ ) . however , the EU choose to do exactly that when it suit its purpose . the treaty between the EU and Morocco , draw up some year ago , allow for the free movement of good , service and capital but exclude free movement of people . this could be a blueprint for Britain ' s future relationship with the EU . David Starkie London SW8 Sir - it be amazing how EU myth persist in the face of overwhelming contrary evidence . you report that the Governor of the Bank of England be attempt to ` ` keep the UK inside the single market of good and service until at least @card@ ' ' . but there be no single market in service in the EU . there never have be , and there be no likelihood of one in the near future . give the importance of service , especially financial , to the British economy , why persist with reference to an imaginary market ? Stanislas Yassukovich OppÈde , Vaucluse , France Sir - Those forecast the euro ' S demise underestimate the devastation that its EU creator be prepare to countenance in order to make their dream project succeed . this Brussels lunacy ultimately will not ensure the euro ' S survival , at least not in its present form . tragically it ensure that the result delayed disintegration will be that much greater.Mark Baker Tenterden , Kent Sir - William Hague ( Comment , December @card@ ) fear that the eurozone tsar will never tolerate the breakup of the euro . a face-saving compromise might be to allow the good boy ( Germany , Austria , Netherlands , Belgium , Luxembourg ) to form a new club , with perhaps a historically apt name like the Thaler , and make the bad boy in class ( Italy , Spain , Portugal , Greece , Cyprus ) start their own club , with a historically apt name like the Scudo . the rest of the eurozone country could then decide whether they want to join the good boy or the bad boy , or perhaps leave school altogether . Stuart Green Bedford
a shock on the Tory bench as opposition remember how to oppose
three time David Davis have have to come to the Commons to defend the government ' s strategy on Brexit , and already he sound tired of it . tire of MP opposite him always nag him for detail . tire of MP behind him always nag him for detail . tire of Anna Soubry , a vociferous Tory Remainer , caw at him endlessly to give way . yesterday he sound tire even before he begin . ` ` another day , another outing , ' ' he sigh . he may find there be a few more to come . the Brexit Secretary still have plenty of supportive Tory to fight his corner , of course . they too , though , seem put out by Labour ' s criticism of the government ' S approach . to put it another way : they seem indignant to find the opposition oppose them . perhaps , after a year of Labour in-fighting and incompetence , they ' d simply forget that that ' s what an opposition be there to do . yesterday ' S debate be n't strictly about Brexit ; it be about how MP be go to debate Brexit . how much light the government will shed on its plan ; how much scrutiny it will permit MP to give them . Sir Keir Starmer , newly appoint by Jeremy Corbyn as Mr Davis ' s opposite number , say Labour ` ` accepted and respected ' ' the result of the EU referendum . the government , he acknowledge , have a mandate for leave . but it do n't have ` ` a mandate for the term ' ' of leave . a mandate for , say , give up membership of the single market . and it be these term that MP must be allow to examine and debate . as might be expect from a QC and former director of public prosecution , Sir Keir make his case authoritatively and methodically . the problem , however , come when he be ask what Labour themselves want from the EU negotiation . ` ` Best access to the single market , ' ' he reply . well , that ' s enlightening , because to go by what Theresa May have say ( ` ` Maximum possible access to the European market ' ' ) , that ' s what the government want too . in short : labour appear to be attack the government for hold a position as vague as their own . just as he ' d do on Monday , Mr Davis reassure the house that the EU could n't afford to ` ` punish ' ' Britain for dare to leave . to punish us , after all , would be undemocratic , as well as damage to their own country ' www.economies.No doubt it would be . then again , Mr Davis ' S opponent may find his confidence surprising . one reason frequently give for leave the EU be that its leader be crazed ideologue who reject democracy and prize their mad project above the economic success of their own country . yet Mr Davis seem convinced that , now Britain have vote to leave , the crazed ideologue will magically transform into decent , democracyloving pragmatist who will prize the economic success of their own country over their mad project . still , who know ? maybe Mr Davis be right . maybe the ideologue be more reasonable than I think . maybe I should stop talk Brussel down . ' he seem convince the crazed EU ideologue will transform into decent , democratic pragmatist '
the exodus from the City be already happen
Theresa May ' s trip to Wall Street last month be not a resounding success . by all account , she turn up to hear what the banker have to say about Brexit and they turn up to hear what the new British Prime Minister have to say on the matter - consequently , not much get say . temper start fray . and then one of May ' S contingent make matter bad by say that the UK Government understand the importance of the City and be take the banker ' concern on board , but , let ' S be honest , none of you guy be go to be move to Frankfurt anytime soon . there be a similar dialogue ( if that be the right word and it almost certainly be n't ) during a financial service panel discussion at the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham last week : banker repeatedly say that they might have to move City job to the continent in the event of a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit and Tory MP repeatedly insist that they wo n't . what we ' ve get here be a failure to communicate . it ' S hard to blame the politician for assume the banker be cry wolf - again . how many time have we hear bank say they be go to take their ball and play somewhere else if they do n't get their way ? and it stand to reason that no self-respecting banker want to uproot their family , cancel their membership of Glynebourne and move to the cultural blackhole that be Frankfurt ( with apology to the Goethe-Museum and the no doubt excellent Hoechst Porcelain Manufactory ) . the trouble be , those forwarding this argument be make a monumental category error . in one sense that Downing Street flunky be bang-on - no one ' s move anywhere ; it ' S job that will go . speak at a conference in London yesterday Robert Rooney , the head of Morgan Stanley ' s business in Europe , say that despite all the noise about Brexit , the issue ` ` really be n't terribly complicated ' ' . if the UK stay in the single market ( which , for want of a good phrase , we ' ll call ` ` soft ' ' Brexit ) then the bank will likely be able to carry on much as before , if not ( ` ` hard ' ' Brexit ) then there ' s stuff that they use to do out of London that they will legally have to do somewhere else . it really be as simple as that . the complication come in the timing . last week , Theresa May say she would start the twoyear process of leave the European union by trigger Article @card@ in March @card@ . this have prompt a subtle shift in the City ' S focus . it be still concern about maintain the ` ` passporting ' ' that will allow them to sell their service throughout the EU and the rather esoteric issue of euro-clearing . but it be now really worry that the UK and the EU wo n't get round to decide on the transitional arrangement that could bridge the inevitable gap between the end of the Article @card@ process and the start of any new trade agreement . it be not just the bank that be fret about this loom cliff edge . last month , the Bank of England make Phil Evans its new ` ` Brexit coordinator ' ' with responsibility for try to minimise the impact of the country ' s departure from the EU on the UK ' s huge financial sector . banker say that the Prudential Regulatory Authority be ask them what contingency plan they have in place to deal with a worst-case , hardest-of-hard Brexit scenario . this have prompt bank to start take what they call ` ` no regret ' ' decision - move role and entity to Europe that can be reversed or which make sense anyway . bank have - in the most dramatic fashion - be alert to the fact that the old ( super-efficient ) hub-and-spoke system run out of London massively concentrate political risk and be now think about spread themselves around a bit . some business will be too expensive to move and the plug will just get pull . those that have to move could take around two year to set up in Europe and queue could soon start to form . to which European city will those activity migrate ? take your pick . will Bank X move X thousand staff to Paris , Frankfurt or Dublin ? no . could Bank X cut a few hundred/ thousand job in London ( or just not replace natural churn ) and then hire a few hundred/ thousand people in a variety of different European city ( with some maybe go to New York ) ? yes . will another European city rise to challenge London as the main financial hub in this time zone ? no . but if each take a few percentage point of market share from the City , it will start to add up . will London cease to be a prominent global financial centre ? also no ( only about 25pc to 30pc of the City ' S business be with the EU ) . but could Brexit diminish London ' s status at the margin ? yes . and would that result in a hit to the UK ' s finance ( and therefore the economy ) ? yes . this process have - slowly but surely - already begin . manager have become less reluctant to sign off on European job , legal entity on the continent that be slate to be shut down be be keep open , discreet inquiry be be make about office space . there will be no Big Bang , just a gradual shift . how big it will be depend not only on the form Brexit take but also how soon decision be reach . a report publish last week by the consultancy Oliver Wyman for CityUK conclude that a soft Brexit would result in the loss of @card@ job and £500m in tax revenue while a hard Brexit would result in the loss of around @card@ job , £10bn in tax revenue . banker believe it will be possible to use current trade deal , equivalency arrangement and sensible negotiation to find a solution that work for the UK , the EU and the City . but if the government want to know what that be , it have n't ask yet . the clock be tick . ' it be not just the bank that be fret about this loom cliff edge '
ignore the doom-mongers . Brexit should be a cause for optimism
last week I write on the outlook for the UK economy in the year ahead without even mention Brexit once . this be not accidental . nor be it because of a suspicion that you be all bore to death by the subject ( although you may well be ) . rather it reflect my judgment that the Brexit negotiation will not play a major role in determine how the economy fare this year . this may seem surprising . there be a widespread belief , fan by part of the medium , that our economic fate hang by a thread and if Brexit negotiation go badly then the economy could be in serious trouble . this be completely misguided . admittedly , the political world and the medium world that live off it will be on tenterhook for much of this year . each twist and turn of the negotiation will be report and analyse ad nauseam . yet the economy will trundle on much as before , whatever happen in the talk . as I never tire of tell people , on the whole , political event have next to no impact on immediate economic performance . this be determine by much more humdrum factor such as the growth of income or change in interest rate . similarly , the several serious political issue currently beset the European Union , include Catalonia , the impending Italian election , the absence of a German government and the increase alienation of Poland and Hungary , despite their long-term importance , be unlikely to dent the current expansionary phase in the eurozone economy . this be not to say that the term of Brexit be economically irrelevant . rather , their impact on the economy will unfold over several year . and even the long-term impact be not mechanistically determinate . it will depend largely on the policy decision that we make . nevertheless , at the beginning of the year in which many of the issue surround Brexit will become clearer it be appropriate to take stock . what have the effect be ? accord to the Treasury , the vote to leave be suppose to send the economy into recession . this turn out to be nonsense on stilt . even so , accord to Tony Blair , you can see the ill-effects of Brexit in everything from the crisis in the NHS to our poor productivity performance . I be surprise that he do not throw in recent extreme weather event for good measure . the truth be that whatever be wrong with the British economy at the moment - and there be quite a few thing - predate the Brexit vote and have next to nothing to do with it . in fact , last year ' s growth rate of a probable 1.8pc be only marginally low than the previous year ' S 1.9pc . this degree of difference be not worth quibbling about . it may reflect all sort of statistical quirk . moreover , it may even be revise away . admittedly , the UK have slip down the international growth table as other country ' growth have pick up . but this reflect difference in the timing of the economic cycle and probably wo n't last . true , some investment be defer but by the end of last year the overall impact of this appear to be minor . investment grow more strongly last year than it have in @card@ . where there have be a continue effect from Brexit , albeit indirectly , be on consumer spending . this have be hit by the squeeze on real income result from the rise in inflation that be cause by the fall of the pound . however , this effect be set to subside as inflation fall back . moreover , we should soon enjoy a substantial increase in export , reflect our improve competitiveness . there be clear sign that this be already happen . so , Brexit have contribute to the rebalance of the UK economy that have long be necessary . with regard to the eventual outcome of the negotiation we be still not at all sure what may transpire . future possible trading relationship with the EU range from some continued pseudo-membership of the custom union and single market , through to Theresa May ' s ` ` special partnership ' ' , which would involve tariff-free and interferencefree trade , to departure without a deal and trade on WTO rule . far from be a disaster as so many assume , if the EU do not play ball with May , this last outcome could in fact be the good . but even if we know this be go to be the outcome it would not fully dispel uncertainty . simply say that we will trade under WTO rule do not say anything specific about tariff rate . it would be consistent with impose tariff on import from the EU or keep such import tariff-free while abolish tariff on import from the rest of the world , and all station in between . WTO rule merely stipulate that whatever tariff rate be decide must be impose on all country - unless there be a free trade agreement in place . this uncertainty about our future relationship with the EU do not help business to plan or to invest . however , to portray this as a disaster for the UK economy , as so many Remainers do , be ridiculous . this be an attempt to serve up a reheat version of ` ` Project Fear ' ' . true , British export to the EU be an extremely important part of the economy . they account for about 12pc of our GDP . but this mean that about 88pc of the UK ' S GDP do not consist of export to the EU . moreover , whatever trade relationship be agree , the overwhelming bulk of existing EU-UK trade will continue . and whatever trade relationship be agree , the share of the EU in the UK ' S trade will continue to fall as the EU fade in relative importance in the world . there be good reason to be optimistic . if you be to embark on a major change to your trading and economic arrangement it be good to do this when the world economy be grow well and your currency be competitive . for the first time in many year , both these criterion be currently meet . Roger Bootle be chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com ' Brexit have contribute to the rebalance of the UK economy that have long be necessary '
Brexit deal for aviation industry be ' vital to avoid a blow to trade '
the government have be urge to focus on the aviation industry in its Brexit talk if the country be to avoid suffer a hit to trade and investment the Independent Transport Commission think-tank , one of the country ' s lead research charity , have issue a report claim a lack of support for the sector could lead to trade suffering once the UK leave the EU . its research , authore by former Bank of England economist Rebecca Driver , point to the ` ` huge economic value ' ' of the aviation industry . it add that Brexit will have a ` ` significant impact on the regulatory framework govern trade in aviation ' ' make it even more essential the UK retain global aviation tie . establish new aviation agreement with the EU be deem critical give there be no historic rule to fall back on should a deal not be strike . many industry could operate on World Trade Organisation rule . but Air Service Agreements , which enable cross-border aviation , be strike on a bilateral basis between individual country . this mean there be no underlie global framework to fall back on . ` ` in order to preserve the UK ' s air connectivity , the UK will need to ensure that there be a timely renegotiation of a significant number of aviation treaty , include with third country such as the US , as well as with the EU , ' ' the report state . the UK ' s large aviation manufacturing sector be also single out as an area of potential concern due to its reliance on factory across the globe . in @card@ , the trade surplus in aircraft and aircraft part in the UK be the large of any of the country ' s good sector , show how important the industry be to UK plc . ` ` the aviation manufacturing sector be part of significant global supply chain , with aircraft be assemble from part from many different country , ' ' it say . ` ` this mean that the competitiveness of the UK sector will depend on minimise regulatory barrier post-Brexit . ' ' Air passenger duty , the levy bemoan by the industry for its high rate compare to other nation , also draw criticism from the report . ` ` if the UK be go to achieve its vision of become a truly global player post-Brexit , have a tax that penalise travel to far-flung location be likely to be counter-productive , ' ' it say . cut or even remove the tax seem unlikely in the near future , however , give move by Philip Hammond the Chancellor , in his Budget last month to increase the rate for those fly business class or with private jet . more broadly , the research show the importance of aviation by state that a new airline route between two metropolitan area lead to a 4.6pc increase in venture capital investment , while a 10pc increase in the number of intercontinental flight lead to a 4pc increase in business headquarters . Matthew Niblett , director of the ITC , call for decisive action from the government give trade talk be about to begin with the EU and the UK ' s aviation policy remain ` ` bog down ' ' in Parliament . ' the UK must ensure there be a timely renegotiation of a significant number of aviation treaty '
City require ' swift clarity ' on transition deal , say HSBC boss ; Shift towards to Asia drive $ 3.8bn rise in underlie profit at HSBC in third quarter
the outgoing chief executive of HSBC Stuart Gulliver have warn of the danger of an empty Brexit transition deal and say the bank would wait ` ` as long as we possibly can ' ' before decide whether to move up to @card@ staff from the UK to France . after post profit and revenue growth for the nine month to September , Mr Gulliver say HSBC have not experience any ` ` material ' ' negative impact from Brexit so far but want swift clarity on the UK ' s term of withdrawal . he warn a transition deal devoid of detail would only provide false comfort to the City . ` ` when it come to international client , what they ' re really keen on be to have clarity , ' ' he say . ` ` a transitional period without clarity may just postpone investment . what matter be the timing of precision around the UK ' s relationship with the EU post-Brexit . ' ' at the time of HSBC ' s half-year result in July , Mr Gulliver advise the bank expect to incur around $ 200m- $ 300m ( £152m-£227m ) of restructuring cost in a hard Brexit . to date it have book just $ 12m of cost relate to legal advice and planning.Mr Gulliver say the bank ' s major presence and separate EU banking licence in France allow it to hold off from do ` ` anything precipitous ' ' on Brexit . ` ` we do n't need to move as early as some other , ' ' he add . in the third quarter HSBC post revenue growth across all its main global business as its ` ` pivot to Asia ' ' continue to drive expansion . more than 70pc of its adjusted profit for the year to date come from Asia , with retail banking and wealth management perform particularly well . however a rise in cost lead to a slight dip in adjusted pre-tax profit , to the disappointment of investor . underlie revenue for the three month rise 2pc to $ 13bn ( £9.9bn ) , while underlie pre-tax profit slip $ 100m to $ 5.4bn . despite both figure narrowly beat analyst expectation , HSBC share fall 1.5pc to 737p . over the nine month to September HSBC grow both underlie revenue and pre-tax profit by 3pc and 8pc respectively . exceptional cost in the third quarter hit $ 770m , include a further $ 101m put towards the cost of set up a ring-fenced UK retail bank to comply with new regulation , take total spending on this to $ 277m . with one-off cost and currency impact strip out , HSBC post a $ 3.8bn leap in pre-tax profit to $ 4.6bn for the third quarter , as it have make a $ 1.7bn one-off loss on the sale of its Brazil business last year . HSBC be in the process of hand over to new management , with new chairman Mark Tucker start this month , while HSBC lifer John Flint will take over as chief executive in February . Mr Gulliver say he expect Mr Flint - who be step up from head HSBC ' s retail banking operation - would follow ` ` the same approach ' ' include ` ` the mantra that revenue need to grow faster than cost ' ' . he say he would spend his last few week at HSBC ` ` work with intensity ' ' to improve shareholder return and on hit the final two of @card@ strategic target set out in @card@ that have not yet be meet - to improve profitability in the US and to grow its global renminbi trading business . Mr Gulliver say the bank be cooperate with UK enforcement agency investigate potential link between HSBC and corruption allegation in South Africa . he also say the bank be work with more than @card@ UK business customer who have have their business banking privilege curtail after be catch up in a crackdown on money laundering . he insist company catch up have be repeatedly warn to provide more information and represent a small minority of customer . HSBC ' s core capital ratio decline marginally to 14.6pc , down from 14.7pc , but be still well up on 13.6pc at the end of last year . $ 12m the amount the bank have book to date on cost relate to contingency planning for Britain ' s exit from the European Union
UK seek close datum protection partnership with EU after Brexit
Britain will seek to remain ` ` fully involved ' ' in shape EU datum protection regulation after Brexit in a hugely ambitious attempt to retain the status quo for business , the government announce yesterday . the plan , which be set out in a position paper from the Department for Exiting the EU , be welcome by tech industry chief , although they quickly warn it would not be easy or straightforward to accomplish . the question of how both business and government will maintain legal cross-border datum exchange after Brexit remain one of the most pressing of the negotiation , with datum flow the lifeblood of both trade and security tie . the 13-page position paper argue that the UK will depart the EU with rule on data-sharing at an ` ` unprecedented point of alignment ' ' , and will seek an early determination from the European side that flow will be maintain unimpeded immediately after Brexit . subsequently , Britain will seek to build a new , bespoke UK-EU model ` ` which could build on ' ' the existing model in which the European Commission grant ` ` adequacy ' ' status to non-EU country which it have determine comply with its data protection standard . the new model would allow the UK ' s data authority , the Information Commissioner ' S Office ( ICO ) , to be ` ` fully involve in future EU regulatory dialogue ' ' , with an ` ` ongoing role ' ' for the ICO with the existing network of EU datum protection authority . the government have concede that no other non-EU country have such a role and that such an arrangement would be unique and unprecedented . Antony Walker , deputy director of Tech UK which represent more than @card@ UK-based tech firm , welcome the ambition of the proposal , but urge more detail . ` ` what the government say it want to achieve be positive , but we urgently need more detail on how we get there , because it wo n't be easy or straightforward - although it be not impossible , ' ' he tell the Daily Telegraph . ` ` there really be a mutual interest to get a solution to these issue . ' ' business hope for a regulatory arbitrage on EU datum rule after Brexit will be disappoint , with the government make clear that it be seek no additional privilege for the UK after its departure from the EU . instead , the government believe it can use its ` ` unique ' ' alignment with the EU at the point of Brexit to win a seamless deal . however , EU source have caution that even though the UK will this year absorb the EU ' S new General Data Protection Regulation into British law , a determination of ` ` adequacy ' ' after Brexit be not guarantee . as a non-EU country , any such designation will have to take into account the UK ' s security establishment which have sweeping power under the new @card@ Investigatory Powers Act . ' what the government say it want wo n't be easy or straightforward - although it be not impossible '
UK to axe EU ' s green target ; EU green energy target to go after Brexit
Britain be prepare to scrap EU green energy target that will add more than £100 to the average energy bill as part of a bonfire of red tape after Brexit . the UK be currently commit to get @card@ per cent of all energy from renewable source such as wind and solar by @card@ . minister have long be critical of the target because they exclude nuclear power , carbon capture or gain from energy efficiency . the UK be currently on course to miss the target and incur million of pound in fine from the EU . government source tell the Daily Telegraph that the target , under the EU Renewable Energy Directive , be likely to be scrap after Brexit . the Telegraph have call on the Conservative Party to promise a bonfire of EU red tape in its @card@ manifesto to put Britain on a radically different course . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , have ` ` applaud ' ' the campaign and he back call to sweep away decade of ` ` burdensome ' ' EU regulation after Brexit . it come after civil service document , photograph on a train , reveal Britain plan to scale down concern on climate change after Brexit . detail of the policy change be contain in the paper of a senior civil servant at the Department for International Trade photograph by a passenger this month . the note say : ` ` Trade and growth be now priority for all post - you will all need to prioritise develop capability in this area . some economic security-related work like climate change and illegal wildlife trade will be scale down . ' ' Earlier this month Bloomberg , the news agency , reveal that official at the Treasury and Department for Business , Energy and Industrial Strategy have be discuss axe the renewables target . the EU Renewable Energy Directive require the UK to generate @card@ per cent of its energy from renewable source by @card@ . the target have lead to billion of pound of government subsidy for renewable power source such as wind , solar and biomass power plant , which be ultimately pay for by customer through their energy bill . the National Audit Office estimate that green energy subsidy will cost every household £110 a year by @card@ . Owen Paterson , a Conservative MP and former environment secretary , say : ` ` it ' S distort the whole energy market . it ' S like the Sheriff of Nottingham - it transfer money from my poor constituent to my wealthy constituent who be put up pointless wind turbine heavily subsidise . I would be happy to see the back of it . ' ' accord to a Commons report , minister will have to import @card@ EU rule and regulation on to our statute book as part of the Great repeal Bill , which will take shape in a white paper publish on Thursday .
Scotland do n't mess with Brexit Bill , Rudd tell peer
the Home Secretary have write to every peer in the House of Lords urge them not to hand the government its first defeat over the Brexit Bill . Labour believe it have the number to ` ` handsomely ' ' defeat the government today with an amendment to Theresa May ' s Article @card@ bill that would guarantee the right of EU migrant live in the UK . the amendment be expect to win the support of more than @card@ peer include Labour , the Liberal Democrats , cross-bencher and a dozen Tory rebel . a Lords defeat would mean the Bill would enter into ` ` ping pong ' ' , with Mrs May have to use her Commons majority to vote down the amendment . in her letter , Amber Rudd say the government have the ` ` utmost respect ' ' for EU migrant live in the UK and that the government want to guarantee their right as soon as possible . Ms Rudd say the responsibility for the failure to reach an early agreement lie with the refusal of ` ` a few EU country ' ' - understand to include Germany - to discuss the matter . however , she warn that if the UK ` ` unilaterally ' ' guarantee the right of EU migrant live in the UK it will leave British citizen live in the EU face uncertainty over their status . minister be push for a ` ` reciprocal ' ' deal . it come as Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , hit back at Sir John Major and say he be feed up with people ` ` drone and moan ' ' about Brexit , add that he feel like tell them ` ` come off it , sunshine ' ' . the Foreign Secretary say Brexit present an ` ` unrivalled opportunity ' ' for a new free-trade deal with the EU . on Monday Sir John have warn that leave the union could mean cut the NHS and welfare state . ask about his intervention , Mr Johnson say : ` ` I think it ' s very important that as we set out on this journey that we be positive about the outcome , for the very good reason that the outcome will be fantastic for this country . when I become Foreign Secretary and first go to other European capital they be in a state of shock some of them , of puzzlement . that mood have almost entirely vanish . they really want us to help us to do a good deal . ' ' he add : ` ` sometimes I feel impatient when I hear people drone and moan about the state of the world . I hear them warn the sky be likely to fall on our head . every generation hear its prognostication of doom . ' ' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , warn the Cabinet yesterday that Britain must prepare for the ` ` unlikely scenario ' ' that a trade deal with the EU could not be reach before Brexit . Philip Johnston : page @card@ Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , will today launch a blueprint for Europe ' s survival after Brexit amid dissent from poor eastern state over plan for deepen integration . the plan will set out five ` ` pathway to unity ' ' for the @card@ member state leave in the EU after in @card@ .
Scotland Our man in Brussel be ' a gloomy pessimist ' ; Diplomat condemn by Tory MP for say Brexit deal could take a decade and end up be reject
Britain ' S ambassador to the EU be accuse of be a ` ` gloomy pessimist ' ' last night after say it could take a decade to complete Brexit . Eurosceptic Tory MP claim Sir Ivan Rogers be ` ` completely out of his comfort zone ' ' after he warn that a trade deal may not be complete until the mid 2020s and could ultimately be reject by EU member state . the European Commission itself yesterday appear to contradict Sir Ivan after leak minute of a private meeting with EU negotiator , obtain by the Daily Telegraph , suggest Britain could secure a quick trade deal . Theresa May yesterday tell European Union leader at a summit in Brussels that she want a ` ` smooth and orderly ' ' Brexit as she push for the UK to secure a trade deal within two year before Britain leave the EU in @card@ . Eurosceptic MP say Sir Ivan have be ` ` scar ' ' by the EU referendum and say his failure to secure a good deal with Brussels play a key role in persuade people to vote to leave . Sir Ivan ` ` diluted ' ' Mr Cameron ' S attempt to win significant reform by repeatedly warn that they be likely to be reject by Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , it be say . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , go further . he say : ` ` the Foreign Office have be take us in the wrong direction for decade , they want to delay or stop Brexit . the old guard all need clear out , every single one of them . he be top of the list . Brexit be suppose to mark a new departure , a change of direction for our country . they be clearly mentally not up to it . ' ' Sir Ivan advise minister in October that secure a free trade deal with the other @card@ member of the European Union could take a decade . he say that even once conclude it would need to be approve by national parliament , which involve every country in the EU have to sign off the deal . he suggest that EU leader expect that a free trade deal , rather than continued membership of the Single Market , be the most likely option for the UK after Brexit . Dominic Raab , a eurosceptic Conservative MP , say : ` ` he be the diplomat who persuade David Cameron to dilute his ambition for the renegotiation , which be one reason the referendum be lose . so , he have be rather scar , in fairness , by his own pessimistic advice in the past . ` ` I respect the Foreign Office ' S professionalism , but they have always be very pro-EU , and very anti-leaving the EU . Let ' S not be consume by Sir Ivan ' s gloomy pessimism , let ' s get behind the government , let ' S set out the case for a strong , post-Brexit relationship with the EU on trade , security , and other area . ' ' Sir Iain Duncan Smith , the former Work and Pensions Secretary , say : ` ` people like Sir Ivan Rogers be now utterly out of their comfort zone . they be not to be treat like God who know the in and out of this . ' ' European Commission official say at a seminar hold in October by Michel Barnier , the Commission ' S chief Brexit negotiator , that it could negotiate a new trade deal with Britain ` ` fast ' ' than the seven year it take to agree a deal with Canada . Downing Street say that Sir Ivan , who speak to Mrs May yesterday , be pass on the view of other EU nation . ` ` Ivan be there to report the view of other , he be do the job of an ambassador , ' ' a source say . be the Prime Minister can be lonely at time . particularly if you turn up for a meeting of the European union club have tell your fellow @card@
Britain tell full control of border must wait until @card@
EU Freedom of movement rule must continue to apply in Britain during the Brexit transition period and until @card@ , Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' s Brexit coordinator , yesterday warn . Mr Verhofstadt insist Britain would not be able to fully take back control of its border until the transition be over , mean an extra two year of unlimited EU immigration after Brexit Day on March @card@ @card@ . warn that the transition period would not allow ` ` cherry-pick ' ' , he say any change to immigration rule ` ` would only apply after the Withdrawal Agreement and the transition period ' ' . that would push back , by just under two year , the cut-off date for EU citizen to qualify for special residency status allow them to live and work in Britain indefinitely . ` ` on content , there be no discussion , ' ' Mr Verhofstadt tell MEPs in the constitutional affair committee , ` ` it will be the whole acquis [ the EU ' s body of law ] and nothing else . ' ' his comment back demand make by EU-27 diplomat in draft instruction for Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator . speak in the European Parliament in Brussels , Mr Verhofstadt also raise the possibility of the transition period , which be mean to start immediately after Brexit Day , last for long than @card@ month . ` ` it be not a question of religion that it have to end on @card@ December , ' ' he say , suggest an extension of a few month would be allow and note that MEPs would accept a transition period of up to three year . negotiation over the transition period , which will effectively freeze Britain ' s EU membership while strip it of vote right and representation in Britain , be expect to start next month . the EU will demand it end in December @card@ and that Britain obey all EU law during the period .
Scotland Sturgeon : independence good for Scot after Brexit empty pocket ; SNP priority be ' second independence vote - not a good EU deal
Nicola Sturgeon yesterday publish a report warn that Brexit will cost up to £2,300 per person , but give no figure to support its conclusion that independence be ` ` good ' ' for Scotland ' s economic prospect . the First Minister unveil Scottish Government research that state Scotland ' S economy , environment and society ` ` will be well serve as a member of the European union as an independent state ' ' . but it produce no figure to substantiate its claim and the Tories say it ignore the benefit of the UK ' s internal market , which be worth four time as much to Scottish company as that of the EU . in contrast , the report calculate that Scot would each be £2,300 worse off if the UK and EU fail to negotiate a trade deal and be force to revert to World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rule . this would be reduce to £700 if the UK stay in the single market , the report say , with Ms Sturgeon insist that untrammelled immigration from the EU must continue after Brexit if the Scottish economy be to flourish . the report ' s firm conclusion that independence be Scotland ' s good option appear to undermine Ms Sturgeon ' s claim that she will only decide on a second referendum after she have see the term of the Brexit deal in the autumn . she insist a separate Scotland would get a special deal that would allow it to trade freely with both the UK and EU , cite Ireland as a precedent . however , the Irish border issue be yet to be resolve and it be be consider in the context of the Good Friday Agreement . the report be intend to ` ` relaunch ' ' her Brexit strategy after Ms Sturgeon ' S demand last year for a second independence referendum trigger a major public backlash . but David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , say : ` ` these figure fail to acknowledge that above all we need to avoid anything that might fracture the vital UK ' s internal market , which be wortharound £48 billion to the Scottish economy - or four time more than trade with the EU . ` ` at the weekend , Nicola Sturgeon make it clear her real priority be hold a second independence referendum in Scotland , not get a good deal as we leave the EU . ' ' Adam Tomkins , the Scottish Tories ' constitution spokesman , say : ` ` the SNP government have go completely over-the-top in its scaremongering here . as the nationalist prove with their independence White Paper , their financial forecast simply can not be trust . ' ' Willie Rennie , the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader , say the report make some ` ` worthwhile ' ' point but ` ` without any attempt to quantify the cost of dismantle the UK single market . ' ' a study publish last week say Ms Sturgeon ' S call for single market membership have make ` ` little headway ' ' over the past year , with Scot oppose to freedom of movement and have a different immigration system from the rest of the UK . unveil the research , she insist there be no contradiction between warn that quit the single market will have a dire economic impact and claim that leave the UK would be beneficial . although EU member state will be bind by the term of the Brexit trade deal , she cite the Irish situation as evidence this would not apply to a separate Scotland . she say : ` ` I do not want to compromise or give up trade with the rest of the UK , or these island generally , and there be absolutely nothing that should make us say that be necessary . ` ` you only have to listen to the UK Government itself right now when it talk about Ireland , when it say very clearly to the Republic of Ireland that it can continue to trade freely with the UK and with the European Union post-Brexit ... this be not an either/or for Scotland . ' ' she also argue that free movement must continue seamless ' ' after Brexit .
A ' cliff-edge ' Brexit be just another name for Project Fear
the referendum campaign continue . proposal for transition period and the various scare story concern a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' be really project fear in disguise . the British public risk be mislead by the establishment - all over again . moreover , as Brexit shenanigan continue within the Conservative Party , you could be forgive for believe that the most serious issue at stake be the self-interest of those who be position themselves to become the next Prime Minister . some of our senior civil servant be hope that a combination of delay , only half-leaving , and the inexorable approach of the next election will see the cherished membership of the Union preserve in substance , if not in name . they be not do this for personal advancement but rather in pursuit of what they perceive to be the national interest . meanwhile , large established business and their lobbying organisation be , as usual , argue in favour of the status quo , which happen to protect them . the City be try to bamboozle minister , lack in both detailed financial knowledge and intellectual selfconfidence , with tale of its importance and future threat to its success if we do n't cling to something very close to EU membership . the Delayers ( aka the Remainers ) have try to gain advantage through the use of language . ` ` Hard ' ' Brexit seem to imply a reduction in our living standard , so if you support this type of Brexit presumably you accept the reduction as a price to be pay in order to recover sovereignty . yet there be no conflict between the recovery of sovereignty and economic self-interest . quite the reverse . Brexit can bring economic gain - escape from the EU ' s trade protectionism that oblige us to impose tariff on import from the rest of the world , and escape from its regulatory burden . this be what make yesterday ' s launch of a document call ` ` from Project Fear to Project Prosperity ' ' by economist for Free Trade ( EFT ) so significant . eft be comprise of a number of economist ( include me ) who believe that Britain ' s economic interest be well serve by Brexit , and a full Brexit at that - the sooner the better . the voice of consumer be seldom hear above the cacophony of special pleading by business interest . at the heart of our analysis be the large potential gain to consumer from low price make possible by Brexit . unless the UK can wring some remarkable concession from the EU , a transition period will delay these gain . supposedly , though , a transition period would avoid a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' in March @card@ . but would n't this simply put off the ` ` cliff-edge ' ' for two year ? in reality there be no cliff-edge . if we do not secure a free-trade agreement ( FTA ) with the EU by the time of our departure then trade can continue , albeit with EU tariff on British export . but we know that , on average , such tariff be trivial . where they be not , the low pound be a major offset . in any case , why should agree an FTA with the EU be so difficult ? why ca n't the essence of it simply be to continue with the status quo ? as the former Cabinet Minister , Peter Lilley , have point out , this be the first negotiation in history about an FTA between two party who currently do n't impose any tariff on each other . admittedly , a transition deal be allegedly also about buy time to ensure that custom procedure be fully adapt . yet most country undertake trade with the single market without run into custom problem . and custom procedure be now almost entirely electronic and undertake before good cross the border . why be the EU drag its foot about set up the relevant procedure and kit for trade with us ? of course , money be at the heart of this - lot of it . the public be be soften up for a sell-out by the British establishment under which it agree to pay huge sum to the EU . yet we should n't pay a penny for so-called ` ` access ' ' to the single market . what do America pay for such access ? or Singapore ? the answer be zilch . the suppose rationale for the idea of a large payment to the EU be that the latter ' s planning period run over several year and the UK have already sign up to the last one . yet the UK ' s acceptance of this financial plan be clearly predicate on the implicit assumption that we would continue to be a member of the EU and would meanwhile benefit therefrom . ( EU membership do provide benefit , do n't it ? ) the EU make no provision for a country leave . now that we be set to do so , it should simply redo its financial planning . and we should pay nothing after our membership end . the adoption of a transition period sound so mild and reasonable . but what should really worry you be that many of those push for one be not only on the lose side of the Brexit referendum but be also on the wrong side of the debate about join the euro . for most of the British establishment ( but not , in this case , the Treasury ) , this be another instance of stand on the wrong side of history . there they be , now stand by the ` ` cliff-edge ' ' , still try to tell us that they know good : gilded , cosset - and profoundly wrong . Roger Bootle be chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com ' the voice of consumer be seldom hear above the cacophony of special pleading by business '
Scotland SNP threaten Brexit process with demand for new power
SNP minister yesterday threaten to derail the UK Government ' S plan for an ` ` orderly ' ' Brexit unless they be hand a swathe of new power repatriate from Brussels . Mike Russell , the SNP ' S Brexit Minister , warn the Scottish Parliament could withhold consent for a swathe of legislation require to plug gap in the statute book after EU law cease to apply . in particular , he say the nationalist would not agree to the UK Government unilaterally create post- Brexit law cover agriculture , fishery , environmental policy and justice in Scotland . Mr Russell say all power repatriate from Brussels in these area have to be devolve to Holyrood . SNP minister would then decide if it be ` ` sensible or desirable ' ' to agree a common UK framework with their counterpart in Whitehall . in a separate threat to withhold consent for the repeal bill , which will replace thousand of redundant EU law , the minister say that the Scottish Parliament would use any vote on it ` ` to express its view on Brexit ' ' . his proposal clash with Theresa May ' s blueprint for Westminster to create UK-wide replacement for the Common Fisheries Policy ( CFP ) and Common Agricultural Policy ( Cap ) , before devolve responsibility for delivery to Scotland . the Prime Minister have warn that the SNP ' s plan to devolve all power in these area would create different regime north and south of the Border and trade barrier within the UK . however , create UK framework could require the Scottish Parliament to pass a series of Legislative Consent Motions ( LCMs ) . these be usually need when Westminster pass law that cover devolve responsibility . Mrs May confirm the government be consider whether an LCM be require for the repeal bill . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , have previously say that one will likely be need and warn of ` ` significant implication ' ' if consent be withhold . the row break out after the Queen ' S Speech include fishery and agriculture bill to set up replacement for the hate CFP and cap after Brexit . Scot-land ' S fisherman welcome a UK Government pledge to bring ` ` prosperity ' ' by take back control of British water and quota . but Mr Russell say the SNP have be ` ` consistently clear ' ' that all repatriate power over agriculture , fishery , environment policy and justice must be devolve . refer to future Scottish Parliament LCMs , he say : ` ` there can be absolutely no question of the UK Government attempt to reserve power in devolve area and the Scottish Government would not recommend the Scottish Parliament consent to such proposal . where it be sensible or desirable to introduce a common UK framework to replace that provide by EU law , this must be achieve through agreement and negotiation . ' ' he say it be ` ` deeply concern ' ' that the UK Government believe that repatriate power in these area ` ` should go by default to Westminster ' ' . but Mr Mundell say the legislative programme set out in the Queen ' S Speech be the first step in repatriate law hold by Brussels and promise to work closely with the SNP administration in Edinburgh to ensure an ` ` orderly ' ' Brexit . the Scottish Secretary say : ` ` we will bring power back in a way that work good for Scotland and the rest of the UK . ` ` there will undoubtedly be more decision-making power come to Holyrood , and I look forward to work closely with the Scottish government on this . ' ' Background briefing note issue by the government say the UK-wide framework replace the CFP and Cap would be create immediately after Brexit . this will be a transitional arrangement ` ` to provide certainty ' ' and will allow time for ` ` intensive ' ' consultation with the three devolve administration on permanent replacement to the two system . the note say the Fisheries Bill would help ` ` ensure prosperity for a new generation of fisherman ' ' . ' there can be no question of the UK Government attempt to reserve power in devolve area '
Scotland Union be ' unstoppable ' , may to tell Sturgeon ; special Leaving the EU May to tell Scot she will work for a ' more united ' nation
Theresa May will make it clear to Nicola Sturgeon that Britain will be ` ` a more united nation ' ' outside the EU when the two leader meet today , before the formal Brexit process be trigger . the Prime Minister will travel to Glasgow where she will meet Scotland ' S First Minister and tell her , face to face , that there will be no new Scottish independence referendum while the Brexit negotiation be ongoing . Mrs May will describe the Union as an ` ` unstoppable force ' ' whose strength will be ` ` even more important ' ' during the Brexit talk . then , on Wednesday , she will trigger Article @card@ . before that , she will address staff at the Department for International Development ' s office in East Kilbride , where she will promise to build ` ` a more united nation ' ' where the interest of the entire Union be ` ` at the heart of ` ` decision . Ms Sturgeon want to force a second referendum before Britain leave the EU , unless Mrs May can secure a special deal for Scotland that will give it access to the Single Market . Mrs May have make it clear that neither of those thing will happen , mean her meeting with Ms Sturgeon today be likely to be a tense affair . the Scottish Parliament be expect to vote tomorrow in favour of a new referendum , which will trigger a demand from Ms Sturgeon for a Section @card@ order that would transfer the power to hold a referendum from Westminster to Holyrood . the Prime Minister will ramp up the rhetoric over an independence referendum when she tell development department staff : ` ` when this great union of nation - England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland - set its mind on something and work together with determination , we be an unstoppable force . ` ` in those policy area where the UK Government hold responsibility , I be determine we will put the interest of the Union - both the part and the whole - at the heart of our decision-making . ' ' she will say that her intention be to build ` ` a more united nation ' ' , fully respect the devolution settlement but ` ` never allow our union to become loose and weak , or our people to drift apart ' ' . emphasise the value of freedom of speech , democracy and respect for human right , she will say : ` ` this proud shared heritage provide the bedrock of our life together in the UK , and on that foundation we have build a country where we share the challenge that we face , and bring all the expertise , ingenuity and goodwill we share across this Union to bear to tackle them ... . ` ` so , as Britain leave the European Union , and we forge a new role for ourselves in the world , the strength and stability of our union will become even more important . ' ' an SNP spokesman say : ` ` the next two year will determine the kind of country Scotland will be . so , once the term of Brexit be clear the people of Scotland should have the final say . ` ` that ' S why the First Minister set out a plan to give the people of Scotland a choice between Brexit and become an independent country . ' ' a spokesman for Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` we understand the UK Government wish to discuss Article @card@ . ` ` give we be just day from the formal process of Brexit be trigger there have , as yet , be no discussion with the Scottish government over what will be in the letter trigger departure from the EU . ` ` there have be no discussion over how Scotland ' S interest will be represent , what role the Scottish government will play in negotiation , nor which power [ remit from Brussels ] the Tories intend to take for Westminster . ` ` most worryingly there have be no discussion over how the UK Government intend to manage the financial impact of Brexit and the consequence for job and the economy in Scotland ` ` there be clearly a lot of area where we hope the Prime Minister intend to provide answer . ' ' the spokesman add : ` ` it be appear that this be another area where a Tory Prime Minister intend to simply dictate the rule and expect people in Scotland to go along with it . ' ' Tom Harris : page @card@ Brexit bias BBC accuse of breach impartiality the BBC be embroil in a fresh bias row after a study find just one in six speaker on the business news section of Radio @card@ ' s today programme see Brexit as positive for Britain . a report from the campaign group Newswatch suggest that the BBC ' S negativity have breach its own impartiality rule . it find that of @card@ guest speaker on the show ' s business segment in the second half of last year , @card@ ( @card@ per cent ) be negative . only @card@ ( @card@ per cent ) could be say to be pro-Brexit and @card@ ( @card@ per cent ) be neutral . News-watch have be scrutinise the BBC ' s EU output since @card@ . a spokesman for the BBC say the coverage be ` ` an accurate reflection of the business community ' s viewpoint ' ' .
Scotland Trump salute Brexit ; in the week he move into the White House , president-elect declare Briton be right to vote to leave EU
Donald Trump say last night that Britain be right to vote for Brexit because the country ` ` want to get its identity back ' ' . the comment come in an interview with Michael Gove , the former minister who lead the Brexit campaign then be sack by Theresa May . speak in Trump Tower , the president-elect say : ` ` people , country , want their own identity and the UK want its own identity . ' ' Mr Trump also criticise Angela Merkel ' s immigration policy . ` ` I think she make one very catastrophic mistake and that be take all these illegal , ' ' he say . Mr Trump be expect to launch a widespread review of America ' s place in the world when he take office later this week - and have already speak disobligingly about both the EU and Nato in recent month . there be grow anticipation in Washington and around the world over how Mr Trump will behave when he move in to the White House later this week - and which leader will be invite to meet him first . Mr Trump be say to harbour deep reservation about the EU and have express concern over the dependence of Nato on American money and resource . he have suggest he will make negotiation over a bilateral trade deal with the UK a priority . Mr Trump ' s Brexit comment come at the start of a major week in geopolitics . Mrs May be expect tomorrow to set out her vision for a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' day before the Trump administration take control . yesterday , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , warn the EU that the UK could cut tax for business and undercut European rival in an attempt to encourage investment in Britain if exporter face new tariff outside the EU . meanwhile , Mr Trump be warn he fail to understand the threat pose by Russia by the outgoing director of the CIA , who caution him against forge close tie with Vladimir Putin . John Brennan , the head of the US ' s intelligence agency , say Mr Trump should not lift sanction currently in place against Russia and say that the president-elect ' s undisciplined style could pose a risk to US national security . Mr Trump have say that if he be like by Mr Putin it be an ` ` asset , not a liability ' ' but his aide yesterday deny there be any imminent plan for a summit between the US and Russia . Mr Brennan , who will step down as CIA director on Friday , say Mr Trump do not understand the risk pose by Moscow , or by his own statement . ` ` I do n't think he have a full appreciation of Russian capability , Russia ' S intention , and action that they be undertake in many part of the world , ' ' Mr Brennan tell Fox News . ` ` I think Mr Trump have to understand that absolve Russia of the various action that it ' s take in the past number of year be a road that he , I think , need to be very , very careful about move down . ' ' before his inauguration , the CIA director say that Mr Trump must change his way for the sake of the security of the US . ` ` I think Mr Trump have to understand that this be more than be about him , ' ' he say . ` ` now that he ' S in a position to actually do something about our national security as oppose to talk and tweet , he be go to have tremendous responsibility to make sure that US national security interest be protect and advance . ' ' Mr Trump have call on US intelligence chief and medium to apologise over the dossier controversy , thank Bob Woodward , the reporter well know for his role in the Watergate investigation , for call the document ` ` garbage ' ' that should not have become public . Juliet Samuel , John Eliasch : page @card@ Editorial Comment and Charles Moore : Page @card@ ' people , country , want their own identity and the UK want its own identity '
Scotland can be a beacon for the UK after Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Holyrood ' S plan should be give a fair hearing - they could help to reduce cost by maximise trade
in what be the first comprehensive proposal by any administration within the UK to deal with the Brexit challenge , the Scottish Government have now publish its plan for Brexit , entitle ` ` Scotland ' s place in Europe ' ' . the Standing Council on Europe , an advisory body set up by the Scottish Government , which I chair , be consult on these proposal , which be develop by Scottish minister . as with any group of expert , we each bring specialist perspective and different shade of opinion on matter of detail . but the Standing Council be unanimous on the follow point : First , membership of ( not simply access to ) the European Single Market ( ESM ) be vital to protect the economic and social interest of the UK and Scotland . secondly , a Brexit which move away from membership of the ESM and the custom union will be extremely damaging to an economy such as the UK which rely so heavily on service export , or the export of manufacturing , where the supply chain be spread across Britain and Europe . there be no equivalence between a bespoke free-trade agreement ( FTA ) and membership of the single market . even if the UK be to negotiate tariff-free access to the EU , which be possible , it will be the non-tariff barrier that will damage our economy . this be especially the case in financial service . over two million job depend on this key sector , and £66 billion of tax revenue - much more than we pay into the EU budget - help sustain the NHS and other vital public service in Britain . what have catch the eye of a number of commentator about the Scottish Government ' S proposal be the notion of a so-called ` ` differentiate agreement ' ' . this mean that , in the event that the UK Government opt for a hard Brexit , outside of the custom union and the ESM , the Scottish Government want to explore the possibility of leave the EU but remain in the single market . to be clear , the proposal be one to keep Scotland within both the UK and the ESM : in essence , a ` ` parallel market ' ' solution . this would not imply a border within the UK single market for good . so any UK company wish to sell product to Scotland , or vice versa , would encounter no barrier . this be because the custom border would lie between the whole of the UK and the ESM . under the differentiate solution , the whole of the UK would leave the custom union . system of check good between Europe and the UK , include Scotland , would have to be set up as a result of Brexit , not as a result of the differentiate model . but be this be good for UK business ? by keep part of the UK within the ESM , there will be small loss in term of fall trade flow with Europe . this in turn will help to sustain economic activity in the whole of the UK . the Office for Budget Responsibility currently estimate that there will be around £15 billion in high borrowing per annum due to Brexit . there be challenge to be face . some worry that increasingly divergent regulation between Scotland and the UK over time could impact on intra-UK trade . but there be mechanism which could help here . for example , the UK and Scotland could coordinate their regulatory regime , perhaps by have a federal market authority , which seek to coordinate the ESM and UK regulatory framework both for business and product . one advantage of this be that it would keep UK good market regulation anchor more closely to that of the European Economic Area ( EEA ) : in essence Scotland would be an ` ` EEA beacon ' ' which UK regulator could follow . it would make it easy for UK export to trade with our EU neighbour . indeed , the differentiate model would work good if the negotiate FTA between the UK and the EU ensure maximum access . the selfconfident Brexit supporter , who believe that the UK negotiation with the EU-27 will go extremely well and will result in a bespoke UK zero-tariff FTA on good and great market access in service , should be extremely sanguine about a differentiate Scottish solution . in such a case the differentiate model would impact minimally on production and trade pattern within the UK . the propose differentiation in immigration rule between Scotland and Europe would not create difficulty in term of the free movement of people within the UK . as a City of London report show recently , a differential regional visa system , base on employer monitoring , and enforceable through the national insurance and tax system , have be use in Canada and Australia and would provide a differential solution that address regional skill need in different part of the UK . all of this be complex , but the only simple Brexit be UK-wide singlemarket membership outside the EU . beyond that any Brexit be complicate and very costly . these proposal can reduce cost by maximise trade and the flow of skill with European market . they deserve serious scrutiny . Professor Anton Muscatelli be the principal of the University of Glasgow
' no special Brexit deal for the City ' ; Philip Hammond and David Davis tell banker that they can not expect favourable treatment
the City of London will not get any special treatment in Brexit negotiation , senior member of Theresa May ' s Cabinet have tell a group of high-profile banking and insurance chief . the Daily Telegraph understand that Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , and David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , tell a group of City leader yesterday that , despite accounting for 11.8pc of gross domestic product ( GDP ) , financial and professional service be only one industry and can not be see to be treat differently . ` ` there be quite a blunt warning that , politically , the government do not want to be see to do a deal to favour rich banker if it do n't comply with Brexit voter ' wish - that there be more to the negotiation than just the city , ' ' say one of the @card@ industry leader who attend the meeting , which take place at the Shard . another say : ` ` the message be : ' you ' re not the only sector . you ' re a very important sector but you ' re not the only sector . ' ' that be likely to mean the UK will not keep precisely to EU finance rule , indicate bank and other firm will not keep the passport which allow them to trade freely across the continent . as a result , the government and the Square Mile expect a modest amount of business to move from the UK to other European financial centre . City insider praise Mr Hammond and Mr Davis for present a unite front and display a thorough knowledge of the issue face the financial service sector . Mr Davis be also understand to have open the meeting with reassurance that skilled staff from overseas will be welcome to Britain , calm fear that the City would be cut off from the foreign worker crucial to London ' s status as a global financial hub . the Brexit Secretary tell the financier that the government understand that ` ` the City need foreign talent too , and be not intend to put any serious impediment to that ' ' , an attendee say . minister and financier also discuss the timetable for leave the EU and the transition arrangement which the City may need to implement any new rule in the wake of Brexit . the meeting be attend by senior representative from across the City , include Baroness Vadera , chairman of Santander , John McFarlane , chairman of Barclays , and Inga Beale , chief executive of Lloyd ' S of London . ` ` as the UK exit the EU , we be determine that our country remain a great place to invest and to do business , ' ' Mr Hammond and Mr Davis state . ` ` that be why these meeting , where we listen closely to the sector ' S view on the potential impact and opportunity offer by us leave the EU , be so important . our financial service sector make a crucial contribution to our economy and we will work together to ensure it continue as the hub for both Europe and the rest of the world . ' ' meanwhile the minister responsible for the digital economy have say there be no need for a post-Brexit tax deal with technology company . Matt Hancock , the minister for digital and culture , reject the suggestion that Silicon Valley giant Facebook , Apple and Microsoft have be encourage to set up new London site with attractive tax break .
Scotland Sturgeon to seek legal ruling that Brexit can only be trigger with Scottish consent ; Sturgeon ' wrong ' to insist UK can not leave Europe without Scottish approval
Nicola Sturgeon announce yesterday that her government will attempt to intervene in the Supreme Court ' s Brexit case and argue that the Scottish Parliament should have to consent to the trigger of Article @card@ . the First Minister say Lord Advocate James Wolffe , Scotland ' s most senior law officer , will lodge a formal application ask for leave to make representation in the hearing over whether Theresa May can start the Brexit process without a vote by MP . Ms Sturgeon be vague over the detail of Mr Wolffe ' s case if he win permission , but he be expect to argue that the Article @card@ process for leave the EU can not be trigger without a legislative consent motion ( LCM ) from the Scottish Parliament . although Ms Sturgeon deny that she be try to infuriate the English , an LCM would allow MSPs to block Brexit , with a majority of member in the Holyrood chamber vigorously oppose to leave the EU . the Department for Exiting the European Union respond by state that no part of the UK have a veto over Brexit . Ms Sturgeon refuse to say whether her Cabinet have seek any legal advice that her Supreme Court challenge could be successful . however , academic expert have previously say the UK Government be not legally bind to seek LCMs from the three devolve administration and all they can do be make the process more ` ` politically awkward ' ' . Ms Sturgeon ' S announcement come as she attempt to get back on the offensive over Brexit after the Daily Telegraph disclose last week continue on Page @card@ Alan Cochrane : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ that Alex Neil , who serve in her Cabinet , have vote leave and claim other SNP MP do the same . press again on the disclosure , she say it be up to SNP parliamentarian whether they disclose how they vote in the EU referendum but express confidence the ` ` vast majority ' ' back Remain . the Scottish Government have legal representative observe the High Court case at which three senior judge rule last week that the Mrs May , the Prime Minister , do not have the power to trigger Article @card@ without the prior authority of parliament . the UK Government immediately announce plan to appeal against the judgment to the Supreme Court and it emerge yesterday that the challenge will get under way on Dec @card@ . Ms Sturgeon use a press conference at her Bute House residence in Edinburgh yesterday to confirm her administration plan to get involve . the SNP leader say her government be clear that the trigger of Article @card@ would impact on its devolve responsibility and ` ` deprive ' ' Scot of EU-related ` ` right and freedom . ` ` it simply can not be right that those right can be remove by the UK Government on the say-so of a Prime Minister without parliamentary debate , scrutiny or consent , ' ' she say . ` ` so legislation should be require at Westminster and the consent of the Scottish Parliament should be seek before Article @card@ be trigger . ' ' the First Minister add : ` ` let me be clear - I respect the right of England and Wales to leave the European Union . this be not an attempt to veto that process . ` ` but the democratic wish of the people of Scotland and the national Parliament of Scotland can not be brush aside as if they do not matter . ' ' she refuse to discuss any detail of what the Lord Advocate will argue , but make it clear she personally believe the UK Government should seek approval for trigger Article @card@ through an LCM . the device be use to enable the Scottish Parliament to give permission for Westminster to legislate in devolve area . Ms Sturgeon have claim one should be require for Brexit but James Chalmers , Regius Professor of Law at Glasgow University , have previously say the LCM process ` ` be n't ever a rule of law , it be just a matter of politeness as much as anything else ' ' . a spokesman for the Department for Exiting the European Union say : ` ` it be for the court to decide on whether this intervention will be grant . as we have already say , we believe we have strong ground for appeal and we be press ahead with this . ` ` we have be clear that the result of the UK-wide referendum should be respect , and that no part of the UK can have a veto . however , we be determine to deliver a deal that work for the whole of the UK . ' ' Jim Sillars , the SNP ' s former deputy leader , reject Ms Sturgeon ' S analysis , point out that Scot have vote in the referendum on whether they want the United Kingdom to stay in the EU , rather than any constituent part . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , be today expect to outline a plan to share civil service analysis of leave the EU with the devolve administration ` ` as part of a two-way flow . ' ' he will also use a meeting of the Joint Ministerial Committee to offer monthly talk with his Scottish , Welsh and northern Irish counterpart with ` ` continual informal engagement ' ' . Mr Davis say he want devolve administration ` ` to bring us their analysis that will help shape our priority for the negotiation with the EU ' ' . SNP ' divide ' by Brexit Challenge to secret Leavers The SNP ' S suppose ` ` united front ' ' against Brexit have be ` ` shattered ' ' by the Daily Telegraph ' s disclosure that Alex Neil and other SNP MSPs vote to leave the EU , it be claim yesterday . Donald Cameron , the Scottish Tories ' shadow health secretary , ask SNP MSPs in the Holyrood chamber : ` ` how many of your colleague sit here today be secret Brexiteers ? because your supposed united front against Brexit have be well and truly shatter . ' ' he note that Mr Neil , a former Scottish health minister , must have be aware of the implication for EU worker in the NHS before vote leave in June ' S referendum . Mr Neil disclose last week he secretly vote leave and say he have be approach by ` ` a number ' ' of other SNP MSPs who do the same .
Scotland Hungry McDonnell make dog ' s breakfast of his Brexit speech
if politician learn one lesson from the event of @card@ , let it be this : never give a speech about Brexit on an empty stomach . because , however valiantly you try to soldier on , it ' S practically guarantee that at some point you ' ll accidentally call Brexit ` ` breakfast ' ' instead . look what happen to poor Andrew R T Davies , leader of the Welsh conservative , during his midmorning speech at Tory conference this month . he intend to cry , ` ` we Will make Brexit a success ! ' ' instead he cry , ` ` we Will make breakfast a success ! ' ' still , at least he only do it once . in a speech in London at @card@ o'clock yesterday morning - that dangerous hour , when blood sugar be run low and the stomach be start to growl - Labour ' S John McDonnell do it not once , not twice , but three time . ` ` the government , ' ' glower the shadow chancellor , ` ` be hurtle towards a chaotic breakfast . ' ' Less than two minute later , he warn the nation that ` ` a chaotic breakfast will lead to job loss ' ' . ( presumably in brasserie and greasy spoon café . ) then , three minute after that - during a passage attack the notion of an elitist , free-market ` ` banker ' Brexit ' ' - he argue that Tory voter ` ` do n't want a banker ' breakfast any more than I do ' ' . three time in five minute . the poor man must have be starve . personally , while I share the shadow chancellor ' S misgiving about the prospect of a chaotic breakfast , I would query his assertion about the appetite of Tory voter . I suppose it depend on what exactly a banker ' breakfast consist of . I would imagine it to be a lavish affair : teeter log pile of the fine sausage , king-size rasher of sumptuous bacon , a skyscraper of blueberry waffle cascade with syrup , and all wash down with a bottle or two of exquisitely chill Pol Roger champagne . equally , of course , it could just be a triple espresso and four line of coke . either way , I suspect it would have more public appeal than Mr McDonnell give it credit for . after all : breakfast mean breakfast . what the shadow chancellor be try to say , amid all this muddle , be that the government have to get its act together . ` ` it ' s absolute chaos at the moment , ' ' he say . ` ` this be chaos . ' ' within the last hour , a journalist point out , it have be announce that the economy have grow faster than expect , and that Nissan - thanks to what its chief executive call the government ' s ` ` support and assurance ' ' - have decide to build two new model of car at its plant in Sunderland . Mr McDonnell stick to his gun . ` ` this approach be chaotic , ' ' he say . ` ` there ' s no coherence to it . ' ' this , of course , be in sharp contrast to the consistency of Mr McDonnell ' S approach , which be to keep say the word ` ` chaos ' ' over and over , irrespective of what the news be . I ' m not knock it . I ' m a big believer in pessimism . keep predict thing will go wrong and sooner or later you ' re bind to be prove right .
ask migrant : what can you do for Britain ? ; finally , for the first time in decade , we have the chance to put the need of British people first ; the BREXIT dividend
when Theresa May announce at the recent Cabinet awayday at Chequers that restrict EU immigration will be at the heart of the Brexit negotiation , you could almost hear the sound of @card@ million people collectively sigh with relief . they , like me , vote to leave the EU on June @card@ and , like me , they have be leave on tenterhook for week wait to find out precisely what our new Prime Minister actually mean when she say thing like ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . so , now we know that Mrs May want to control the number of European immigrant , the question still remain as to how she plan to do it . we now have the first opportunity in a generation to replace our current mess - to which the British people never consent - with sensible border control at long last , cut net immigration from @card@ a year to something more practical . while the minutia have yet to be work out , any new immigration should undoubtedly be base on one simple principle : it should unashamedly be for the benefit of the British people , and not for the benefit of those who want to come here . cue the anguish cry of horror from the pro-immigration brigade who fervently believe that it be Britain ' s job to offer a haven to the poor and huddle mass from every country under the sun . sorry , but it be n't . we have no duty of care to improve the lot of poor Romanian or Pole or Pakistani or anyone else who be not a British citizen . while I have nothing but admiration and respect for anyone who want to travel across a continent to make a new life for themselves and improve their lot , the reality be that British taxpayer do n't owe the rest of the world a living . we can offer trade deal or international aid , by all mean , and we should never desert asylum seeker in their time of need , but we do n't have a moral responsibility to open our door to the five billion-odd people on this planet who live in poor country than ours . instead , to paraphrase the former US President John F Kennedy , we should instruct would-be immigrant : ` ` Ask not what this country can do for you , ask what you can do for this country . ' ' if you have something to offer Britain , whether it be much-need qualification or skill , entrepreneurship , create job , or big wad of taxable cash , then by all mean do come in and make yourself at home , I ' ll put the kettle on . if , however , you have no qualification , no professional skill other than a drive licence , and can barely speak English , or you have a criminal record , then thanks but no thanks . if that sound harsh , then tough . while we be each lucky to be bear here in a wealthy country where we enjoy the rule of law and freedom , it be not a matter of luck that Britain be the country it be . Great Britain do n't just happen ; the British people create this country through decade and century of hard work , fight for democracy , the welfare state and all the other benefit we currently enjoy . that be why we have every right to close our door to economic migrant who will contribute less than they will take out - whether it be in term of work tax credit , housing and child benefit , or in publicly fund school , housing , healthcare and public transport . Britain be a very desirable place to live and , thanks to English be the world ' s international language , we be ideally place to pick the bright and the good to come to live and work here . so why be n't we more choosy ? the only sensible immigration policy be one use skills-based work permit . yes , that will involve more paperwork than an open-door policy , but most country manage it . and indeed , we already operate such a system for non-EU migrant , so it be hardly beyond the wit of man to devise one that operate across the board . currently , an EU citizen need to fill out more paperwork to get a Sainsbury ' s Nectar card than they do to come to Britain , so a little more red tape wo n't do anyone any harm . but there be one other crucial requirement that should also be at the heart of any new immigration policy , and that be the ability of new arrival to integrate and assimilate into British society . admittedly , this be a rather more difficult and subjective criterion than a university diploma , but it be just as vital - and especially after year in which mass immigration have enable many new arrival to live and work in entirely separate ethnic , religious or national community in many of our city . if you do n't want to learn English and you do n't embrace fundamental British value like democracy , woman ' S equality and the freedom to choose who you marry , then Britain be probably not the country for you . control immigration do n't require us to close our door to the rest of the world - far from it . but it do mean us get to decide who we want to live here and , for the first time in decade , put the need of the British people first . Julia Hartley-Brewer be a journalist , broadcaster and talkRADIO presenter
wait for a wave of Confidence ; Domestic
after Theresa May ' s annus horribilis , her rather modest wish for next year will be that it be n't as bad as the one she have just endure . with a Budget U-turn , a lost majority , Cabinet resignation , a sexual harassment scandal , trouble in Brussels and that conference speech , the Prime Minister will likely be desperate to rip down the calendar and never speak of @card@ again . whether or not @card@ prove to be a fine vintage depend almost entirely on one thing : Brexit . when Parliament return on @card@ January after its break , the deadline for reach an EU deal will seem terrifyingly www.close.No long will minister be able to talk about the Brexit date be in @card@ ; instead we ' ll be discuss Britain leave the EU next year . one almost wo n't Brexit Secretary David Davis want trade talk to be more or less wrap up by October so that Parliament can have plenty of time to debate the prospective deal . but even he have admit that negotiation with Michel Barnier could carry on until ` ` the 59th minute of the 11th hour ' ' . hence , we can expect deadline to be push back , red line to be rub out and plenty of dissent from the Tory backbenches as British resolve be test to the limit in Europe and Mrs May ' S resolve be test by her own party . March will be a key month for the PM , not only because it will mark the halfway point between Article @card@ be trigger and Brexit day arrive , but also because Philip Hammond will make his Spring Statement , a stripped-down version of what use to be the Spring Budget . after the disastrous economic forecast make by the Office for Budget Responsibility in November ' s Budget , the Chancellor be cling to the hope that progress in Brexit talk will have persuade jittery business leader to unfreeze investment . one thing we almost certainly wo n't see be a leadership election . have survive the summertime muttering of a coup and come through the Conservative Party conference intact , Mrs May can expect to stay in Number @card@ until at least March www.2019.No serious contender to succeed her want to be burden with take over the poison chalice of Brexit talk , nor would they have support from the party to do so . however , the Tory conference next autumn will become a classic political ` ` beauty pageant ' ' as Boris Johnson , Amber Rudd and other try to shore up support for a tilt at Downing Street the follow spring . on the domestic policy front , the big moment will come in the summer , when the government publish its delayed green paper set out how it intend to tackle the problem of fund social care . have be badly sting in the election - when its attempt to address the issue be shoot down by the opposition as a ` ` dementia tax ' ' - the government will need cross-party support for a funding model that will inevitably be unpopular with those whose tax increase to pay for it . still , no one say politics be mean to be easy . remain one thing we almost certainly wo n't see be a Tory leadership election
Scotland Stay clear of Brexit ' cliff ' , warn Scottish business
a COUNTRYSIDE organisation have call on the UK Government to avoid a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' Brexit and safeguard the ` ` unique interest of Scottish agriculture ' ' . Scottish Land & Estates , which represent landowner and rural business , have join @card@ other farming organisation in issue a joint statement to the government . it urge minister to secure an agreement on an initial transition period that will give the UK ` ` unfettered access to European market ' ' and keep it in the custom union . it also call for a fully function immigration system to be in place before freedom of movement end to ensure farmer can access EU worker . the organisation say they be commit to work with the government and devolve administration to ` ` establish a new and good agriculture and land use policy ' ' once the UK leave the Common Agriculture Policy , and ask the administration to work with them to establish a ` ` collaborative policy framework and budget ' ' . the statement recognise ` ` opportunity ' ' from Brexit but urge minister to provide great certainty for farmer . David Johnstone , chairman of Scottish Land & Estates , say : ` ` it be vital that the unique interest of Scottish agriculture be take account of during Brexit negotiation and we would urge the UK Government and the devolve administration to work to deliver a new farming landscape that deliver for all . ` ` Scottish Land & Estates have be clear that there be a need for the sector in Scotland to change over the next decade and beyond , especially in the drive to increase business resilience , but that need to be accompany by a gradual transition in term of our support framework as we leave the EU . ` ` there should be no cliff-edge , and that mean ensure the industry have access to the support , labour and trade market require to ensure our farming sector remain a world leader . ' ' a spokesman for the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs say the government be commit to get a deal that allow ` ` tariff-free , frictionless access for good and service into the European market ' ' .
Scotland Davidson ' S campaign save Tory party from defeat , say Osborne
ruth Davidson be the ` ` heroine of the party ' ' for save the conservative from general election defeat , George Osborne say yesterday as he back her demand that Theresa May drop her plan for a hard Brexit . the former Chancellor praise the Scottish Tory leader , as David Mundell be last night reappoint Scottish Secretary in the Cabinet reshuffle . Mr Osborne say Ms Davidson have run a ` ` more open and optimistic campaign ' ' than Mrs May and that the Scottish Tory leader ' S success have be the difference that prevent Jeremy Corbyn from enter @card@ Downing Street . he give his backing to her demand that the UK Government draw up a new ` ` open Brexit ' ' blueprint that prioritises free trade and the economy over restrict immigration . but Dominic Raab , a Tory MP and lead Brexiteer , argue that Scottish Tory MP be elect on a manifesto that pledge to come out of the single market and end free movement . the row break out the day after Ms Davidson raise the prospect of her new group of @card@ Scottish MP torpedo a hard Brexit . they be pivotal to keep the conservative in power in the hung parliament that result from last week ' S election . the Scottish Tory leader flex her new political muscle by warn that ` ` they will vote entirely as they believe they should ' ' and put a pro-trade Brexit deal ` ` at the heart of what I ' m after ' ' from Mrs May . Mr Osborne , who now edit the London Evening Standard , say : ` ` she be the heroine of the party who if she have not win seat in Scotland with a much more open and optimistic conservatism than the national campaign be provide there would not be a Conservative government and Jeremy Corbyn would be in Downing Street . ' ' he add : ` ` she have say she now want to prioritise the economy and free trade over immigration in the negotiation around Brexit , by the way I completely agree with her . ' ' across the UK , the Tories fail to win a parliamentary majority but finish @card@ seat ahead of Labour . however , if the Conservatives have not gain the @card@ seat in Scotland from the SNP then the pro-independence party , Labour and the Liberal Democrats would have be able to outvote the conservative in the Commons . Anna Soubry , a Tory MP and former minister , back Ms Davidson ' s call for a Brexit rethink but Mr Raab hit out at the Scottish Tory leader , tell the BBC ' s Sunday politics programme that he do not know what she mean by the term ` ` open Brexit ' ' . Mr Raab argue that Scottish Tory MP stand on the UK manifesto and should back Mrs May ' s blueprint to come out of the single market but negotiate a free trade deal .
migrant ' free to enter Britain until @card@ ' ; Brexit
migrant from the EU could be allow to come to Britain with full citizen ' right for several year after Brexit in @card@ , Theresa May have hint . the Prime Minister admit there would have to be ` ` a period of time ' ' after Brexit , as business and government be implement the deal with the EU , when free movement could still be allow . it raise the prospect of Britain have no control over its border until @card@ , as EU leader have suggest that a three-year transition period will be necessary after Brexit . Mrs May also say she be confident she will reach a final deal with the EU member state within two year . on the second day of her tour of the Middle East , Mrs May say : ` ` if you think about it , once we ' ve get the deal , once we ' ve agree what the new relationship will be for the future , it will be necessary for there to be a period of time when business and government be adjust system and so forth . ' ' she add that Britain would have ` ` control of our border and control of immigration ' ' but would not set a date for that . Richard Tice , co-chairman of the pressure group leave Means leave , warn that more than a million extra migrant could arrive in Britain . he say : ` ` if the Prime Minister fail to set a cut-off point on immigration , Britain must prepare for a crisis as around 1.25million extra EU migrant will likely move to Britain . ' ' an ICM poll publish this week find that @card@ per cent of voter think that free movement ` ` for a few year after Brexit , as part of a transitional deal ' ' would be acceptable . Alp Mehmet , vice chairman of Migration Watch , say : ` ` the reason so many people vote out be because they want control on immigration . it ' S essential that immigration from the EU be control at the very first opportunity and that be March @card@ , @card@ . ' ' 1.25m the number of migrant leave Means leave claim could enter the UK after Brexit
Sturgeon have pick a fight on her term ; the SNP leader be not a bit interested in compromise or whether we land up with a hard or soft Brexit
the idea that Nicola Sturgeon be on the point of throw caution to the wind and plunge Scotland into another independence referendum be consider far fetch until only very recently . but in the last few week there have be grow confidence in the First Minister ' s circle that the strategy be pursue by Theresa May be play into their hand . for the nine month since the referendum , Ms Sturgeon have plot a carefully judge course from which she ' S never deviate , always aim to lead her adore activist to the point when yesterday ' S announcement could be put off no longer , while at the same time constantly declare that she be a victim of an intransigent Prime Minister in Westminster . despite their word to the contrary , the lose separatist have never accept their defeat in the @card@ referendum , even if Nicola Sturgeon insist it be a ` ` once-in-a-lifetime ' ' event . they be always liable to find a way back to the ballot box . ever the wily operator , raise in the hard-knocks school of West of Scotland politics and shape at Glasgow University ' S famous debate society , Sturgeon at all time preach compromise . she do n't want a new referendum , she say . she just want to protect the Scottish people , who vote massively to remain in the EU , from the dastardly ` ` Hard Brexit ' ' be pursue by an extreme Right-wing Government in London . what ' s more , she emphasise , she have draft compromise whereby Scotland could benefit from special deal and stay in the single market and custom union . forget the fact that such opt-outs be never likely to win favour with the Cabinet , and have be veto in advance by other EU member - notably Spain . the truth be that Sturgeon be never in the slight bit interested in compromise . neither she nor her ultra care if there be to be a hard Brexit , a soft Brexit or anything in between , because all they want be to get to where they arrive yesterday - the declaration of another vote to break up Britain . determine always to be on the front foot , she bring forward by five day her announcement of another independence referendum , which she have be due to make in her keynote speech to her party conference in Aberdeen this Saturday . by do it yesterday in the Scottish First Minister ' s official residence in Edinburgh ' S New Town , this incredibly partisan leader seek to make her announcement seem a non-party occasion . act as a sort of ` ` Mother of the nation ' ' may seem an odd role for such an abrasive lady , but it ' S how she now want to be see . in the purely personal contest of one-upwomanship between two formidable politician , keep Mrs May on the back foot in London and force the PM always to react to what she be say in Edinburgh have be a constant , and successful , Sturgeon tactic . Alex Salmond may have remain the darling of the London broadcast medium but his caterwaul from the sideline have make no impression on the cool approach of his successor . certainly , she have be aid and abet by some startling own goal from the Unionist camp - Jeremy Corbyn ' s support for # indyref2 being but the late . but Defence Secretary Sir Michael Fallon ' s statement that London would never permit another vote also cause a storm of protest , and Brexit Secretary David Davis ' s support for an open border between Ireland and Ulster after Brexit allow the Nat to declare that such an arrangement should also apply between England and an independent Scotland . even Chancellor Philip Hammond ' s excuse that the special circumstance of Brexit mean he could break Tory manifesto promise on national insurance help Sturgeon - permit her to say Brexit justify her U-turn on another referendum . big of all , however , have be Mrs May ' S declare opposition to Britain remain in the EU single market - undermine Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Tory leader , often see as Unionism ' s good hope north of the border . so while Nicola Sturgeon may be a politician with no economic policy - or even a currency - to back up her independence dream , she have chutzpah on her side . as she and Theresa May lock horn , then , it ' S an even money bet as to which one win . read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Davis : Britain ' s border control be not up for negotiation with the EU ; News
Britain ' s border control be not up for negotiation in EU talk , David Davis have tell MP . the Brexit Secretary make it clear that the government will decide how its immigration system will look before present the option to European leader . his comment , a sign that Britain intend to leave the EU ' s freedom of movement for worker system , come as Theresa May today travel to Brussel for tense negotiation with her European counterpart . Mrs May will warn EU leader that they risk lose public confidence if they allow hundred of thousand of economic migrant into Europe . EU leader will then hold a dinner without Mrs May in a snub to Britain . speak to MP on the Brexit select committee , Mr Davis say that Brussels will have no say over the UK ' s immigration system after its EU exit . ` ` the example I will point you to be the Swiss example , ' ' he say . ` ` they think they have control over their own migration via an emergency brake system . ` ` when they try to exercise it they be unable to because it be tie into so many other treaty . ` ` what we have to bear in mind be we have to pay respect to the outcome of the referendum , there have get to be clear control by this Parliament . ' ' he add : ` ` my job be to bring the decision back here , not exercise the decision . ' ' ask by MP if that would be part of the negotiation , Mr Davis say : ` ` no I do n't . I think that the operation of that decision after we have leave the EU will be in the national interest and that will affect all of us . ` ` the judgment the government come to as to what be necessary for university , what be necessary for business and what be necessary for fruit picking . ' ' Mr Davis say he be ready to accept a transitional arrangement to implement the term of Britain ' s withdrawal from the EU ` ` if it ' s necessary , and only if it ' s necessary ' ' . and he indicate that the government be work on four possible outcome from the Brexit talk in relation to the European Customs Union . these range from be fully or partially inside the union , have a free trade agreement and custom arrangement with the remain EU nation , or be ` ` completely outside ' ' the bloc . Mrs May will hold bilateral talk with the leader of Latvia and Lithuania and have a brief talk with Martin Schultz , the President of the European Parliament . the Prime Minister will call on EU leader to do more with migrant ' country of origin to help them tackle smuggling network and control their border , and to do more with Egypt to reduce level of migration . Britain will also reiterate its support for the EU ' s deal with Turkey and send an extra @card@ border staff to Greece to help deter economic migrant . Brexit mean ... OED come up with the answer Theresa May famously declare that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' , but now the Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ) have come up with its own definition . six month after the Prime Minister deliver the elusive explanation , lexicographer have clarify that ` ` Brexit ' ' be ` ` the ( propose ) withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union , and the political process associate with it ' ' . the definition add that the term be sometimes use specifically to refer to the referendum hold on June @card@ . the word be add to the dictionary this month , with the OED note the ` ` impressive ' ' speed with which it become widely use . Grexit - ` ` the ( potential ) withdrawal of Greece from the eurozone monetary union ' ' - be also add .
you put your leave leg in , your leave leg out ... what be Labour all about ?
labour do n't seem to be support Brexit . yet they do n't seem to be oppose it , either . in the circumstance , it would be easy to run away with the idea that they do n't know what they ' re do . on the contrary , explain Sir Keir Starmer yesterday , during a speech in London . Labour ' s refusal to commit themselves either way be ` ` a huge strength ' ' . the Tories have err , say the shadow Brexit secretary , by speak only for the @card@ per cent who vote leave . the Lib Dems have err , meanwhile , by speak only for the @card@ per cent who vote Remain . ` ` I absolutely see it as Labour ' S role , ' ' declare Sir Keir , ` ` to speak for both side . ' ' a noble ambition . but give the bitter division between Brexiteers and Remainers , it ' S hard to imagine how it ' s go to work in practice . ` ` Mr Speaker , the position of the Labour Party be clear . we speak for both side . we therefore believe that Britain must leave the EU . provide , of course , that Britain stay in the EU . that ' S a red line . ` ` it be time to end the in-fighting that have rive this country . people who vote Remain must stop insult the xenophobic dupe who be squarely to blame for the oncoming disaster . and people who vote leave must stop insult the scaremongering snob who ' ve spend the last six month throw their toy out of the pram . ` ` Mr Speaker , we respect the will of the people . that ' s the will of the people who want to leave the EU , and the will of the people who want to stay in the EU . ` ` that ' S because we ' re the only party that recognise Brexit for what it be : an unmitigated catastrophe burst with golden opportunity , which will create and cost million of job , boost and ruin our economy , and give this country the shot in the arm and slap in the face it both do and do n't deserve . ' ' some people want hard Brexit . other people want soft Brexit . Labour , it seem , want Schrödinger ' s Brexit . Sir Keir , of course , would say that their view be far more nuanced than I ' ve allow . sometimes in politics , though , a nuanced view can sound dangerously like indecision . at yesterday ' S speech , a journalist ask Sir Keir for Labour ' s official policy on freedom of movement : keep it , or end it ? ` ` well , erm , ' ' begin Sir Keir . the ` ` Labour Party position ' ' be that freedom of movement ` ` be there to be negotiate ' ' but ` ` the rule will have to change ' ' . as for number of immigrant , ` ` the direction of travel ' ' should be ` ` downward ' ' , but he refuse to set any ` ` arbitrary target ' ' . good to get that clear up , because Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , have defend freedom of movement - while Andy Burnham , her predecessor , have say it must end . Sir Keir appear to be somewhere between the two , but close to his former colleague than to his current one . labour : speak for both side . and if necessary , a third or fourth side too . ' we respect the will of the people who want to leave the EU , and the will of the people who want to stay '
Brexit be a big opportunity for Mrs May to offer new idea - not the status quo ; the PM will be define by exit from the EU , so the Autumn Statement should have have a clear vision
even before her first Cabinet meeting as Prime Minister , in July , Theresa May say ` ` ... we will not allow the country to be define by Brexit ' ' . the point she be make seem sensible : she want to talk about lot of other important thing too , such as education , skill and social mobility . nevertheless , I think she make a mistake , which be become clear over time . first , her aim be pointless , since the country under her administration will be define by Brexit , whether she like it or not . she will carry it off well or badly - or , just conceivably , not at all - and by that she will be judge . second , Brexit be an enormous thing . you ca n't imagine George Washington , have become first president of the United States in @card@ , tell the American people that independence be great , but now it be time to talk just about tax and infrastructure . he would have understand that his overarching task be to make the new republic work . Brexit be n't quite that big , but it ' s big enough . the task of become a selfgoverning country once again should organise the way government think about most other thing . it ' S not just a complex negotiation : it ' s the establishment of a new identity , or at least the recovery of an old one . third , Mrs May ' s wish to avoid definition by Brexit disclose her own unease , maybe even confusion on the subject . she be a Remainer , though not an ardent one , and she have never have to argue for Brexit at the ballot box . we still do n't know whether she see Brexit as a necessary , but irksome , task like , say , get rid of our African colony in the 1950s , or as the great national opportunity of our time . the fact that she want to put it in a special file by itself suggest the former . Britain will win more victory if it be the latter . do she see her task as transform the country to deal with the change which , as she herself announce in her party conference speech , be come ? or be she , in the phrase she like to use in another context , ` ` just manage ' ' it ? this unease express itself in her decision and indecisions . this week ' S Autumn Statement by the Chancellor be present in term of help the right section of society , but it be well understand as an insurance policy to cover what she and Philip Hammond see as a very tricky two or three year . whatever the merit of the statement , it be not visionary . or take early dealings with Donald Trump . as the political beneficiary of the Brexit decision , Mrs May have the chance to range herself with the change-bringers in the free world , not with the status quo . she do not need to buy Mr Trump ' s whole bag of trick ( even he do n't do that ) , but she could have be ready to get alongside him - embrace a likely trading alliance with a wax power , against EU rival in a wane one . instead , she look as if she have suck a lemon . cruel jester that he be , Mr Trump accordingly mock her by express his love for Nigel Farage . or take the Article @card@ legal case which be now head for the Supreme Court . the Prime Minister and the Lord Chancellor should have be instant in defend the integrity of the judge , but tough in think through and publicly expound the government ' s legal case . why do they not robustly challenge whether the whole thing be justiciable in the first place ? they remind me of a rider who head for a fence while not really believe his horse can jump it . a fall often result . at her party conference in October , Mrs May make two speech , the first about Brexit , the second about everything else . this be part of her policy of separate the two . it be produce some incoherence . Brexit should not be see as a special subject on mastermind ( though its negotiate detail certainly could be ) . it be the context for everything . if she see it that way , Mrs May can then bring direction to whatever else she want to say . take her support for revive grammar school . this have come out look rather retro and partisan ; she may even be tiptoe away from it . but it could be present so differently . suppose she paint a picture of how Britain , out of the EU , would have to live more on its wit than in the past , and how those wit could good be sharpen by a new generation of unashamedly excellent , globally competitive school . then an idea from a chalky old past could be turn into a plan to capture the future . the same with immigration . if we be to trade with the whole world without the protection and restriction of a European bloc we need a high number of immigrant worker . the point about migration be not to strangle it , but to direct it to our advantage . it be not about give unfeasibly large number of non-British people universal ` ` right ' ' at our expense , but about satisfy our need . one also want to know much more from Mrs May about what she think be happen to the world as she work towards Brexit . do she think that a dark night of illiberalism be descend , or do she believe it be broadly a good thing that voter be try to reassert their democratic right over ruler who have take them for grant ? what be her vision of the defence of the west at a time of Russian aggression and Islamist subversion ? do she believe that a strengthening Anglosphere can compensate for a weaken EU ? she have speak eloquently for the small people who get the headache from globalisation , but how do she think a modern country can reconcile its national independence with force - often digitally drive - which can sweep the world ? in formulate her view on these matter , she be hamper because she have no time to develop them as opposition leader and have never lead her party into an election . nor have she yet use the ` ` convene power ' ' of her office to rustle up all sort of able people , inside her party and out of it , to influence her thought and advance it in public . at present , her style and her adviser be transfer from her time at the Home Office , where she be famous for control . her two close aide be able people , but they be a bit like Richard Nixon ' s famous pair , Ehrlichman and Haldeman , who be know as the ` ` Berlin Wall ' ' for their ability to cut the president off from other . if a prime minister , in a time of massive change , have not yet form her own idea and have few conduit to new one , she will be the victim of the old orthodoxy . sure enough , up pop ex-prime minister - and one recent ex-deputy prime minister . Mr Blair want to help ( ` ` let ' s just keep our option open ' ' ) . Sir John Major warn against ` ` the tyranny of the majority ' ' . Mr Clegg conjure up an exciting new bogey , ` ` the Brexit elite ' ' , which must be counter . it all remind me of Ted Heath in about @card@ warning eloquently , egotistically and misguidedly that if only we could revert to his economic policy which have quite recently collapse , all would be well . Mrs Thatcher could rebut the seductive argument of the once-mighty because she have something new to offer . do Mrs May ?
Scotland leave single market ? Davis be out of line , say May ; Brexit minister be ' set out his own opinion ' to MP , not official policy
Theresa May have rebuke one of her most senior Cabinet minister after he say it be ` ` very improbable ' ' that the UK will remain a member of the single market if the country be to regain control of its border . the Prime Minister ' S spokesman say it be wrong to be ` ` put all your card on the table ' ' and claim David Davis be set out ` ` his opinion ' ' , not government policy , when he speak in Parliament yesterday . the minister for Brexit tell the House of Commons that it be ` ` a simple truth ' ' that if the UK be force to accept free movement of people it would be unlikely that the country could remain in the single market . Mr Davis tell MP : ` ` this government be look at every option but the simple truth be that if a requirement of membership be give up control of our border , I think that make it very improbable . ' ' his comment go much further than those make by the Prime Minister , who have be cautious not to discuss any detail for Brexit plan . during her visit to China , Mrs May dismiss proposal to introduce an Australian-style points-based system for immigration say that it be not a ` ` silver bullet ' ' to reduce number come into the UK . the rebuke be a stark sign of the disagreement at the heart of the Cabinet surround Britain ' s exit from the EU . ask whether the Prime Minister agree with the comment make by the Brexit Secretary her spokesman say : ` ` the PM have set out that we be go to need to be able to address people ' S concern about migration with the EU and get the well possible deal in trade and service and now work be under way . ` ` she be approach that with an open mind , with a view that we should n't be take a model off the shelf , we should be work through what be the issue for Britain what we do we want for this relationship and address it . ` ` with a view that this be a negotiation , it ' S not always the right approach to start put all your card on the table at the start . ' ' the spokesman add that Mr Davis be ` ` set out his view ' ' on the single market , not state the government ' s policy on the issue despite address the commons as a member of the government . the comment will be view as a warning to Mr Davis , who as a member of the government be not suppose to state his own opinion in the Commons . she add : ` ` the PM recognise that people have their differ view , that ' S why we need to do the work that there be and all of this be go to have to be negotiate with our EU partner but we should go after the good deal we can . ` ` he ' s set out his opinion ... policy tend to be a direction of travel of what we ' re do , say something be probable or improbable I do n't think be necessarily a policy . ' ' the issue of immigration be not on the agenda at a meeting of Cabinet which Mrs May chair after return from the China ' s G20 summit yesterday .
Scotland Food and drink firm defy Brexit doom-mongers
Scotland ' S food and drink industry be ` ` bullish ' ' about its prospect after the Brexit vote lead to an increase in confidence and growth expectation , accord to a major report publish today . the Bank of Scotland survey of the sector find half of all firm say the result of the EU referendum have result in them increase their business growth estimate compare with only a quarter who say they have cut their projection . almost two-third of the large company ( @card@ per cent ) revise growth estimate upwards after the Brexit vote , and more than half ( @card@ per cent ) of all food and drink firm say the result have lead to an increase in their investment plan . when ask how they plan to achieve growth over the next five year , the most common response ( @card@ per cent ) be by enter new market in the UK . however , more than two third ( @card@ per cent ) say they be also plan to target new international customer . the result appear to defy SNP warning SNP that thousand of job in the industry be at risk from Brexit , thanks to potential trade barrier be raise in the EU . they also confirm the importance to Scottish producer of the UK , which remain by far the large export market . the industry , which be worth £14 billion a year , be Scotland ' s large manufacturing sector and employ @card@ people . between @card@ and @card@ export increase by more than @card@ per cent . the report conclude that it show ` ` every sign of resilience ' ' in the wake of the Brexit vote , with the fall in the value of sterling helping make Scottish food and drink cheap for foreign customer . Jane Clark-Hutchison , a Bank of Scotland regional director , say : ` ` it ' S incredibly hearten that , just week after the EU referendum result , our survey show that bullish food and drink firm expect to grow , invest , recruit and innovate . they believe in the provenance of their produce and the skill of their staff , and they be confident enough to invest in take their good to new market across the globe . ' ' James Withers , chief executive of industry body Scotland Food & Drink , say : ` ` Change be nothing new to the sector , and there will be opportunity as we build new market for our produce . ' ' although @card@ per cent of firm predict a cut in investment follow the Brexit vote , the response among the large employer be more confident . forty four per cent of large-scale producer say confidence have increase compare with @card@ per cent of the small firm . Lord Dunlop , a Scotland Office minister , say it be ` ` great news to see such optimism and resilience . ' ' he add : ` ` we can be confident in the fundamental strength of the UK economy , and our tradition as a trading nation , as we forge a new role in the world . ' ' a Scottish government spokesman say : ` ` Brexit be without doubt the big threat to Scotland ' s long-term economic success , with the referendum have a negative impact on @card@ per cent of food and drink business survey . ' '
Farage tell the US that Brexit be a blueprint to get Trump to White House ; Ex-Ukip leader due to be first British politician to address Republican presidential election rally
Nigel FARAGE tell republican last night how to use the lesson from the successful campaign to take Britain out of the European Union to send Donald Trump to the White House this autumn . the former leader of the UK Independence Party be set to address @card@ Republican supporter at a rally for the party ' s presidential nominee in Jackson , Mississippi . just month from November ' s presidential election , the pair be expect to meet for dinner for the first time tonight . Mr Farage be in America with Ukip donor Arron Banks . he be understand to have be invite to address both the dinner and the rally by Phil Bryant , the governor of Mississippi . Mr Farage be think to be the first British politician to address a Republican presidential election rally . speak from the United States , Mr Farage tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` Brexit be just massive over here . ` ` I go to the [ Republican Party ] convention in Cleveland and I just could not believe that ordinary people be talk to me about Brexit . ` ` they see it as a victory of ordinary people against big business , big bank and big politics . ` ` the Republican activist and man-agers here be keen to hear the Brexit story , hear how we manage to get @card@ million people who do n't normally vote at all to go to the polling station . ` ` it be a victory for the little people - and if the Trump camp reach out to those same people who have be disadvantage by corporatism , under cut wage , a lot of strong similarity to the United Kingdom , then it do not matter what the poll say , what the liberal medium say - in the end election be win by number . ' ' Mr Farage continue : ` ` there be a potential target out there that the Republican Party need to reach . we reach them in Brexit - if they do the same they can completely turn this election around . ' ' Mr Farage say that he would not be endorse Mr Trump at the rally because it be wrong for a foreign politician to intervene in a US election . he add : ` ` I sha n't be endorse anybody but I will say that I would n't vote for Hillary [ Clinton ] if you pay me . ' ' there be some doubt later yesterday about whether Mr Farage will appear on stage ahead of Mr Trump ' S speech . Hope Hicks , spokesman for the Trump campaign , tell Sky News she would ` ` highly doubt ' ' such a joint appearance . she add that she know nothing about it and ` ` they do n't know each other ' ' . Mr Farage counter by say he have be invite to the dinner with Mr Trump and the rally . he say : ` ` I have be invite to speak at both by the governor of Mississippi . ' ' Mr Trump cause a stir last week with a cryptic tweet in which he say : ` ` they will soon be call me Mr BREXIT ! ' ' the real estate businessman support June ' s UK vote to leave the European Union and describe it as ` ` the people take the country back ' ' - a phrase use by Mr Farage at dozen of Brexit rally before the referendum day . during a visit to his golf resort in Ayrshire shortly after the referendum , Mr Trump say the UK ' s vote to leave the EU be a ` ` great thing ' ' , add : ` ` people be angry all over the world . ' ' Ahead of the appearance Mr Farage tell the radio station SuperTalk Mississippi that the fact that most politician be in favour of stay in the EU highlight the disconnect between voter and the political class in Westminster , which be similar to Washington and the rest of the US .
it ' S simple : Brexit will make Britain rich . that ' s why leave can win ; middle-class floating voter must be tell of the benefit we ' d gain in term of influence and flexibility
it be far from over for the leave side . the receive wisdom in Westminster be that the outer be all but finish , and that the only question now be how badly they will be thrash . that ' S nonsense . with four week leave , and the government now ban from deluge us with its taxpayer-financed propaganda under the purdah rule , anything remain possible . but the leave campaign face an increasingly difficult dilemma : as a broad Left-Right independence coalition , whose member disagree on just about everything other than the need for self-governance , it be find it tricky to articulate a strong macroeconomic case for Brexit . this be become a major issue , especially for more prosperous , middle-class , centrist and Toryleaning voter in London and across the country , who be crave reassurance that it ' S safe to vote for Brexit . many Telegraph reader fall into this camp ; and we all have friend , relative and neighbour who be vacillate , wonder whether maybe - just maybe - there may be some truth to the endless supply of scream , hysterical anti-Brexit report . as it happen , such study be a farrago of nonsense , base on question-begging , unrealistic assumption design to lead to a pro-Remain conclusion . in some case - especially the Treasury ' s analysis of the short-term consequence of leave - they be a scandalously unethical concoction of a kind eerily reminiscent of Tony Blair ' s dodgy dossier prior to the Iraq war . but the fact that they be flaw do n't mean that their argument can be ignore . it be desperately important that the economic case for Brexit be make much more vigorously . it need to be divide into two component : a takedown of the EU as an ultimately doom , job-destroying , decline and mismanage behemoth that stand no chance in an increasingly agile , globalised world ; and the mapping out of a clear exit strategy , compatible with leave ' S objective , that show how we would maintain and enhance our openness to the world . the message must be clear : we would be good off out - in term of job , wage and growth . the cost of leave will be small than the benefit , and this would become evident within a few year of leave . the core assumption of the anti-Brexit economist be that leave would erect damaging barrier to trade ; the pro-Brexit side must take on and demolish these argument . the good news be that it ' S quite easy to do so . the leave campaign ' s long-term aim be to break away completely from the EU . but there be no doubt that , be we to vote leave on June @card@ , the UK would seek to adopt , as an interim solution , a Norwegian-style relationship with the EU which ensure that we remain in the single market , give us plenty of time to work out new arrangement with the rest of the world . that be both the only realistic way we would quit the EU - the only model that , plausibly , MP would support as a cross-party compromise deal - and the good possible way for us to do it . the Norwegians would welcome us with open arm , as their own influence would be enhance , and other EU nation would seek to join us . such a deal would eliminate most of the cost of leave , while deliver a hefty dose of benefit as a down-payment . as part of the European Free Trade Association , we would remain in the single market , complete with its four freedom , while withdraw from agricultural and fishery policy , justice , home affair and the custom union . the City would n't lose access and virtually all of the anti-Brexit scare story would be neutralise , which be presumably why that option be mysteriously absent from the Treasury ' s ludicrous analysis of the short-term impact of Brexit . we would save money : Norway ' s net contribution per person be low than Britain ' S . we would have to follow few rule : Norway have adopt @card@ out of @card@ EU directive , and just @card@ out of @card@ EU regulation . so Norway have be force to swallow just @card@ per cent of the total ` ` acquis communautaire ' ' , against all of it for the UK . leave the EU and join EFTA would make us more , rather than less , influential . we have only a small share of the vote in Brussels and can thus easily be outvote . but Norway , which have technically no vote , have regularly mould key rule , include the Consumer Rights Directive . the real reason why we - as a large and powerful economy - would have great influence in EFTA than in the EU be that Brussels be increasingly not the place where big decision take place . rule be increasingly negotiate under the auspice of global body : automotive norm be determine by the World Forum for the harmonisation of Vehicle Regulations ; food standard be determine by Codex Alimentarius ; naval rule be under the aegis of the International Maritime Organisation ; and the crucial new banking regulation be be determine by the Financial Stability Board . these regulation be then pass down , with the odd gold-plate , by the EU . these global body proceed by consensus , not qualify majority ; we be currently represent by the EU at these meeting . a Brexit would allow us to have a seat at these top table , and thus to disintermediate Brussel . we would also be able to sign free-trade deal with country such as China : the EU have prove incompetent at this task , partly because it need the agreement of all @card@ member . Norway have be far more successful ; we would be even more so . it be true that being outside the custom union would require some additional bureaucratic form-filling for our exporter . but the government could help by earmark some of our reduce contribution to the EU to help these company : for example , slash corporation tax on all exporter to @card@ per cent . it could do the same to compensate farmer , be they to face any new barrier , and in any case consumer would benefit hugely from be able to buy cheap food from all over the world . the economic case for Brexit be remarkably strong . if Brexiteers want to reassure float middle-class voter , it will need to be make again and again , loudly and clearly , over the next four week . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Siemens in Brexit swipe as it opt to float in Frankfurt
german engineering giant Siemens be to float its medical business in Frankfurt in what be set to be the country ' s large flotation in a generation - and a blow to the London exchange cause by Brexit . the initial public offering be expect to see the company sell up to 25pc of its Healthineers medical imaging and diagnostics business early next year in a deal that value the division at up to ( Euro ) 40bn ( £35.3bn ) . Siemens take a swipe at the UK ' s vote to quit the European union as the company set out its plan . ` ` Frankfurt be one of the world ' s large trading centre for security , and its importance will continue to increase due to Brexit , ' ' say Michael Sen , Siemens board member responsible for healthcare , in an apparent reference to London lose global standing as a consequence of Brexit . while Siemens be a German business , the decision to list in Frankfurt be something of a coup for the exchange which have be overshadow in recent year . the New York bourse be also understand to have be consider before be rule out . accord to datum from Dealogic , the expect listing in the German bourse would make it the country ' s big since Deutsche Telekom ' S ( Euro ) 13bn float in @card@ . a float of Healthineers would be the big development yet in the company ' s wholesale restructuring under boss Joe Kaeser . under the threeyear-old Vision @card@ plan , Siemens ' activity will be concentrate around its core industrial business and the wide company streamline . Siemens ' decision to list in its home country will also keep German union onside , with the company in the process of slash job as part of its wide restructuring . as part of this strategy , Siemens have combine its wind power division with Spanish renewables business Gamesa and be in the process of combine its rail operation with France ' s Alstom .
Corbyn be big risk than Brexit , warn US bank ; Morgan Stanley warn of damaging consequence of a Left-wing lurch as snap election chance increaseFTSE could fall by a third if Brexit happen under Labour , Morgan Stanley warn
the prospect of a radical left-wing lurch under Jeremy Corbyn be a more serious threat to British asset market than Brexit and risk set off a drastic reprice of UK plc , a lead US bank have warn . Morgan Stanley have tell client that there be a two-thirds likelihood of a snap election in the second half of @card@ once it become clear the UK can not secure the sort of Brexit deal it want and the Tory party start to fracture , bring political country risk into sharp focus . ` ` we could see the big shake-up in the political backdrop since the seventy . this be much more scary from an equity perspective than Brexit , ' ' say Graham Secker , the bank ' s chief European equity strategist . the bank say the ` ` double whammy ' ' of Brexit and a Labour government together could prove toxic for the UK stock market , with its full-blown ` ` bear case ' ' lead to an economic recession and a 32pc crash in the FTSE @card@ index by @card@ . gilt could also face a reckoning give that 10-year yield be trade at just 1.26pc at a time when inflation be run at 3pc , with a further depreciation of sterling on the card . ` ` bond investor be lose money faster in the UK than almost anywhere in the world , ' ' say Andrew Sheets , the bank ' s global asset strategist . fund manager must plan for the serious possibility that a developed OECD country may nationalise power utility , water company , mail delivery and rail transport in sweeping move unseen in the trading life of most investor now alive . the new agenda include a rise in corporation tax to 26pc , a surtax on financial entity , and a financial transaction tax or ` ` Robin Hood ' ' tax on derivative and bond , as well as some share . ` ` the direction of travel we have see for the last @card@ year be go to change by @card@ degree , ' ' he say . the thrust of policy would shift ` ` in favour of labour over capital ' ' with rise in the minimum wage , an end to the public sector pay cap , and a revival of sectoral collective bargaining . this would erode profit , especially for lowmargin firm such as retailer . ` ` even if we see good progress in the Brexit negotiation , the scope for UK sensitive asset to rally may be mute , unless we also see an improvement in the government ' s position in the opinion poll , ' ' say Mr Secker . worry about a duumvirate of Mr Corbyn and John McDonnell - the ` ` Marx brother ' ' as they be know in the City - be approach systemic level . one senior banker tell the Daily Telegraph last week that even familyowned firm be think of cash in their wealth before the guillotine come down , either in the form of a high capital gain tax or ultimately through de facto wealth confiscation . the sense of unease have echo of the ` ` red scare ' ' that grip French investor before Leon Blum ' S Front Populaire sweep to victory in @card@ . city veteran no longer rule out capital control . Emma Marcegaglia , head of the pan-EU lobby BusinessEurope , say Labour ' s apparent tilt towards a soft Brexit would not compensate for the damaging effect of its radical policy manifesto . ` ` what Corbyn propose during the election campaign be not pro-business , that be for sure . there would not be a good outcome even if there be a fantastic free trade agreement , ' ' she tell the Daily Telegraph . Ms Marcegaglia say her member be push the EU institution to take an open and friendly line in the Brexit talk but also warn the British side to eschew wishful thinking . ` ` the UK must put concrete proposal on the table otherwise thing be just go to get bad and bad , ' ' she say . ` ` we have a meeting of @card@ CEO along with the Japanese last week and the feeling be that the situation be very bad . some company will start to activate their contingency plan even before March : that could be to stop invest , or leave the UK altogether . ' ' Morgan Stanley say a Labour Party victory pose a threat to defence company , UK-focused financial group like RBS , utility such as SSE or Severn Trent , telecommunication , bus operator and rail company . it have draw up a basket of those most at risk from change to UK employment law - make bad if their earnings be generate in Britain - such as Ocado , Wetherspoons , Halfords , Sainsbury ' S , Stagecoach , Royal Mail , Card Factory and Greene King . those that rely on foreign earnings be far well insulate , lead by oil driller Ophir , Shell and BP , as well as miner Rio Tinto , BHP Billiton and Anglo American . British American Tobacco earn 99pc of its revenue abroad , and Diageo 94pc . AstraZeneca and Glaxosmithkline be also likely to be well protect . the problem for Britain be that the Brexit talk may come to a head just as the financial cycle enter choppy water in mid-2018 . Morgan Stanley think the global economy have enough momentum to steam on through next year , but asset market will anticipate the next downturn and may de-couple much earlier . Stock could start wobble - and perhaps roll over - once US inflation pick up in March and April , as investor wake up to monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve and perhaps the Bank of Japan . 32pc the crash in the FTSE @card@ share index estimate by @card@ under the combination of Brexit and a Labour government
Scotland ' A United States of Europe ' ; Juncker lay out his vision for future of the EU - lead by a European president - and warn UK it will regret Brexit
JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker yesterday call for an ever-more powerful European Union and warn that Britain would ` ` regret Brexit ' ' , in a defiant speech that be brand a blueprint for a United States of Europe . the plan push for ` ` ever-closer union ' ' on defence , asylum and foreign policy in a big , more powerful bloc under a new , directly elect EU president . a eurozone finance minister would be appoint , with every country to adopt the euro . Mr Juncker call for a special summit of the @card@ remain member state the day after Brexit in March @card@ , in the Romanian city of Sibiu , to map out the future of the EU . he insist the ` ` wind be back in Europe ' s sail ' ' despite deep division on eurozone reform , migration quota and democratic value . ` ` I have live the European project my whole life , ' ' Mr Juncker declare as he outline his federalist vision of common EU policy . ` ` I have fight for it through good time and bad time . ' ' after almost one hour of his state of the Union speech in the European Parliament in Strasbourg , Mr Juncker , the European Commission president , mention Brexit for the first and only time . ` ` we will always regret this , ' ' say Mr Juncker , before round on Ukip MEPs , who have begin to heckle him . ` ` I think you will regret it as well , ' ' he tell Nigel Farage , the former party leader . ` ` we will move on . Brexit be not everything . it be not the future of Europe , ' ' he say to applause in the chamber . ` ` it be not the be all and end all . ' ' Mr Juncker say the role of European Commission president and European Council president should be merge . ` ` the European landscape would be clear and more understandable if the European ship be steer by a single captain , ' ' he say . the passport-free Schengen zone should extend to Bulgaria , Romania and Croatia , he add , and measure should be take to allow Western Balkan country to join the bloc . he demand that every EU country adopt the euro and submit to EU banking supervision . ` ` the euro be destine to be the common currency of the entire union , ' ' Mr Juncker say . national government should give up their veto over tax and foreign policy , he add . speak afterwards , Syed Kamall , the senior Conservative MEP , say : ` ` Mr Juncker say the EU have the wind in its sail . anyone that hear his speech now know what direction he be sail it in - towards a United States of Europe . ' ' Mr Farage describe the speech as ` ` the most open , honest and truly worry speech I have ever hear in my long year in this place ' ' . Mr Juncker praise Italy for bear the brunt of the migration crisis but scold Hungary and Poland for defy Brussel over asylum-seeker quota . he hail step toward EU cooperation on defence . ` ` by @card@ we need a fully fledge European Defence Union . we need it . and Nato want it , ' ' he say . last year , Mr Juncker concede , Europe be ` ` batter and bruise by a year that shake our foundation ' ' but employment have rise , the EU economy be grow and the migration crisis have be bring under control . ` ` let us make the most of the momentum and catch the wind in our sail , ' ' he say . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , praise the speech , but there be ` ` longer-term , institutional thing I be less keen on ' ' . he say : ` ` Juncker be a romantic . I be a politician , not a romantic . ' ' report : page @card@ editorial comment : page @card@ @card@ the date by when Jean-Claude Juncker say Europe need a ' fully fledge European Defence Union '
EU will ' stall ' Brexit talk if UK refuse to pay settlement bill
Britain will wait until the ` ` 11th hour ' ' before agree a final deal on the EU ' S so-called Brexit Bill , it have emerge , as negotiator lock horn over the financial settlement . as the first round of substantive talk enter a second day , it have become clear that the big gap between the two side remain over the EU ' s demand for a gross ( Euro ) 100billion ( £88billion ) financial settlement . in a sign of the tension on the issue , the EU diplomat have reportedly threaten to ` ` stall ' ' the Brexit talk if the UK do not make a serious offer . last week the UK concede it do have financial ` ` obligation ' ' to the EU , but it be refuse to agree hard number until the EU side provide legal justification for demand that British official have describe as ` ` ludicrous ' ' and ` ` outrageous ' ' . among the disagreement be the insistence from Brussels that it will not deduct the UK ' s share of the EU ' s multibillion euro asset portfolio when calculate any final bill . ` ` the EU view seem to be that we have liability but no share in the asset , which be nonsense , ' ' say one senior UK official . both side have do little to hide their frustration , with the EU skittish about how it will fill the ( Euro ) 10billion-ayear black hole that will be leave in its annual budget after Brexit . British negotiator expect that the EU will find it increasingly difficult to defend its rigid pre-talks position . Boris Johnson apparently mock the EU ' s negotiate team yesterday by jog in a T-shirt cover in French exclamation of Captain Haddock from the Tintin book . the fashion choice be take as a dig at EU negotiator who once hang a poster on the wall of their negotiation room show a spoof Tintin book cover , Tintin and the Brexit Plan , that depict the Belgian boy reporter warm his hand on a fire in a wooden boat . the EU have also be brief that the UK be ` ` not well-prepared ' ' for the talk , a move that be cause irritation in Whitehall , which have spend month develop detailed negotiate posi-tions on Northern Ireland , the financial package and the right of EU and UK expats after Brexit . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , have say that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' must be make on these three area before the EU will discuss trade and the future relationship with the UK . meanwhile , it emerge that Owen Paterson , the former Cabinet minister , will go to Hamburg today and tell an audience - in German - that ` ` Brexit be go to happen ' ' . write on www.telegraph.co.uk , Mr Paterson say he would tell a conference that ` ` spiteful protectionism by the Commission be in no one ' S interest , and German politician be realise this ' ' . British official have also risk upset their EU counterpart by suggest an amendment to the schedule after it emerge that one of the original day in August fall on a Bank Holiday Monday . the change could potentially split the August talk into two separate two-day session , disrupt the holiday plan of Eurocrats . ' the EU view seem to be that we have liability but no share in the asset , which be nonsense '
the Brexit revolution have fan the flame of a hard-left rebellion ; the Tory Right think a post-EU debate would be on their term - now they have to save capitalism
revolution often end up a long way from where they start . a year after triumph in the Brexit referendum , many conservative learn this the hard way during a brutally disappointing election night . the rebellious spirit that carry them to victory last June have seem sure to manifest itself again by lift the Tories , the newly commit champion of Brexit , to unprecedented height . instead , like a train switch track , the momentum suddenly turn and take a hard Left . with the government now in paralysis , Tory Brexiteers be in danger of lose control of the revolution they begin . history be full of example of campaign and rebellion that , once start , unleash new political current and take up new cause . yesterday it be sovereignty . today , austerity . my current reading , a history of the Habsburg Empire , seem to be full of analogous event . the book , a revisionist take by Pieter Judson , be n't quite explicit about map the EU on to the Habsburg Empire , but it argue that nationhood be a recent , contingent invention in Europe and that ordinary European be just as capable of loyalty to a supranational authority . this be , of course , music to the ear of EU federalist . like the EU , though , the Habsburg Empire run into trouble because it have a centralise tendency that often rub its subject up the wrong way . in @card@ , tire of Vienna ' S supremacy , a group of Polish landowner try to re-establish an independent Polish state . they gather their force and march into Galicia , a Habsburg territory that straddle modern-day Poland and Ukraine , hope to rally the peasant to their cause . but instead of join the noble , the peasant massacre them . the violence be so bad that Vienna intervene to protect the rebel . what the lord have fail to realise be that , to the Galician peasant , the reformist Habsburg Empire offer the prospect of emancipation . local rule mean continued serfdom and forced labour . two year later , with revolution sweep Europe , the noble have another chance . this time , like Boris Johnson and Michael Gove with their ` ` £350 million to the NHS ' ' bus , the landowner be fall over themselves to make appealing promise about the end of forced labour . unfortunately for them , the Habsburg governor announce the emancipation of the peasant one day before the noble have plan to do the same and their populist drive be puncture . political movement do n't succeed unless they maintain support from a wide alliance of interest . you might think you ' re start a revolution about sovereignty , until suddenly it turn into a fight over emancipation - or austerity . for Brexiteers like Mr Gove and many pro-immigration , Tory internationalist I know , Brexit be purely about democratic control . but they rally voter against a centralise and remote foreign rule by include a wide range of juicy promise in their programme , from immigration cut to public service funding . unfortunately , political alliance be unstable and it be easy to mistake voter ' instinct and mood for commitment to a cause , particularly if it be a cause you have champion for decade . it be always the elite who chafe most against EU authority . the unauthorised transfer of power from Westminster to Brussels be most keenly feel by those accustom to wield power . that do not mean that voter do not understand or care about it . it just be n't their top priority . it be not easy to influence what their priority be , particularly after a political upset . this time last year , immigration be far the most important issue to most voter , accord to YouGov . since then , the importance place on health have rise dramatically . Tory Brexit campaigner know that the referendum would open up policy area that have be ignore or outsourced for many year , like immigration , agricultural policy and state aid . this be , indeed , the point . but they think the battle over the interpretation of Brexit would be on Right-wing territory , whether it be about free trade and a ` ` global Britain ' ' or a Nigel Farage-ist emphasis on sharp immigration cut . their hope be that Britain would move in a Tory direction , towards deregulation and economic competitiveness . what they never consider be the possibility that Britain might leave the EU only to embrace radical socialism . Brexit seem to have throw all sort of taboo out of the window and conservative now find themselves in a pitched battle to save capitalism . who could have predict that the anniversary of the referendum would be greet by Corbyn-mania at Glastonbury ? who consider that Brexit Britain want to be neither Singapore nor little England , but Greece ? all of this be under way as the Brexit negotiation begin . the political instability have leave the interpretation of Brexit down to an unpredictable tussle between Parliament and a hamstrung government . the dynamic be not favourable for Tories . every concession the government make will feed support for a Labour Party run by the hard Left . meanwhile , the Right face a difficult challenge . make the case for Right-wing idea would be a start , but in itself be n't enough . like the Polish nationalist in Galicia , conservative need to construct a new proposition for voter - one potent enough to rival the prospect of Labour ' S largesse . whether that means rebranding the NHS bus again , build more home or offering incentive to make Britain a nation of owner and saver , it be just as important as make the ideological argument . Brexiteers think that win the referendum would be the glorious culmination of their struggle to restore democracy . but the vote for Brexit be just the start of the argument . the Right start this fight . however , with the Left in the ascendant , conservative be now in danger of lose the war . follow Juliet Samuel on Twitter @ CitySamuel Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
the economic rebirth that ' s good for Brexit ; all around the world the sign be encourage , which should mean a good deal for Britain
amid all the interminable and ultimately unanswerable debate about how good or bad Brexit might be for the UK economy , something rather important be be quite widely miss . it be this : there be much big force at work in shape our island economy than the negotiation on Britain ' s future relationship with the European Union . these force be the great oceanic current of the global economy . as one of the world ' s most open economy , the UK be unavoidably nearly always far more beholden to such force than almost anything else . when thing be bad externally , they tend to be pretty grim here too ; by the same token , when the global economy be do well , that same buoyancy will also be mirror on these shore . it would take almost unimaginable , Venezuelan-style , economic mismanagement for the UK to be in recession when all around be grow like topsy . so , momentous though the process of leave the European Union undoubtedly be , these external influence be considerably more likely to determine the success or otherwise of the UK economy over the next two year and beyond than the diplomatic wrangling over the term of Brexit . that ' s good , because as luck would have it , the global economy be perk up across the board . we should , of course , beware of false dawn . there have be many of them since the dark day of the banking crisis nearly a decade ago . it be not yet clear the wound have entirely heal . there be , moreover , still much that could go wrong . China might yet keel over under the grow weight of its own debt , the eurozone crisis could all too easily reignite , or Donald Trump could be as good as his word , and destructively retreat behind high , protectionist wall . yet uncertainty be always with us , and if anything , the know risk today seem to be rather less threaten than for quite some time . even the political risk of European populism seem to be in retreat . unusually , moreover , today ' s growth spurt be not confine to a single region . there be a confluence of economic revival . I ' ve recently return from the Far East , where the economy seem once more to be approach near boom condition . the major global trading hub of Taiwan , Shanghai and Singapore be positively buzz with excitement and activity . international trade , seemingly permanently becalmed by the catastrophe of the Lehman crisis , be once more in the ascendant . similarly in the US , where despite the apparently chaotic and ineffectual nature of the Trump presidency , a spirit of economic optimism not see in year seem to be take hold . Keynes ' s famous ` ` animal spirit ' ' have return with a vengeance . always a year or two behind the US in the economic cycle , Europe too seem slowly to be raise itself from its sick bed , buoy by the recovery in the wide global economy . we have grow use to unsynchronised economic progress , of one region collapse down even as another try to struggle back up . yet , today , the world economy seem to be fire on all cylinder in a way not see since the late ninety . this economic rebirth ought to prove supportive of Brexit in two way , assume it hold . first , it should help mitigate any economically depressing side effect from Brexit uncertainty . this in turn will make the politics of Brexit easier , cauterise business and economic opposition to the process . but perhaps more important , it ought to help Europe feel more at ease with itself , and therefore more rational and magnanimous in the way it deal with Britain ' S departure . the EU have be fire-fighting on multiple front for an awfully long time now . this be easily forget in the already develop acrimony of the Brexit divorce court . first there be the eurozone debt meltdown , which prove almost www.existential.No sooner have the policy-maker calm the financial flame than they be hit by the migrant crisis . Brexit be the final kick in the proverbials . a potentially dangerous , back-against-the-wall way of thinking have take hold in the EU hierarchy , a desire for revenge and punishment which although not rational be all too easily explain by the series of crush blow deal to European hubris and vanity . it ' S of the utmost importance that this siege mentality be not allow to gain the upper hand in forthcoming negotiation . a bait bear be not easily tame , which be why an adversarial approach to the come negotiation be almost bind to fail . there be absolutely no reason why Britain should not enjoy a similar relationship with the EU as Canada do with the US , highly integrate on many level , but separate sovereign nation with their own law and mutually recognise standard . this be what the talk must aim for , and with goodwill on both side , it ' S eminently achievable . that goodwill be go to be much more likely in a grow economy . we can but hope that the present sweet spot persist . follow Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ jeremywarneruk ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Sturgeon ' out of touch ' with Scottish public ; Brexit deliver Survey undermine call for second independence vote as voter north of border reject call for separate deal
Nicola Sturgeon be today accuse of be completely out of touch with Scotland about Brexit after a major survey find almost two-third of Scot oppose her demand for a different deal and support Theresa May ' s UK-wide blueprint . the First Minister ' s justification for a second independence referendum be severely undermine by the NatCen research , which find @card@ per cent of Scot think trade and immigration rule should be the same as in the rest of the UK . an overwhelming majority also support Mrs May ' s plan to curtail free movement from the EU and oppose the First Minister ' s insistence that it continue , with @card@ per cent believe that immigrant from the continent should be subject to the same restriction as those from elsewhere in the world . the research conclude that Scot ' view be similar to those of people in the rest of Britain and warn Ms Sturgeon that her argument that the Prime Minister ' s Brexit blueprint justify an independence vote ` ` be unlikely to prove particularly persuasive . ' ' the Tories say the survey show Ms Sturgeon be out of touch , with even a majority of independence supporter demand curb on immigration . it be publish as David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , formally reject Ms Sturgeon ' S highly complex proposal for Scotland to stay in the EU single market . this would have see Scotland adopt completely separate trade and immigration regime from the rest of the UK . Mr Davis say this be not deliverable and argue that the Prime Minister ' S vision would achieve almost all of Ms Sturgeon ' S aim use a different method , such as a comprehensive free trade agreement . the research be conduct by Prof John Curtice , Britain ' s most eminent psephologist and a senior research fellow at NatCen . he say : ` ` this mean that on immigration , in particular , voter in Scotland seem to be more in tune with the stance take by the UK government than that adopt by the Scottish Government ' ' . Prof Curtice conclude that it be ` ` far from clear ' ' concern about Brexit would translate into increase support for independence if the UK Government succeed in deliver free trade and immigration control . Adam Tomkins , the Scottish Tories ' constitution spokesman , say the report expose the ` ` myth ' ' that Scot have different opinion about the Brexit deal from people in the rest of the UK . this survey , conduct between February @card@ and March @card@ , find almost unanimous support north and south of the Border for maintain free trade . the proportion of Scot who want EU immigrant to face the same restriction as those from elsewhere in the world ( @card@ per cent ) be only slightly low than the UK-wide figure of @card@ per cent . while Remain voter in Scotland be much less likely than leave supporter to back immigration control , more than half ( @card@ per cent ) be still in favour of end free movement . Scot be slightly more likely ( @card@ per cent ) than their counterpart in England and Wales ( @card@ per cent ) to forego immigration control in order to get a free trade deal but it find only @card@ per cent of Scot want more relax EU trade rule compare with those in force in England and Wales , and a mere @card@ per cent say they want a more liberal immigration policy north of the border . at least three in five of those who vote for independence be oppose to freedom of movement , while they be no more likely than those who vote no in the independence referendum to back free trade . contrary to the SNP ' s claim that the EU referendum result justify another independence vote , the study find clear evidence that Scot ' view on one issue do not ` ` necessarily correspond in any way ' ' to their opinion on the other . it conclude : ` ` Those who vote Yes in @card@ be on balance barely any keener on have a close relationship with the EU than be those who vote no . ' ' a Scottish government spokesman say : ` ` the poll demonstrate people in Scotland continue to value the protection and right offer by the EU , particularly on key issue such as free trade and freedom of movement . ` ` it also highlight great support in Scotland across many important issue to maintain the benefit of EU membership , compare to the UK as a whole . ' ' David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , say : ` ` Today ' S report underline the need for the Scottish government and the UK Government to work together to secure the right deal for the whole UK . ' '
call me a heretic - there ' S more to life than Brexit ; Schools and the health service be in urgent need of reform - and the Prime Minister must take the lead
one of the lesser pleasure of Christmas be not have to talk or think much about Brexit . many people , I suspect , find the way Brexit dominate national debate a bit try : be they still go on about that ? have n't they sort it out yet ? however you vote in the referendum , good accept two fact . first , we be go to leave , and second , it ' s go to involve a little more time and a lot more talk than many people would like . if you think @card@ be all about Brexit , you ai n't see nothing yet . sorry . still , the people who ' d like to talk about something else be on to something . until June @card@ @card@ , political convention say that voter do n't care very much about Europe . yes , they have a view , and that view tend to be negative . but they do n't consider it as important as the economy , health , education and immigration . since the referendum , with politician and pundit rush to ditch anything that smell of outmoded thinking , a new consensus have emerge - that Brexit be not just the most important issue face the government , but the one that matter most to most voter . all consensus should be challenge . so here ' s a holiday heresy : there ' S more to life than Brexit . some thing the government do matter at least as much as get our EU exit right . high on that list be education and health . long term , a good Brexit or bad Brexit will make a big difference to Britain ' S wealth and status , but for now , the most tangible effect of British politics probably come in the school your child or grandchild attend and the quality of care you get when you fall ill . the most optimistic Brexiteers will argue that leave the EU will dramatically improve both service by reduce the number of EU citizen in the UK and thus the pressure on them . but the people who oversee those service know such pressure be marginal at good . the problem we have with the way we educate our child and treat our sick and elderly wo n't be solve by tough immigration rule . in the NHS , the picture be bleak . Whitehall official speak in unusually grim term about this winter . hospital be desperate to stop people enter ( ` ` triage team ' ' block the door of A & E for non-urgent case ) and desperate to push people out of bed and back into their own home , but ca n't when those people ca n't cope at home . a service use to run hot be unnervingly close to melt point . in his heart , Jeremy Hunt know the NHS model be n't work , but he also know that no Health Secretary alone can change it . it would take a Prime Minister in good standing , lead a concerted charge into the gun of public veneration for the NHS to get Britain to the point where we could sensibly discuss health reform . absent of such support , Mr Hunt silence himself on the fundamental question about the NHS and focus on the thing he can do . like a mechanic try to coax a few more year out of a car with @card@ mile on the clock , he ' s try to squeeze more efficiency out of an organisation not always culturally incline to maximise productivity . after the bloody business of get junior doctor to work more weekend , he must ask consultant to do the same . Education also demand urgent attention , not least in the context of Brexit . if the UK economy be to be wean off its addiction to cheap European labour and trade its way to glory , the indigenous workforce need to be smart and sharp and incline to work even harder . despite some recent progress , England ' S school be n't fit for top-flight competition : international league table have their flaw , but figure suggest English pupil do bad than those in Poland , Canada , Japan and even Belgium can not be ignore . Justine Greening secretly know that new grammar school alone will not fix Britain ' s problem of low productivity and stalled social mobility . indeed , whatever the merit of grammar ( and some Tories remain deeply unconvinced ) , the fight to create what may end up be a very small number of selective school risk absorb time and political capital that might be spend on more useful educational improvement . yet she too know that in government , direction must come from the top . in bureaucratic term , no @card@ be always a relatively small unit , a few dozen staff at most , and thus vulnerable to be overwhelm , focus on immediate need and neglect long-term one . the allconsuming nature of Brexit and Mrs May ' s habit of govern through a handful of adviser mean the Downing Street bottleneck be especially narrow these day : school and hospital be not squeeze through . be it unreasonable to expect Mrs May to manage the most complex diplomatic , legal , political and economic negotiation of our time and at the same time push for historically important health and education reform ? probably . but no one say be prime minister be go to be easy . follow James Kirkup on Twitter @ jameskirkup ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Brexit ' may hit England host hope ' ; Sport Football
Greg Clarke admit yesterday that Brexit could damage England ' S hope of stage the World Cup or European Championship . the new chairman of the Football Association claim it may even be force to enter into a joint bid with another European Union country follow Great Britain ' s vote to withdraw as a member state . Clarke reveal one of his main objective be to establish whether Brexit have damage the FA ' s standing within Fifa or Uefa . speak after watch England win their opening World Cup qualifier in Slovakia on Sunday , Clarke say : ` ` I be mull on the way back on the plane from Slovakia what Brexit do to our chance of a future tournament because I never have any expectation of a new tournament [ bid ] in my tenure . the timescales be too long but you have to build a platform for the person after you or the person after them to be able to harvest some goodwill and get a tournament . ` ` but we be leave the EU . can we count on EU support or will they vote for EU nation in the future ? I do n't know the answer but we have to get to the bottom of that . we have to build relation directly within Uefa now and not rely on the support of the EU nation because they might say we ' ve get an EU member who want it this year . so it ' S doubly important to have really strong relationship in Uefa and Fifa . ' ' England have be link with bid for the @card@ European championship and @card@ World Cup and Clarke add : ` ` I need to find out before we waste a lot of money . it could mean we have to slightly change our tactic for get a tournament . it might be jointly host with an EU member . ' ' Clarke be speak at the official launch of Kick it Out ' s ` ` Call Full Time on Hate ' ' campaign . the antiracism watchdog release figure yesterday show the number of report incident of discrimination in football last season be up @card@ per cent on the previous campaign , @card@ compare with @card@ . the rise be down mainly to abuse in relation to religion and sexual orientation , while there be an @card@ per cent increase in incident involve social medium .
why Trump have little chance of ' do a Brexit ' ; the presidential hopeful have certainly change his tone - but it ' s the lack of substance that ' s the issue
Donald Trump be so loud that he even shout in print . last Thursday , he tweet : ` ` they will soon be call me Mr . BREXIT ! ' ' he mean that he ' ll defy the poll and pull off a surprise victory in November . that ' s unlikely . it ' S a safe bet that we wo n't be call him Mr President . Trump ' s tweet reflect a change of plan . in the primary there be no plan at all : he say the first thing that enter his head . it work : he win the Republican nomination . but the shift from primary to a general election require moderation , and Trump have struggle to fulfil a promise to be ` ` so presidential that you people will be so bored ' ' . instead , he insult and argue and outrage - while privately complain that Trump be n't allow to be Trump enough any more . this week the campaign manager , Paul Manafort , be effectively demote and one Steve Bannon replace him . Bannon be a fascinating character . a former Goldman Sachs banker , he be the man behind Breitbart - a far-right news website that have be one of Trump ' s few consistent supporter . it ' s part of what be sometimes call the ` ` alt-Right ' ' , a coalition of conservative in perpetual war against both the Left and the establishment right . the coalition count sexist and neo-racists among its number . some of Breitbart ' s most arresting headline include ` ` Birth Control Makes Women Unattractive and Crazy ' ' and ` ` Young Muslims in the West be a Ticking Time Bomb . ' ' Breitbart have a UK bureau that be shameless , friendly to Ukip and boast Nigel Farage as a columnist . the conservatism of Mitt Romney be well-mannered , ethical . Breitbart ' S people be political punk who , just like Sid Vicious , revel in be despise by the folk they despise . they have a reputation . Ben Shapiro , a former Breitbart editor , call Bannon : ` ` a vindictive , nasty figure , infamous for verbally abuse suppose friend and threaten enemy . ' ' in Shapiro ' S view , ` ` Bannon be a smart version of Trump . ' ' so when Bannon join the campaign we expect Trump to go turbo . perhaps extend that wall to keep out the Canadian , too ? instead , he offer what be be label an ` ` apology ' ' for his past behaviour . a very Trump apology : he deliver it without humility , shout that , ` ` believe it or not , ' ' he regret that sometimes people take offence at the thing he say . expect to hear more about this apology . expect Trump to refer to it as ` ` the most beautiful apology ever give ! ' ' what the apology show be that Bannon might be a maverick but , presume he agree with this manoeuvre , he be also clever . he and the rest of the staff can read poll : Trump be behind even in oncecompetitive state such as North Carolina and Florida . as one Republican insider put it to me , it ' S too late to catch up . the new goal wo n't be to overtake Clinton but to get close enough - say just three point behind - to be within striking distance on polling day . that ' S when the Brexit part of the strategy kick in . Trump ' S people hope that Americans be lie to pollster about their voting intention - just as many Briton may have do during the referendum . Team Trump dream of victory by stealth . the candidate may even think that he ' S buy some of the genius behind Brexit . after all , one can draw a direct line from Bannon to Farage through the UK Breitbart branch , and the two man be reportedly close . but Brexit can not be buy and import . for a start , while Farage ' s anti-immigration campaign be a key component of victory , it probably alienate as many as it seduce . what be far more important be the endorsement of senior Tory and personable character from Labour . it be a bipartisan movement base on an idea that , love or loathe Euroscepticism , have be on the table for @card@ year . Trump , by contrast , be brand new in political term and fraught with far great risk . leave the EU be a single policy ; Trump be a package . Americans be weigh up whether or not to give this guy the nuclear code . moreover , Brexit appeal to a coalition of middle-class Tory and working-class Labour supporter . Trump be do well among the bluecollar voter but haemorrhage whitecollar republican . Swing-state poll show Trump lose college-educated white , a group Romney win by @card@ per cent in @card@ . Brexit also do well in a few majority non-white area , such as Slough . in some poll , Trump score zero per cent among African-Americans . Trump ' s hope to ` ` do a Brexit ' ' be root in a misunderstanding about what Brexit be . it be a less risky , less Right-wing a choice than its opponent think - far less so than the Trump candidacy be . and there ' s no sign of a real pivot to where Trump need to be to achieve Brexit ' s breadth of support . his apology represent a change in tone , but it ' S not just tone that put off voter . it ' S substance . nothing will undo the thing Trump have say about immigration , trade or terrorism . what it take to excite Breitbart reader and win the Republican primary have probably damn him in the opinion of everyone else . follow Tim Stanley on Twitter @ timothy_stanley ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
control migration with point system , former minister tell May
Theresa May must adopt an Australian-style points-based immigration system by @card@ or face a backlash from Brexit voter , two former Cabinet minister have say . Theresa Villiers , the former Northern Ireland secretary , tell the Telegraph that Britain have vote to end the ` ` free-for-all ' ' of ` ` open-door ' ' immigration . at the same time , Iain Duncan Smith , the former work and pension secretary , say people be ` ` live in cloudcuckoo land ' ' if they think voter do not choose complete control of their border by back Brexit . the comment will add pressure on the Prime Minister to adopt a hard line in negotiation over Brexit , and expose a grow Cabinet split on the issue . at least five Cabinet minister be believe to support a points-based system : Liam Fox , Boris Johnson , Priti Patel , Chris Grayling and Andrea Leadsom . however , Amber Rudd , the new Home Secretary , criticise the idea during the EU referendum campaign , and neither Mrs May nor Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , support the move earlier this year . source have suggest the government will not take a stance until the end of Brexit negotiation , which be at least two year away . before the referendum , Tory Brexit campaigner pledge to introduce the system , which allow a country to control how many migrant enter base on the need for skill in certain industry . Mrs Villiers tell the Daily Telegraph that match migrant number to skill shortage be a ` ` sensible way to have a reform immigration system ' ' . ask whether it should be in place by @card@ , she say : ` ` that ' s an achievable and sensible goal . I very much hope that it ' s go to be possible to deliver that . ' ' Mr Duncan Smith say : ` ` it be my view that we will have leave the EU by the time of the next election , which mean we have to have a system in place that control migration . ` ` people be live in cloud-cuckoo land if they think the British voter do anything else but absolutely vote to take back control . it be very explicit - that mean migration , and that ' s exactly what they vote for . ' ' speak for the first time since her Cabinet sacking last month , Mrs Villiers also speak of her ` ` loss ' ' and ` ` grief ` ` at leave office , and say she fear , at the age of just @card@ , ` ` this be the end ' ' of her ministerial career . ` ` it be a difficult conversation because I be obviously pretty upset , to be honest , ' ' Mrs Villiers say of her meeting with Mrs May . ` ` these kind of conversation be never easy . ' ' she add : ` ` Politics be an uncertain path for anyone . it certainly come with its up and down . to be very frank , I suppose I ' m still suffer regret , grief , loss , as you do in these kind of situation . but I ' ve just get to accept it and move on . ` ` I ' m really sad to have leave my Northern Ireland role behind . it ' S a very special place - I leave a lot of friend , the people be great and I feel I be able to achieve thing . ' ' she identify help to solve the political stand-off at Stormont last year among those thing . Mrs Villiers also insist that passport control be not need on the Northern Ireland border with the Republic ; reject call for an early general election and defend David Cameron ' s controversial honour list .
UK could rejoin EU in future , say May deputy ; Lidington state that Brexit will stand , but in year to come Europe might be very different from today
Britain could rejoin a reform European union within a generation , Theresa May ' S de facto deputy prime minister have say , suggest it would be ` ` something for future parliament to consider ' ' . in an interview with the Daily Telegraph , David Lidington , the Cabinet Office Minister who replace Damian Green at the Prime Minister ' s side in this month ' S reshuffle , say it be impossible to predict what the EU would look like in ` ` @card@ or @card@ year ' time ' ' . ` ` it ' S dangerous to say never , ' ' he add . Mr Lidington , who campaign for Remain during the EU referendum and be one of the government ' s most prominent Europhiles , say he have not change his view on Brexit but as a democrat it be his job to implement the will of the people . the former Europe minister now chair several key Cabinet sub-committee on Brexit . in his first interview since take on the new role , he say it be possible Britain could join some form of cus-toms union with the EU after Brexit.The Government be commit to leave the single market and the custom union , but Mr Lidington say if there be ` ` some different framework that we can arrive at in negotiation that will be mutually beneficial ' ' , it could work to ` ` everybody ' S advantage ' ' . earlier this week , Justine Greening , the former education secretary , suggest future generation of MP could ` ` undo ' ' Brexit if it do not ` ` work for them ' ' . Emmanuel Macron , the French president , have say the UK could ` ` find its place ' ' in a ` ` reform and simplify EU ' ' within a few year of leave . ask whether Mr Macron and Ms Greening could be right , Mr Lidington say it be a ` ` red herring ' ' to suggest Britain could rejoin the EU in its current form . however , he add : ` ` we may be look in a generation ' s time at an EU that be configure differently from what it be today . the exact nature of the relationship between the United Kingdom and that future system , whatever it turn out to be , of European cooperation be something that future parliament , future generation will have to consider . ' ' yesterday Mrs May refuse once again to say whether she would vote leave if the EU referendum happen now . she say : ` ` I would do what I do last time round which be sit down and look carefully at the issue . ' ' in an interview with a French television station , Mrs May be ask : ` ` do you feel European ? ' ' she reply ` ` Yes ' ' . since move to the Cabinet Office , Mr Lidington have spend most of his time take charge of the fallout from the collapse of Carillion . he reject Jeremy Corbyn ' s suggestion that outsourcing have become a ` ` racket ' ' or that PFI contract should be take back under public sector control . interview : page @card@ Charles Moore : page @card@
bank may be force to raise buffer further ; Disorderly Brexit pose potential risk for lender , say Bank of England , as it mull widen safety net
bank could be order to build up their capital buffer even more to guard against the threat of a disorderly Brexit that risk cut finance firm off from their continental customer , the Bank of England have say . official be already make bank increase the countercyclical capital buffer ( CCyB ) , a fund that be build up in the good year and can be use in bad time to ensure bank be safe and can carry on lending when time get tough . but Brexit add in an extra element of uncertainty . the Financial Policy Committee , which be head by Mark Carney , have decide not to hike the rate further to reflect Brexit just yet , but will consider do so next year . the CCyB be rise from 0.5pc of bank ' risk-weighted asset to 1pc , reflect the relatively ` ` normal ' ' risk condition face at the moment . this put the CCyB at £11.4bn . the Bank of England stress test bank ' finance to see how they could cope with a major recession , and find they have enough capital to survive and to keep lending . but a disorderly Brexit on top of such a crunch could be more dangerous . ` ` in such circumstance , capital buffer would be draw down substantially more than in the stress test and , as a result , bank would be more likely to restrict lending to the real economy , ' ' say the record of last month ' s FPC meeting . the committee therefore debate the merit of increase the UK CCyB rate above 1pc at this juncture . this would help keep bank safe , the committee say . ` ` on the other hand , the likelihood of a disorderly Brexit occur in combination with both a severe global recession and very substantial additional conduct cost ( as in the stress test ) could be see as extremely remote ; if that be the case , the potential economic cost to ensure the banking system be resilient to this combination of risk could exceed the benefit , ' ' the FPC say . ` ` the FPC agree that , when make its decision on the UK CCyB rate during the first half of @card@ , it would reconsider the adequacy of a 1pc UK CCyB rate in light of the evolution of the overall risk environment . ' ' official be also worry that an extra rise on top of that already plan would be a painful shock for bank . ` ` an increase in the UK CCyB rate above 1pc would also be a surprise for bank and market participant , give the committee ' s previous communication , ' ' the FPC say . ` ` this could undermine the effectiveness of future communication , and the FPC recognise the benefit of act in a predictable manner . ' ' the Bank of England have also alert the High Court that it might face extra demand from insurance company prepare for Brexit . depend on the result of negotiation with the EU , the finance firm might need to set up new entity in the correct location , and transfer contract to those new entity . ` ` the UK process of transfer insurance contract rely on a court procedure that could take @card@ month ; give the volume of these application be expect to be three to five time the normal level , there be a risk that transfer would not be complete in time , ' ' the FPC minute say . ` ` The PRA [ Prudential Regulation Authority ] and FCA have be work to ensure that firm ' plan be as robust as possible , and the Bank have write to the High Court to alert them to the potential for increase application . ' ' ' an increase in the UK CCYB rate above 1pc would be a surprise for bank and market participant ... '
as Brexit pressure mount , we must remain open for business
ahead of last year ' S referendum , I be optimistic about Britain ' s future outside of the European Union . I still strongly believe that the country make the right decision to leave the EU and that business and the economy will thrive . but the short-term impact and opportunity arise from Brexit will only ever be as good as the execution of the separation and how it be negotiate . and I fear that , unless action be take on two front , we be head towards a very sub-optimal outcome . with regard to the Brexit negotiation , money need to be front and centre . most recently , we have see the Prime Minister generously offer approximately £20bn in payment to the EU during the propose transition period , without have a firm EU-UK trade deal in place post-Brexit . unless the EU begin trade talk without further delay , we will - to use a phrase coin by Lord Bridges , the former minister from the Department of Exiting the EU - be discuss Britain ' S gangplank , rather than the bridge to our final post-Brexit destination . government negotiator should also have the confidence to spell out to the EU ' s negotiator what the consequence will be of fail to agree term of trade with Britain , specifically the full implication of not have access to our market . in essence , our position ought to be that we will not pay a penny unless we have proper access to EU market on fair term ; and that if we do n't get that access , the EU should not expect to have access to our market on fair term . on the other hand , we should make clear what our financial offer would be , should we reach appropriate term , as an inducement for European government to put pressure towards a settlement . such an offer should be spread over a number of year , say @card@ , to help ensure adherence to the deal . thus , for instance , £5bn a year over @card@ year as a carrot , or nothing if no deal be reach . Jean-Claude Juncker ' s recent ` ` state of the union ' ' address be a timely reminder of the EU ' s direction of travel . government across the EU listen patiently to what he have to say and several reply : ` ` no , thank you ' ' . this lay bare the divergent interest of the European Commission and the member state that pay for it and provide a useful reminder to British voter that the EU be still on an integrationist track . on the domestic front , the Prime Minister provide a defence of free enterprise to a Bank of England audience , shortly before the Conservative party conference . but these word now need to be match by a policy vision to support wealth creation in a post-Brexit Britain . we need more pro-business policy ; more commitment to deregulation ; more encouragement for small business ; and more tax incentive . as well as aspire to be the number one trading destination in Europe , we should aim to make Britain the number one destination in Europe for entrepreneur to set up . one only have to look at how clever both Ireland and Luxembourg have be with their tax policy and measure design to encourage talented people to go there . the priority for a pro-business agenda be simple : deregulate - red tape continue to exert an especially onerous burden on SMEs that lack the resource to handle regulatory compliance ; cut corporation tax - create a globally competitive tax regime encourage business to be in Britain and will enlarge the overall tax take ; give SMEs employ under @card@ people a more flexible employment regime - enable firm to manage a change commercial environment and reduce the regulatory downsides of hiring ; Focus government grant - adopt the Israeli model where the government match start-up funding for technology business . in the UK , funding should be available to start-up outside of the South East in sector where British ingenuity be world-class , such as pharma , biotech and medical device ; Commit to infrastructure - upgrade originally promise to realise the economic potential of the Northern Powerhouse initiative should be build without delay ; Expand capacity at both Heathrow and Gatwick - airport capacity be vital to Britain ' S future ; cut stamp duty on housing - the high rate of stamp duty have cause tax take to fall as the top end of the housing market become illiquid , discouraging foreign wealth creator that want to live and work in the UK . the clock be tick - the conservative have four and a half year to put in place measure to fundamentally improve the economy . if they succeed , they can win the next election . Fail and Britain may face the seemingly unthinkable prospect of a Labour government lead by Jeremy Corbyn . the stake be high and the government face two challenge , not just one . Howard Shore be executive chairman of Shore Capital Group ' we should aim to make Britain the number one destination in Europe for entrepreneur to set up '
Britain to keep European standard ; the decision to maintain @card@ industry directive will enable ' frictionless ' trade , say ' Kitemark ' chief
Britain be to keep all of Europe ' s business standard after Brexit by apply to remain a full member of Europe ' S three business standard agency after March @card@ , the head of the UK ' s official standard agency have tell the Daily Telegraph . Howard Kerr , the chief executive of the BSI which bestow the ' Kitemark ' symbol , say the move will commit the UK to maintain some @card@ industrial and technical standard in order to facilitate ` ` frictionless ' ' trade after Brexit . ` ` the preference in industry and government be for the UK to continue to trade use single standard across Europe and for the UK be a full member of the three [ European standard ] agency , ' ' he say in an interview . the BSI , which be a private body that operate under a UK government mandate from the Department of Trade , be already in the process of formally request the right to remain a member of the European Committee for Standardisation ( Cen ) after Brexit . the move will require Cen and two other European standard organisation to re-write their membership statute to enable Britain to re-join when the UK become a non-EU country . the BSI and Government be quietly confident this will happen . Cen , and its sister-organisations CENELEC and ETSI which produce electro-technical and telecoms standard , be not European Union body , and include EEA member state like Norway as well as EU accession country , like Turkey and Serbia , among their membership . the government commit to remain a full member of the three body in the Brexit White Paper earlier this year as a means of retain British influence in the creation of global standard . however , the move will raise some question about the extent to which Brexit will enable the UK to diverge from EU standard , with some @card@ per cent of publish European standard be develop ` ` as a result of request from the European Commission ' ' , accord to the White Paper . ` ` as a full future member of the European future standard system , with harmonise standard and national adoption of those standard , it would not be possible for the UK to diverge on harmonise EU standard [ after Brexit ] , ' ' Mr Kerr concede . in theory it would remain possible to create specific UK standard for product be sell solely in the UK market , but in practice Mr Kerr say business have no appetite for create cumbersome dual standard regime . ` ` why would business want different standard for trading in the UK ? Business want to make product once , to one single standard , ' ' he add . the adherence to EU product standard could have a bearing on Britain ' s ability to cut trade deal with the rest of the world , accord to Prof Alan Winters , director of the UK Trade Policy Observatory at Sussex University . ` ` the UK will be negotiate with third country , but with a good deal less muscle than the EU , ' ' he say . ` ` the EU have more ability to lean on a partner to accept their standard , but it will be the same dynamic . ' ' Allie Renison , the head of EU and trade policy at the Institute of Directors ( IoD ) , say the decision would send the right signal to the EU @card@ . ' why would business want different standard for trading in the UK ? firm want to make product once '
Mrs May fail to learn the lesson of the leave campaign ' S victory ; a message of hope over pessimism will always prevail - and it could be need in the day ahead
on this day last year , I mournfully make my way to the polling station and end my lifelong support for the European Union . most people do n't change their mind in election campaign , but the referendum be different . I have always believe in an ever-closer union of people , but the EU ' S intransigence have turn it into a source of instability and division . not that I expect my vote to do anything : David Cameron be anticipate to win easily . at noon on polling day his campaign chief , Andrew Cooper , predict a 10-point victory for Remain . I ' m not sure how many of us who vote for Brexit expect anything to come of it . that referendum result seem to break every rule of political science . on one side you have the government , opposition , almost every business group , spymasters , national icon like Stephen Hawking and divinity like Keira Knightley . and those oppose ? a rag tag team lead by a 10-month-old outfit , Vote leave , that have be beset by feud and force to fight at a time of its opponent ' S choosing . it ought to have be a walkover . so why be n't it ? even now , it ' S hard to have a rational discussion about what Vote leave get right . the referendum result be a profound psychological blow for many of those in the business of political analysis , so they end up talk about voter dupe by a ` ` post-truth ' ' era . vote leave itself dissolve in the turmoil that follow Mr Cameron ' S resignation . as a result , very few of the lesson of the campaign a year ago be learn by the Tory - which be rather a shame . if they have be , Theresa May might not have lose her majority in the general election . the Prime Minister want to run her own Brexit campaign , perhaps to atone for not support it last time . but she never quite explain what Brexit be for , or what it might lead to . she need to tell people why we be leave , and never do . from the offset , Vote leave sell Brexit as an agenda of national renewal , of tend to people who have be leave behind . its message - ` ` take control ' ' - actually mean something . ` ` strong and stable ' ' do not . so the idea , last year , be to serve up an inspiring message that would lead million to back change . lesson one : hope sell . perhaps it be because Mrs May do not support Brexit that she never quite see the need to frame it as be open and globalist . as Vote leave know from the offset , they would be accuse of be xenophobic little Englander with no interest in life beyond the English Channel . so they choose internationalist argument : why , they ask , do we discriminate against immigrant from non-EU country ? why not trade fairly with the Third World ? and yes , let ' s offer immediate and unconditional assurance to every single EU migrant in Britain : we need them , they can stay . but it be a cold , mean version of Brexit that Mrs May end serve up in the election . the warm version that Boris Johnson work on - offer unilateral security to EU migrant , emphasise good relation with European neighbour - be a policy that end up be steal by the Labour Party . the Tories find themselves look a bit like ( as someone once put it ) the nasty party . it be as if the Conservatives have grow addict to the negative campaigning deploy in the Scottish referendum then by Remain . when so much be at stake , voter want more than to be tell to fear the other side . lesson two : project fear do n't work . then come the great Brexit variety show . vote leave ' s two star striker be Boris and Michael Gove , but if you do n't like them then there be the Labour MP Kate Hoey and Gisela Stuart . in fact , if you find Boris a bit too wet - with his declaration of be ` ` passionately pro-immigration ' ' - then there be Nigel Farage , with his ( to me , repulsive ) point about HIV-infected migrant and his notorious ` ` break Point ' ' poster show Syrian refugee . and then the other outrider : business for Britain , Muslims for Britain , Labour leave , Out and Proud . so the Brexit campaign have a great many people with a great many message . a contrast to the @card@ Tory general election campaign which only feature one Tory : Mrs may herself . if you find her indecisive , robotic , power-hungry ( or all three ) then there be n't an alternative . it be Jeremy Corbyn who use outrider group - like his momentum and other leftwing campaigner - with different message spread on digital platform to reach young voter , two third of whom turn up . lesson three : coalition win campaign . perhaps the strong weapon in Vote leave ' S arsenal be its claim that Britain send £350 million a week to the EU , and that this could be well spend on priority like the National Health Service . monstrous lie , say Remain : factor in the rebate and the real figure be far low . and to be sure , the real sum that Vote leave be promise for the NHS be close to £100 million a week . but whether you believe the big or the small figure , the overall impression be the same : there ' d be a lot more money for the NHS after Brexit . and here be something else that Theresa May lack in the election : a firm offer for voter . none of this be genius : time change , and successful campaign change with them . politician take note and adapt : or do , if they want to win majority . but give that the Tories might find themselves fight another campaign at any moment , it might be worth thinking about a message that go beyond attack the other chap . in all of the drama of the last year , the Tories have lose sight of what people vote for in the referendum . it be not about use EU national as bargaining chip , or snarl at Brussels . it be about retrieve sovereignty while manage immigration well , disengage from the European Union while find good way to be good European . this be not about a hard Brexit or soft Brexit - neither of which mean anything - but an open Brexit , one that let Britain well engage with the rest of the world . a rather compelling agenda , and one that ' S still there for the taking . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Hammond accuse of stall DUP deal as he push for soft Brexit term ; source claim the Chancellor be ' nitpicking ' over airport tax to buy time for his EU agenda
Philip Hammond have be accuse of prevent Theresa May from conclude her pact with the DUP because of a row over airport tax in Belfast . Whitehall source blame ` ` nitpicking ' ' by the treasury for the fact that no agreement have be reach by last night follow two day of talk . the Daily Telegraph have be tell that the deal be ` ` @card@ per cent agree ' ' but a key stumbling block be a demand by the DUP for an end to Air Passenger Duty at Northern Ireland ' S airport , which have be describe as ` ` an anchor on tourism ' ' to the province because the tax be not levy in the Republic of Ireland . Mrs May ' s hoped-for deal with the DUP , which she be depend on to be able to govern , could now be delay until next week , mean Brexit talk and the Queen ' S speech could both be put back until later this month . one Tory source even suggest Mr Hammond might be deliberately ` ` footdrag ' ' to delay Brexit talk and give him more time to argue for a softening of the government ' s position on Brexit . Mrs May will face a showdown over the DUP deal with the Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams in Downing Street today . the Prime Minister have invite Mr Adams and the leader of Northern Ireland ' s other main political party to no @card@ in the hope of break the deadlock over Stormont power-sharing talk . but her conversation with Mr Adams and Sinn Fein ' s Stormont leader Michelle O'Neill will be dominate by the propose DUP deal . Mrs O'Neill yesterday warn the Prime Minister that she must do nothing to ` ` undermine ' ' the peace process in Ulster . the former Conservative prime minister Sir John Major have previously warn Mrs May that make a deal with the DUP could result in violence return to Northern Ireland . the Queen ' s Speech , originally schedule for next Monday , could be put back as far as June @card@ . several financial issue remain unresolved between the party : one of the most complex revolve around Air Passenger Duty ( APD ) . the government have already give the Stormont executive the power to scrap APD on long-haul flight , but passenger on short-haul flight must still pay a tax of £13 each way . the DUP want the Treasury to give it the power to scrap the tax , but Mr Hammond be say to be concern that if he give Northern Ireland an opt-out it will mean Scotland also have to be give extra cash under the Barnett formula , which determine how fund be allocate to the devolve power . the delay mean Mrs May could be force into the humiliate position of start Brexit talk next week without have form a government . a Tory source say the Chancellor be try to garner support from colleague in the Cabinet and the Con-servative Party for a watered-down Brexit deal that involve stay in the custom union , which would give the UK access to the single market but prevent it from make its own trade deal with the rest of the world . the source say : ` ` Anything involve the treasury be cumbersome . I be not sure Philip Hammond want these talk to succeed . ' ' EU negotiator have say that Mrs May need to end the ` ` uncertainty ' ' surround her ability to command a work majority in Parliament before Brexit talk begin . with no DUP deal in place last night , Mrs May will come under huge pressure from Sinn Fein over the propose pact when she meet its leader today . Mrs O'Neill hint that she might demand the scrapping of the DUP deal if it threaten the good Friday Agreement , which commit the UK and Irish government to demonstrate ` ` rigorous impartiality ' ' in their role as co-guarantors of the peace process . Mrs O'Neill say : ` ` I will be make it very clear that any deal between the Tories and the DUP can not be allow to undermine the Good Friday and subsequent agreement . ` ` it ' s imperative that both [ British and Irish ] government recommit to the word , spirit and implementation of the good Friday agreement if there be to be any prospect of re-establish the [ Stormont ] executive . ' ' Mrs O'Neill add : ` ` Progress will not come from a deal between the DUP and Tories to prop up a government in Westminster with an austerity and Brexit agenda but through the full implementation of the agreement and an executive that respect the right and deliver for all in society . ' ' as well as Sinn Fein , Mrs May have invite the DUP , the SDLP , the UUP and the Alliance Party to Downing Street . the Stormont Assembly have be suspend since January and the government have say the party must reach an agreement on the makeup of the Assembly by June @card@ or direct rule will be re-imposed from Westminster . Ruth Dudley Edwards : Page @card@ ' Anything involve the treasury be cumbersome . I be not sure Mr Hammond want these talk to succeed '
we aim to create stability and opportunity ; a strong economy be a key to make Brexit a success , and we hope to establish a fair Britain for everyone
the next five year will be the most challenging that Britain have face in my lifetime . Brexit will define us - our place in the world , our economic security and our future prosperity . so now more than ever , Britain need strong and stable government to get the good Brexit deal for our country and its people . that be why the manifesto we be publish today be design to confront the great challenge of our time . it be a commitment to take the big , difficult decision that be right for our country in the long term . deal with these challenge be dependent on have a strong economy . and under my leadership we will create that by make the most of our existing strength , invest in infrastructure and people , and ensure that our economy grow across the whole country . we will deliver a smooth and orderly Brexit and forge a deep and special partnership with our friend and ally across Europe . it will allow our United Kingdom to emerge from this period of great national change strong and more prosperous than ever before . since become Prime Minister last year I have always make it clear that we need to pull down the barrier that prevent people fulfill their true potential in order to secure a good deal for ordinary , work people . but for too many people in this country , where you end up in life be still determine by where you be bear and to whom . so our manifesto will make sure that everyone have the opportunity to make the most of their talent and hard work , whoever they be and wherever they be from . it be also vital that the government in place after the general election respond to the reality of an age society . while always make sure that we be fair to young generation , it be essential that we give people security in their old age and care for those with long-term health condition . and for the sake of our economy , security and society , we must harness the power of fast-change technology . rather than pursue an agenda base on a suppose centre ground define by elite in Westminster , we will govern in the interest of the mainstream of the British public . the agenda we set out in the manifesto will restore the public finance and maintain economic stability . we will reduce and control immigration and we will be resolute in defend the country from terrorism and other security threat . the conservative will run public service in accordance with their value as important local and national institution . as I set out earlier this week , we will not only guarantee but enhance worker ' right and protection . and we will develop our ambitious modern industrial strategy to get the economy work for everyone , across the whole of our nation . none of this will be easy . it will require discipline and focus , effort and hard work . on Tuesday , Jeremy Corbyn unveil his shambolic manifesto and it immediately emerge that there be a £58 billion black hole in his spending plan . his number simply do n't add up and if he get the key to Downing Street after the election , every single family in the country will pay the price and face high tax and more debt . under my leadership , the government will look forward and be confident that we have the vision and the plan to build a good Britain . it will be a strong Britain where everyone have the economic security they need and the chance to live a secure and happy life . and it will be a fair Britain that work for everyone , not just a privileged few . read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Brexit will end London ' s ' gateway to Europe ' status , say Bundesbank exec
BREXIT could result in London lose its status as the financial ` ` gateway to Europe ' ' , accord to one of Germany ' s most influential banking regulator . Dr Andreas Dombret , who sit on the board of the Bundesbank , say that any deal strike between the UK and the European union follow Brexit would be ` ` mile away from access to the single market ' ' . he be speak in a private briefing for German business and bank earlier this week . his comment be first report by the BBC . bank in the City of London have long argue there be no alternative to membership of the single market that provide the same level of certainty or access . however , the UK Government last month rule out retain single market membership follow Brexit . access be therefore likely to come through ` ` equivalence ' ' - a deal whereby UK-based financial firm could sell their service to customer in the EU as long as the UK maintain a regulatory regime ` ` equivalent ' ' to that in Europe . a number of UK-based firm have also say that they will need to set up subsidiary within the EU . however , their location and the number of job likely to be move to them from London be a matter of fierce debate . accord to the BBC , Dr Dombret lay out a hard line at the event , organise by the Boston Consulting Group in Frankfurt . he say : ` ` the current model of use London as a gateway to Europe be likely to end . ' ' the Bundesbank executive , who be responsible for banking and financial supervision , also appear to react to implicit threat by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , who earlier this month say that the government could employ other mean to ensure the economy remain competitive - take to suggest that the UK could reduce corporation tax and regulatory burden . ` ` the EU will not engage in a regulatory race to the bottom , ' ' say Dr Dombret .
Scotland Scotland ' s Brexit strategy could lead to EU court
a Second legal expert have suggest the Scottish Government ' s intervention in the legal battle over Brexit could lead to the European Court of Justice be ask to rule on whether Article @card@ can be reverse . Prof Sionaidh Douglas-Scott say that if the Scottish Government ask the ` ` vexed question ' ' in the forthcoming Supreme Court hearing , the matter could be send to the EU court for a ruling . her comment follow a suggestion from a lead QC that Nicola Sturgeon could lay the groundwork for block Brexit by seek such a decision . Jolyon Maugham , a London barrister , say the First Minister should explode the ` ` cosy consensus ' ' that once Article @card@ be trigger , to start the twoyear process of leave the EU , it can not be undo . write in the Daily Telegraph on Saturday , he say that if the EU court rule that the process could be revoke it would allow MP to withdraw Article @card@ notification at a late date if they do not like the shape of the Brexit deal . Mr Maugham initiate the crowdfunded legal challenge in the High Court , alongside the investment manager Gina Miller , that lead to the ruling that the Prime Minister do not have the power to trigger Article @card@ without the approval of Parliament . the UK Government ' S appeal will be hear in the Supreme Court next month . Prof Douglas-Scott , a law professor at Queen Mary University of London , and formerly professor of European and Human Rights Law at Oxford , tell the BBC ' s Sunday Politics Scotland programme there be ` ` nothing clear ' ' in the wording of Article @card@ on whether it be reversible and the only institution that could decide the issue conclusively be the European court . she add : ` ` if the issue be raise in the Supreme Court by , for example , the Scottish Government , then the question be whether the Supreme Court think a decision on that matter be necessary to determine the case . ` ` it might well think that and make a reference to the European Court of Justice and that would delay matter further . ' ' she add : ` ` there would be effect of decide that Article @card@ be after all reversible . one might be that if , two year down the line , the British Government decide that after all Brexit do n't mean Brexit , then Britain would not be perhaps out on its knee without any deal at all . ' ' the Supreme Court rule on Friday that the Scottish and Welsh government would be allow to intervene in the appeal . Prof Douglas-Scott , who be also an adviser to the Scottish Parliament European and External Relations Committee , add that she expect that if parliamentary approval be necessary before minister trigger Article @card@ , then the Scottish government be likely to argue that Holyrood should have to give its consent . she say that if the Scottish Parliament refuse legislative consent it might not stop Brexit but it would cause ` ` a lot of confusion and difficulty ' ' . she say it be a similar situation that ultimately lead to two independence referendum in Quebec .
May rule out Irish border check after Brexit vote
Theresa May will today insist that peace and stability in Northern Ireland be her ` ` high priority ' ' as she pledge to ensure that border control will not be erect after Brexit . the Prime Minister travel to Belfast today for talk with the First Minister Arlene Foster and Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness over how to ensure stability in Northern Ireland in the wake of the EU referendum . Tony Blair and Sir John Major visit the Province a fortnight before the referendum to caution against Brexit , argue that it would lead to control and custom check along the existing ` ` soft border ' ' with the Republic . people and good move freely between Northern Ireland and the Republic under the Common Travel Area ( CTA ) . however , concern have be raise over what Brexit mean for the CTA and for both economy , especially if the UK restrict EU immigration . and , after @card@ per cent of the population vote Remain , there have be call for a referendum on the future of Northern Ireland . Mrs May have indicate that she will not trigger the formal process for leave the EU until there be an agreed ` ` UK approach ' ' back by Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland . she have already travel to Scotland and Wales to discuss the Brexit negotiation . speak ahead of her Ulster visit , the PM say : ` ` I want to assure the people of Northern Ireland that I will lead a government which work for everyone across all part of the United Kingdom , and that Northern Ireland be a special and value part of that Union . ` ` I look forward to underline the government ' s commitment to the Belfast Agreement and its institution , and to work with local party and the Irish government to fully implement the Stormont House and Fresh Start Agreements . ' ' she add : ` ` I have be clear that we will make a success of the UK ' s departure from the European Union . that mean it must work for Northern Ireland too , include in relation to the border with the Republic . ' '
Rolls-Royce to take full stake in aircraft part manufacturer
Rolls-Royce have beef up its position in the aircraft engine business , with a ( Euro ) 720m deal to take full control of an engine part manufacturer Industria de Turbo Propulsores ( ITP ) it already have a major stake in . announce the deal to buy Spanishbased business , Warren East , chief executive of the FTSE 100-listed engineer , say it would ` ` strengthen ' ' Rolls ' s position in the wake of Brexit , give it a strong position in Europe . ` ` we do not analyse this deal from the point of view of Brexit - Brexit happen , ' ' Mr East say . ` ` this strengthen our position in Europe . we be already in Europe with ITP [ by own all of it ] that strengthen growth opportunity outside the EU . ' ' however , he be bullish about Rolls ' s future after Britain ' s leave vote . ` ` Brexit have be on the agenda for some time and although it be not the outcome we would have want it be the outcome we have get and we have to work with that . we be a global business and we be go after global opportunity - three-quarter of our work be outside the EU . ' ' Mr East say Rolls would seek to ` ` in-fluence wherever possible ' ' Britain ' s direction as it negotiate trade deal and free movement of labour and say the company have be in touch with the government about what it want to see for Britain in the form of international business relation . other area of concern include aerospace standard and environmental regulation . ` ` so far the British government have be very receptive , ' ' Mr East add . the deal announce will see Derbybased Rolls buy the 53.1pc of ITP it do not already own , in an acquisition which will boost revenue both in part for new engine and replacement for those already in service . roll will pay for the stake in the business over two year in eight equal payment . privately own ITP be involve in Rolls ' s Trent @card@ and XWB civil engine programme , as well as military engine programme . ITP , which make part for low pressure turbine in jet engine and have experience in complex manufacturing , be responsible for about 10pc of the value of each of £10m Trent @card@ Rolls sell . own by Spanish operation Sener Grupo de Ingeniería , ITP be headquarter in Bilbao , Spain , and employ over @card@ people in facility in Spain , Mexico , India , Malta , US and the UK . in @card@ it have revenue of ( Euro ) 710m , EBITDA be ( Euro ) 116m and profit after tax of ( Euro ) 59m .
Scotland ' Our next prime minister must believe in Brexit ' ; Brexit Battle for Tory leadership
Theresa May should not be the next prime minister because she do not ` ` believe ' ' in Brexit , one of her rival for the Tory leadership have suggest . in an interview with the Daily Telegraph , Andrea Leadsom say that the next Conservative leader must be someone who support the leave campaign before the referendum . Mrs Leadsom also speak for the first time about Michael Gove ' s decision to abandon his support for Boris Johnson and instead run for leader himself , describe it as a ` ` tragedy ' ' . she say that she ` ` agonise ' ' over the decision to run for leader because of her concern about the impact it would have on her family . Mrs Leadsom , who have serve as a minister in both the Treasury and the energy department , be one of the key figure in the leave campaign . Mrs May , the Home Secretary , back David Cameron ' s Remain campaign ahead of the referendum , say EU membership be vital for Britain ' S security . the only other candidate for the leadership who back Remain be Stephen Crabb , the Work and Pensions Secretary . ask whether the next party leader must be a leave supporter , Mrs Leadsom say : ` ` I certainly think [ so ] because I ' ve be absolutely closely involve and very passionate about the opportunity from Brexit . ' ' although she do not refer to Mrs may directly , she add : ` ` I think it ' s very difficult for somebody who do n't agree with that , who be reluctantly follow the wish of the people . I think it ' s quite hard for them to really see the opportunity . ` ` I genuinely believe that if we want to make a go of it , then we need somebody who believe in it . ' ' Key government position and role in the Brexit negotiating team will have to go to people who back the leave campaign , Mrs Leadsom say . ` ` Key negotiating people would certainly need to believe that our future be much well outside of the EU . obviously in government you need highly competent people to do the job . but certainly in actually negotiate our future arrangement with the EU , it ' S get to be someone who really believe we can do it and a team who believe we can do it . ' ' Mrs Leadsom campaign for two month alongside both Mr Johnson and Mr Gove , appear with both regularly at debate and event . ask about Mr Gove ' s decision to run as leader , which have be describe by ally of Mr Johnson as ` ` an act of betrayal ' ' , she say : ` ` I get to know Michael and Boris during the campaign and I think both of them be absolutely commit to leave . ` ` and I just think it ' s a real tragedy . I feel really sad about what ' S happen . particularly that Boris be n't stand . ' ' she add : ` ` I ' m really sorry about what ' S happen . I do n't really understand it but I ' m really surprised and sorry about it . ' ' Mrs Leadsom do not rule out the possibility of either man take a job in her administration if she win the Tory leadership contest . ` ` it would be important to have key people who be able to be competent and also believe in the project , ' ' she say . ` ` but I ' m definitely not think that far ahead right now . ' ' ask whether Britain be ready for another female prime minister , Mrs Leadson say : ` ` I be a big fan of see more woman in public life . woman have a huge amount to offer . we ' re not all one homogenous bunch . we ' ve all get different strength and weakness . what ' S important be to give people the choice . they need to see woman and man . ' ' a number of Tory have privately say that a female leader be need to ` ` sort out the mess ' ' in the party cause by prominent male colleague . however , Mrs Leadsom say : ` ` I ' d never write off a whole sex . I share people ' S concern about what ' s go on in the last couple of day , but I do n't deduce that man have have their day . ' ' Mrs Leadsom have three child - son age @card@ and @card@ , and a daughter age @card@ . when ask whether her decision to run for the leadership be difficult because of the impact it would have on her family , she reply : ` ` at the end of the day , family will always come first . I really , really do agonise ... it be an incredibly important and big job to take on . and so the impact on the family - I certainly discuss it with them and we think long and hard about it , and in the end conclude that it be the right thing to do . ' ' Andrea Leadsom Born Aylesbury , May @card@ @card@ Background Brought up in Tring , Herts , by a divorce mother in a terrace house with an outside lavatory Education Tonbridge Grammar School for Girls , Kent , Warwick University ( read political science ) Family Married to Ben Leadsom . they have three child - two son , age @card@ and @card@ , and a daughter , @card@ Interests Cycling , walk in the Northants countryside and spending time with her family
Boris say Brexit will end ' scandal ' of long A & E queue
migrant arrive from the continent be drive up hospital wait time , Boris Johnson say as he claim Britain leave the European Union would help end the ` ` scandal ' ' of long queue for emergency care . the former London mayor say big company boss be support Britain ' s EU membership because migrant from the EU help ` ` keep down ' ' wage and training bill . Mr Johnson , who be on a UK ` ` Brexit tour ' ' , say the welloff be insulate from migration . ` ` these people never see the impact of those big migration flow on local housing , or school place , or of course on A & E , ' ' he say . ` ` it ' s a scandal ... I think that A & E wait time be longer than they ' ve ever be in the history of the NHS . we have a chance to put some more money into our fantastic NHS and try to sort out that problem . ' ' he also refuse to take back compare the EU to Nazi Germany , despite a backlash , by say both body want to ` ` unify Europe ' ' . Mr Johnson hit back at George Osborne ' S claim that Eurosceptics be act like conspiracy theorist by say there be more ` ` credible evidence ' ' of the Loch Ness monster than Treasury Brexit forecast . he say the comment be ` ` a bit rich ' ' because they come from those who warn of another world war if Britain leave the EU . earlier , at a pro-EU event in Stansted airport , Mr Osborne have dismiss concern from Brexit campaigner that their high-profile critic be ` ` part of some global stitch-up to give misinformation to the British people ' ' . he say : ` ` the next thing we know , the leave camp will be accuse us of fake the moon landing , kidnap Shergar and cover up the existence of the Loch Ness monster . ' ' speaking alongside Labour ' s former shadow chancellor Ed Balls and exbusiness secretary Sir Vince Cable , Mr Osborne unveil new Treasury analysis show the UK would be £200 billion bad off @card@ year after a Brexit , and miss out on ` ` over £200 billion of overseas investment into our country ' ' . Mr Osborne also brush off claim that campaign to remain in the EU have damage his chance of lead the Conservative Party . he say : ` ` this campaign be much big than any one person ' S career , any one person ' S party - the issue be more important than any one general election . ' '
Gove : we will make Britain safe after Brexit
Britain ' S border and national security law must be immediately strengthen in the event of a Brexit , the Justice Secretary warn today . in an interview with the Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove say that good protection of the country be the most urgent priority of the leave campaign . Mr Gove back David Cameron to remain as Prime Minister in the event of a Brexit . but he say that the Prime Minister would have to enact new law ` ` instantly ' ' to stop the influence of ` ` rogue ' ' European court and allow the immediate deportation of terrorist . the immediate power be demand in the wake of a successful Brexit vote include free intelligence agency from European law , allow foreign criminal and terrorist to be deport without hindrance and free the British Armed Forces from Brussels diktat . it have be think that the process of Britain free itself from Brussels control would take year , but Mr Gove say today that it should begin immediately with a series of interim emergency law . the leave group will today effectively begin the main campaign for the referendum with a series of high-pro-file intervention from Mr Gove and Boris Johnson . George Osborne will tomorrow give a major television interview on the EU and the Prime Minister will make a speech on Monday . in today ' S interview , his most outspoken since come out in favour of Brexit , Mr Gove also warn that Britain ' S NHS and school will not be able to cope with the further influx of immigrant that will come to the UK if the country stay in the EU . and he rule out ever stand for the leadership of the Conservative Party , say : ` ` I do n't want to do it and there be people who be far well equipped than me to do it . ' ' he also suggest that he could be prepare to take part in a head-to-head debate with Mr Cameron before the referendum vote . Mr Gove ' s decision to throw down the gauntlet to Mr Cameron over EU justice measure will raise question about whether the Prime Minister could remain in office in the event of a leave vote . ` ` we ' ve stress throughout that the day after we vote to leave , nothing fundamental change and we still have the same trading arrangement and we start a process of informal talk and negotiation with our European partner , ' ' Mr Gove say . ` ` but there be some thing that we can change relatively quickly . and one of the thing we can do be that we can deal with the European Court of Justice , which have become a rogue court . ' ' Mr Gove claim that the ECJ ` ` intervene to prevent Abu Hamza ' S daughter-in-law be send out of this country ' ' and say that it be consider a judgment on Britain ' s surveillance regime in an attempt to assert ` ` legal control over what our intelligence agency can and can not do ' ' . he say that under the new law ` ` life in this country would change because Britain would be safe ' ' . interview : page @card@
Pharma firm encounter overseas talent shortage as Brexit vote hit job application
British drug company have be struggle to attract top talent from overseas since the Brexit vote , research have reveal . the proportion of applicant from outside the UK for senior role at pharmaceutical firm have fall sharply from around 40pc to 15pc in the year and a half since the referendum , datum from recruiter DHR International share exclusively with the Daily Telegraph have show . the firm , which specialise in fill executive position , say it be already start to find problem fill senior vacancy . large British drug firm say DHR ' S finding chime with their experience . one insider say overseas candidate be ` ` turn us down for role because of the uncertainty around Brexit ' ' and it remain a big concern among existing staff who have join from abroad . drug maker AstraZeneca say that , while it be ` ` in part reassure ' ' by the government ' s commitment to the sector since the referendum , it remain concerned . an AstraZeneca spokesman say : ` ` continue uncertainty around Brexit be impact recruitment for skilled role and we anticipate that some international applicant may go elsewhere until they know more about their future employment and security for their family in the UK . ' ' Fellow FTSE @card@ giant GSK say it be ` ` critical ' ' any new immigration system would enable drug firm to ` ` attract the good , diverse talent in both the UK and EU ' ' . the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry , which represent the £63bn life science sector , agree it be ` ` crucial ' ' to the success of the industry that it could expand . Dr Sheuli Porkess , an executive director at the trade body , say : ` ` this issue - alongside many other critical area that have an impact on public health in the UK and EU - must be at the top of the Brexit negotiating agenda . ' ' Theo de Roij , partner at DHR International , say the hire trouble be compound because it be difficult for UK drug firm to move their complex operation abroad . Mr de Roij add : ` ` when recruit for senior position we always cast the net as widely as possible by look for qualified people across many geography . however , Brexit have create uncertainty about how matter will evolve . ' '
JP Morgan begin advise staff of Brexit relocation
JP Morgan have begin tell staff whether or not they will be relocate to the European union ahead of Brexit , a senior boss at the US investment bank have say . the firm - which employ @card@ people in the UK - be plan to beef up its operation in Ireland , Germany and Luxembourg in preparation for what it deem the ` ` bad case scenario ' ' of a hard Brexit . Sally Dewar , international head of regulatory affair at JP Morgan , tell a House of Lords committee yesterday that the bank be ` ` already in execution mode ' ' on its Brexit contingency plan . she say discussion with European regulator be ` ` already well in train ' ' on transfer some of its infrastructure and banking licence away from the UK . she say she expect the Treasury to get less tax revenue from the firm as a result of some of its function move overseas . while she do not say how many staff could move , the bank have previously warn that between @card@ and @card@ role could go . ` ` some key people-decisions have be take and communicate - it will flow through between now and April @card@ , ' ' Ms Dewar say . ` ` by the end of [ the first quarter of next year ] we will start to have to take decision around inform client , which then become more difficult to unravel . ' ' Julian Adams , group regulatory and government relation director at investor Prudential , also tell the committee the firm be enact its contingency plan . the group ' s asset management arm M & G will begin move some asset to Luxembourg before March @card@ , although he say the focus be on ` ` job create in Luxembourg rather than lose in London ' ' . the comment come despite a redouble effort to reassure City firm that minister will work to protect London ' s status as a global financial hub through Brexit . Theresa May meet JP Morgan chief executive Jamie Dimon last week , with Mr Dimon say afterwards he have be ` ` grateful for good clarity ' ' on her Brexit priority . @card@ the number of people employ by JP Morgan in the UK . the bank be suggest @card@ to @card@ could go
Johnson and Gove memo piles pressure on Hammond ; Minister say attack on Hammond ' take advantage of the Prime Minister ' S weakness '
Philip Hammond come under renewed pressure over his stance on Brexit last night as Boris Johnson and Michael Gove be accuse of a ` ` sordid ' ' attempt to oust him . in a letter send to Theresa May last month , Mr Johnson and Mr Gove accuse the Chancellor of let the EU hold Britain ` ` over a barrel ' ' by refuse to make preparation for leave without a deal . the memo , obtain by the Mail on Sunday , say : ` ` we be profoundly worry that in some part of government the current preparation be not proceed with anything like sufficient energy . we have hear it argue by some that we can not start preparation on the basis of ' no deal ' because that would undermine our obligation of ' sincere cooperation ' with the EU . if take seriously , that would leave us over a barrel in @card@ . ' ' it prompt a backlash from minister loyal to the Prime Minister . one say : ` ` it ' S a sordid little double play - they be try to take advantage of the Prime Minister ' s weakness to get rid of Hammond . ' ' however , an ally of Mr Johnson and Mr Gove insist that they be simply ` ` try to win the argument ' ' in Cabinet by any mean . the ally say : ` ` they see themselves as guardian of Brexit . there be more riding for them on its success than anyone else in Cabinet . ` ` he [ Mr Hammond ] be always the problem , he be one of the main reason why there be not enough preparation for no deal . he be so stubborn . ' ' it come as Michael Gove say he would support Mrs May if she decide to offer the EU extra cash in order to make a breakthrough in negotiation in a December summit . Tory Eurosceptics have warn that the party be at ` ` breaking point ' ' over the Brexit divorce bill , and Mr Johnson be understand to oppose make further commitment . however Mr Gove be understand to believe that the divorce bill be less important than ensure that the UK get a good Brexit deal . ask if he would block the Prime Minister if she have to hand over extra cash to secure a deal , he reply : ` ` I certainly would not . I would not block the Prime Minister in do what she believe be right . ' ' he tell BBC One ' S the Andrew Marr Show the government be ` ` do everything we can ' ' to secure a good deal but be make sure that whatever happen in the talk , Britain can ` ` make the good of them ' ' . ` ` I be not worry , but I be determine to ensure that in my own department that we have everything in place for every eventuality . ' ' on the same television show , Sir James Dyson say that Britain should walk away from the European Union without pay anything towards the Brexit divorce bill . the billionaire inventor describe Brussels ' demand for a ( Euro ) 60billion divorce bill as ` ` outrageous ' ' , as he say that the UK should leave the EU without a deal . he tell Andrew Marr : ` ` it be a problem with the people we be negotiate with . I think demand billion and billion to leave be outrageous and I think demand it before we leave be outrageous . ` ` I would walk away , that ' S the only way to deal with them . I have be deal with the EU for the last @card@ year ... there be no way to deal with them . we have to walk away . ` ` if we walk away they will come back to us because they sell all of their product to us . we be in a very strong position . we should walk away and they will come to us . we be in a very , very strong position . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
the political turmoil over Brexit be at odd with the economic reality
we be now enter one of the bad period in the run-up to Brexit . the clock be tick and EU negotiator be try to ratchet up the pressure . meanwhile , there appear to have be little solid progress with regard to the trade agreement that Theresa May have be seek . the EU continue to press for more money upfront before it will deign to negotiate on trade . the British government should stand firm . there be nothing in the Lisbon Treaty to say that a depart country should make a large payment to the EU before start trade talk . and there be nothing in economics justify the payment of a large sum to the EU in return for ` ` access ' ' to the single market . what do country as diverse as the United States and Singapore pay for their ` ` access ' ' to the single market ? the answer be precisely zero . what make the current difficult period especially problematic be the profound weakness of the British government . at the good of time , politician be not usually bless with a good grasp of economics and they be liable to make bad decision . in particular , they tend to overestimate the importance of agreement , while underestimate the importance of the impersonal force of competition and incentive . and they be all too susceptible to the special pleading of Sir Thingummy Whatnot of Widget PLC . in keep with this , they be currently fixate on the importance of do ` ` a deal ' ' . on the continent , politician and official tend to believe that prosperity emerge from the pen that they wield to sign various document . accordingly , they genuinely believe ( and some undoubtedly hope ) that without ` ` a deal ' ' the UK be sink . they could not be further from the truth . as I have repeatedly write , the history of the EU be one of blunder economic policy . this erroneous belief about the UK ' s position without a deal be yet another example . we can now add another ` ` ism ' ' - namely ` ` dealism ' ' - to the ` ` sizeism ' ' and ` ` proximity fetishism ' ' that have dominate EU economic thinking . give the current disarray among our leader , you could be forgive for think that the UK be in a parlous state . in fact , the economy be do pretty well . admittedly , last week , the EU publish forecast say that , while the eurozone ' s growth rate be set to pick up , the UK ' S be go to fall back . supposedly , the UK be set to underperform the eurozone for an extended period . well , there ' s a surprise ! by contrast , although the UK will probably grow by only about 1.5pc this year , I expect growth to accelerate next year as the squeeze on consumer ' real income ease and the growth of export pick up . this be , after all , the logic behind the Bank of England ' s decision to raise interest rate . and it look as though there be a few more rate rise to come . although Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , only acknowledge our robust performance through grit tooth , the fact be that when it cut interest rate in @card@ in the wake of the Brexit vote , the Bank be seriously worry that the economy would suffer a profound downturn . we learn last week that the Bank ' s agent around the country be advise that the rate of growth of average earnings be go to rise next year . that be a good thing and it back up the story of an economy on the up . of course , over the impact of the Brexit vote the Treasury be equally amiss . its Brexit blunder have several component . in common with many other forecaster , it use a so-called ` ` gravity model ' ' which rest on the belief that international trade be very heavily influence by proximity . in fact , though , whatever model they use , the assumption make by the Treasury be bind to produce a forecast in which the UK economy function much bad outside the EU . as we approach the Budget and the government consider what stance to take in relation to our European partner , it be vitally important that we do n't make the same mistake that the Bank and the Treasury make in their thinking about the impact of a vote for Brexit . reflect forecast from the Office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) , in the come Budget the Treasury will doubtless again be spread gloom and doom . yet - and it be difficult to put this politely - their forecasting record hardly inspire confidence , let alone blind acceptance . indeed , tomorrow a group call economist for Free Trade ( EFT ) , of which I be a member , will publish an alternative view of our future which include a substantial fiscal dividend create by the economic expansion make possible by our exit from the EU , which the Chancellor Philip Hammond can spend on a mixture of debt reduction , high government expenditure and tax cut . I have always say that Brexit be not a magic wand . but , to mix my metaphor , nor be it a poison chalice . it present a challenge and an opportunity . to meet the challenge and seize the opportunity the UK must embrace competition and free trade . the notion that the Chancellor be box in by the gloomy post-Brexit economic prospect be a delusion . exactly how thing turn out depend a good deal on what the Chancellor do . so he absolutely should not use suppose Brexit constraint as an excuse for do nothing . largely because of current political turmoil , I do not expect the UK to have a comfortable ride over the come month . indeed , thing may well get very bumpy . yet , if only the government could get enough of a grip to secure a proper escape from this ill-fated union , I be convince that in year to come people will look back upon this troubled time and wonder why so many people ever doubt that it be right to leave . Roger Bootle be chairman of Capital Economics . his late book , make a success of Brexit and Reforming the EU , be publish by Nicholas Brealey . roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com ' you could be forgive for think that the UK be in a parlous state . in fact , the economy be do pretty well '
stop give mixed message on Brexit Body : in precisely one week , Theresa May will travel to the European Council summit in Brussels , where it will be decide whether ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make in Brexit talk to allow both side to move on to discuss a future trade deal . this be already problematic enough , for it be clear that the very arbiter of this ` ` progress ' ' ( the EU ' S leader ) be themselves the cause of the talk stall . as Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , make clear yesterday before the Commons Treasury select committee , Britain have ` ` make the running ' ' in negotiation . ` ` people in this country , ' ' he suggest , ` ` be find it increasingly difficult to understand why we ca n't start talk about the substance of our future relationship . ' ' he note , rightly , that the result of any stall be ` ` a shared problem ' ' , as a ` ` no deal ' ' scenario would have a significant impact on Continental exporter , too . why , then , be the leader of France and Germany behave so mulishly , so irrationally ? perhaps the answer can be find closer to home . here , in the space of @card@ hour , the Deputy Prime Minister , Damian Green , declare that he would vote Remain if the referendum be hold today , Mr Hammond insist that he will not yet allocate money for the ` ` no deal ' ' scenario he suggest be increasingly likely , and Theresa May herself , in an uncomfortable radio interview , refuse to say whether she would now vote for Brexit , have support Remain last June . so some @card@ month after the referendum , Britain ' S three most senior political figure either publicly disavow Brexit , or appear not to have decide what they want to do with it . face with this , the apparently irrational strategy of Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron begin to make sense . when your opponent appear in disarray , you do not let up the attack . instead , you press for maximum advantage . in Berlin and Paris , Brexit negotiator look out across the Channel and think they see a trinity of timidity . they must be prove wrong . one way forward may be for the Prime Minister to take some reinforcement to next week ' s crucial summit . David Cameron happily face the sceptical face of European leader bolster by the wisdom of William Hague or the tactical mischief of George Osborne . why should the Prime Minister not take a willing ally of her own , one who have no problem advocate Brexit and the benefit it can bring this country ? after all , it ' S not unusual for foreign secretary to attend foreign summit .
EU ' s chief exit negotiator on £72,000 more than UK ' s Davis
the European Union ' S chief Brexit negotiator be earn up to £72,000 a year more than David Davis , his UK counterpart , the Daily Telegraph have learn , spark anger among politician . Michel Barnier be employ as an official by the European Commission . he have the status of director general in the EU ' s civil service , which qualify for an ` ` AD15-AD16 ' ' pay grade of between ( Euro ) @card@ and ( Euro ) @card@ ( about £18,000 ) a month . the top wage , which Mr Barnier , as a former commission vice-president , would be expect to earn , translate to a gross salary of £213,772.80 a year . as a Cabinet minister , Mr Davis earn £141,505 a year , just under £12,000 a month and £72,267.80 less than Mr Barnier . Mr Barnier ' S wage also dwarf the £149,440 pay to Theresa May . unlike Mr Davis , Mr Barnier be not elect but appoint . the revelation spark concern as the EU and UK begin tense talk over the so-called ` ` Brexit bill ' ' in Brussels yesterday . the European Commission would not confirm Mr Barnier ' s exact salary , state privacy concern , only his pay grade . if Mr Barnier be still a commission vice-president he would be pay slightly more than now , ( Euro ) @card@ a month . Mr Davis and Mr Barnier meet on Monday in Brussels for a press conference to begin four day of Brexit negotiation . Mr Barnier heap pressure on Britain to publish a position paper on the ` ` Brexit bill ' ' and warn the EU would not talk trade until it do so . his comment be brand ` ` ill-judged and unhelpful ' ' by British source . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , say : ` ` unless our government call the Brexit bill bluff , the British taxpayer will be subsidise these ridiculously bloated wage for year to come . the situation be simply unacceptable . ' ' meanwhile , more than @card@ per cent of voter find a Brexit ` ` exit bill ' ' of £30billion or more unacceptable , a poll say . the survey of @card@ adult by ICM Unlimited find that while @card@ per cent think an exit fee of up to £10billion ` ` as a one-off or in instalment , as the UK ' s contribution to spending commitment make by the EU when the UK be a member ' ' be acceptable , @card@ per cent feel £20billion be unacceptable , rise to @card@ per cent for £30billion and @card@ per cent for £40billion . £213,772.80 the annual gross salary earn by Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator . David Davis ' s annual pay be £141,505
Left ' s election illusion ; establish @card@ body : it turn out the general election be a Brexit contest after all . Theresa May call the poll to strengthen her hand in the negotiation with the EU , yet the subject itself feature little in the campaign . and the Lib Dems , the only party commit to stay in the EU , be trounce , suggest the @card@ million or so Remain supporter at the referendum revert to traditional voting pattern . but now the British Election Study have find that Brexit be far and away the issue uppermost in the mind of voter on June @card@ . when ask to identify their big concern , one in three say Brexit or the EU , compare to few than one in @card@ who mention the NHS . what seem to have happen be that voter who favour a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit but who would not normally support Labour think Jeremy Corbyn be more likely to deliver it than Theresa May . the Tories win a high percentage of the vote than at any election for @card@ year , pick up a majority of the collapsed Ukip support . but Labour , too , increase its vote by @card@ per cent . by deny the conservative a majority and effectively end the prospect of a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit , the Remainers who vote Labour seem to have get their way - at least in influence how we leave , if not whether . yet they may be none the wise now about Labour ' s Brexit intention , after a succession of contradictory statement from the party leadership about future membership of the single market and the custom union . Mr Corbyn will also have to square this with those Labour voter who want a crackdown on immigration . above all , it be clear the Left ' s triumphalist belief that the election reflect a national move towards the socialist agenda offer by Mr Corbyn be a mirage .
hard Brexit will protect this liberal nation ; Britain have lead the charge on LGBT and woman ' S right , not an essentially conservative Europe
it have become fashionable among some of the young and the habitué of Islington wine bar to convince themselves that enthusiast for Brexit ( with the exception , perhaps , of Jeremy Corbyn ) be both illiberal and reactionary . I be proud to be include recently in a list of only @card@ MP of all party in the House of Commons who vote positively in seven crucial vote on LGBT issue and woman ' S right , include those on abortion . nobody doubt my socially liberal credential . but I do believe in Brexit too , and a solid one at that - which mean have to leave the Single Market . this , sadly , conflict with my heroine , the Leader of the Scottish Conservatives , Ruth Davidson . her triumph in Scotland and her stance on LGBT and other progressive issue resonate with my own belief and those of modern Britain . yet her stated desire for a ' soft ' watered-down Brexit reflect the myth that have be construct by some Remainers that social liberalism , which have flourish in this country , be somehow antithetical to leave the EU . far from it . the argument against remain part of the EU be base on sovereignty , economics and border control . the idea that leave a union of @card@ European nation , many of whom be far less progressive than the UK , will somehow undo the social progress of the last few decade be preposterous . Brexit will instead embolden our liberal tradition by give our court the freedom to uphold these value . Ms Davidson have be a passionate advocate for social liberalism and have criticise the Democratic Unionist party , with whom conservative be enter a partnership , for their traditional and antediluvian value . she be right to do so , but it be equally fair to observe that we have cooperate with the DUP over the last seven year , and they in no way hinder David Cameron and his legalisation of same-sex marriage . now Ruth be one of the Conservative Party ' s big asset . but I could not disagree with her more when she push for a soft Brexit , which would require Britain to stay in the Single Market . Britain be a naturally liberal country . our continued membership of the fail EU risk stoke a rebellion , not just against the established economic order of free market , but also against social liberalism . Progressive right such as gay marriage , abortion and maternity leave have come to be wrap up with the European project . this could not be further from the truth . Britain be way ahead of the European curve when it introduce same-sex marriage in @card@ . even today , only @card@ of the EU ' S @card@ member state allow gay marriage . it be a complete misunderstanding of European politics to argue that the EU bring same-sex marriage and woman ' S right to the UK . instead , we introduce these reform despite the traditional , conservative , and often deeply religious , view of the majority in the European Union . by leave the EU and retain our cherished liberalism , we be demonstrate that these value stem not from official in Brussels , but rather from the British people themselves . single market membership or not , tolerant liberalism be in the very DNA of our country - it be not something grant to us by politician and can not be take away easily . for I believe Brexit , like pregnancy , be binary : either we have it or we do not . if we remain in the Single Market , the supreme court will remain in Strasbourg not London , Brussels will still control our immigration policy , and we will not be free to negotiate our own trade agreement . this be not what the British people vote for in the referendum , and this would immediately reignite division in the Conservative Party . it would also revive Ukip , whose social view be certainly not at all in line with modern Britain and , in some case , be virulently anti-gay . the social liberalism that underpin this country be not go anywhere , with or without Brexit . indeed , a truly independent judiciary - free of the European Court of Justice in Strasbourg - be part of our great liberal tradition and have defend us from fascism while continental Europe be rive apart by it . if Brexit be weaken , only bigot will benefit and our nation ' s long history of tolerance will be undermine . follow Michael Fabricant on Twitter @ Mike_Fabricant ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
EY report say post-Brexit finance sector will do fine
the UK ' s financial service sector will be just fine after Brexit , if the string of survey publish in the day before the government trigger Article @card@ be to be believe . the accounting giant EY and the law firm Herbert Smith Freehills have send out reassuring report in the day lead up to the UK ' S official EU exit date on March @card@ , both suggest the City will cope well in the aftermath of Brexit despite it be on the worry list of most bank . the economic forecasting group EY Item Club say personal and business lending growth will slow this year and next but will pick up again in @card@ , with lend to business expect to climb 6pc from @card@ to £430bn in @card@ . total asset in the banking sector will rise 4.2pc from @card@ to £7.3bn , it say ; the wealth and asset management sector be predict to grow despite the slow economy , with asset under management expect to climb 12pc to £1.2 trillion in @card@ . confident consumer in particular be expect to borrow an extra £7bn this year , and £16bn more by @card@ . ` ` this be a key time for the UK ' s financial service industry , just day from the trigger of Article @card@ , ' ' say Omar Ali , EY ' s UK financial service manage partner . ` ` Brexit and wide geopolitics have inject a level of uncertainty and volatility we have not see for some year , but the fundamental of the UK financial service industry remain strong . ' ' Herbert Smith Freehills publish an equally upbeat report base on interview with finance executive at @card@ listed corporate during February and March . the law firm find that nine out of @card@ respondent do not think their spending plan would change as a result of Brexit , with the same number say that the bank they use to raise capital have not suggest that treasury product will change as a result of Brexit . the report come after a survey from the CBI and PwC show that financial service firm be increasingly confident in the economic outlook for their industry , for the first time since @card@ . £430bn prediction for total UK business lending in the UK in @card@ make by the economic forecasting group EY Item Club
Ashtead retreat from Brexit fear as profit climb 28pc in quarter
ASHTEAD ' S chief executive Geoff Drabble admit his fear about the Brexit vote have subsidise yesterday as the equipment hire group report a 28pc rise in its third-quarter profit . ` ` it ' S not time to get out the bunting and have a tea party yet , but thing be not as bad as we think , ' ' Mr Drabble say of the effect the referendum have have on the UK construction industry . Mr Drabble , who have lead the FTSE @card@ company for a decade , say he have fear the bad after the Brexit vote , but most of his worry have be unfounded . ` ` I ' m still watchful , and there be a chance of drag , ' ' he say . ` ` but thing have not dry up to the extent I think . ` ` the real acid test for the industry be whether Brexit fear would be so great that project schedule to start this spring would n't . they do start , and the question now be whether there be enough new stuff in the pipeline for @card@ . it ' S early , but I ' m hearing slightly warm view than previously express . ' ' he make the comment as Ashtead report a 31pc rise in sale in the third quarter to £804.5m , and pre-tax profit of £171.2m , up 28pc on the same period a year earlier . the quarterly figure to the end of January benefit from the weak pound . exclude exchange rate movement , sale increase 13pc , while profit be 8pc high . Ashtead ' s US and UK division perform strongly , underpin by continue growth in the equipment hire sector . equipment hire take off in the aftermath of the financial crisis , as firm look to unburden their balance sheet . Mr Drabble say company have now become comfortable with rent , while the industry itself have mature and become more reliable . ` ` it ' S a virtuous cycle , the more we invest and the big we get , the more people feel they can rely on rent and do n't need to own , ' ' he say . Mr Drabble see big potential in Ashtead ' S North America market , which be five time big than the UK , very fragment and with a low prevalence of equipment hire . if the White House make progress with any of its pledge to cut corporation tax , invest in infrastructure and boost military spending , Ashtead stand to benefit . the company expect sale growth in the double digit next year and to open @card@ new location , with the majority in the US . Ashtead share , which have gain 91pc in the past year , close down 2pc at £17.10 yesterday . meanwhile , share in Aggreko tumble 12.9pc to 921p yesterday after the company say profit this financial year would be low than last year , thanks to pricing issue in Argentina . Aggreko , which hire out power equipment to large energy user , have be hurt by a slowdown in oil and gas market and have difficulty negotiate contract in South America . sale in the year to the end of December fall 3pc to £1.52bn , while pretax profit slump by nearly a quarter to £172m . it book a £30m impairment charge relate to a slowdown in the North American oil and gas sector , as well as £19m in exceptional cost relate to restructuring . Ben Marlow : page @card@
Scotland May hint at Single Market exit as she deny Brexit muddle
Theresa May have indicate that Britain will leave the Single Market to control immigration after Brexit and build a ` ` really good ambitious trade deal ' ' with the EU . in her first interview of @card@ , the Prime Minister tell Sky News ' S Sophy Ridge on Sunday : ` ` often people talk in term as if somehow we be leave the EU but we still want to kind of keep bit of membership of the EU . we be leave . so the question be what be the right relationship for the UK to have with the European Union when we be outside ? ` ` we will be able to have control of our border , control of our law . ` ` this be what people be vote for on June @card@ . ` ` but of course we still want the well possible deal for us , company to be able to trade , UK company to be able to trade in and operate within the European Union and also European company to be able to trade with the UK and operate within the UK . ' ' Mrs May will give more detail about her vision for Brexit in a speech which could be as early as next week , before trigger Article @card@ and formally begin negotiation by March @card@ . her comment follow last week ' s resignation of Sir Ivan Rogers , Britain ' S former EU ambassador , who urge his fellow civil servant to challenge ` ` illfounded argument and muddle thinking ' ' about Brexit . yesterday , it emerge that Sir Ivan secretly meet David Cameron before Christmas to warn him that Britain risk a ` ` disorderly ' ' exit from the EU . he warn Mrs may it be unlikely that the EU would agree a new trading arrangement within the two year of the Article @card@ exit talk and have tell Downing Street that Britain could crash out of the EU without any deal at all . Mrs May reject Sir Ivan ' S analysis , say : ` ` Our thinking on this be not muddle at all . yes we have be take our time . it be important for us to take our time and look at the issue . ` ` it ' S wrong to look at this as just a binary issue as to either you have control of immigration or you have a good trade deal . ' ' meanwhile , Michael Gove , a prominent Eurosceptic , say that Britain need to pull out of both the Single Market and the Customs Union . write on the BrexitCentral website , the former justice secretary , say : ` ` we need to deliver a full Brexit , not settle for fake Brexit . once Article @card@ be trigger , we should be very clear about our simple , straightforward , generous approach to leave . ` ` we do n't want or need to be in the single market - outside we can control our own border , law and tax . inside we ' re trap . ` ` we do n't want to be bind by be member of the custom union . outside we can negotiate new trade deal with emerge economy . inside we ' re trap . ' '
we can strike post-Brexit trade deal now ; it be plain wrong to assume the UK must wait to leave the EU before line up new business partner
Britain be leave the EU . one of the claim advantage of do so be that we will find it easy to negotiate new trade agreement with non-EU country , such as the US , Japan or Australia , because we will not need to satisfy the interest of @card@ separate member state to get a deal . when can we start to take advantage of this ? well , obviously no new trade agreement could come into force until after Brexit . but could we negotiate and ratify new deal so they start to apply on the day we leave the EU ? Philip Hammond seem to think not . return from China in July , the Chancellor say the informal discussion about investment he have with his Chinese colleague be ` ` about as far as we can go while we be member of the European Union ' ' . we even seem to be advise our potential trading partner of the same view . accord to Steven Ciobo , the Australian trade minister , ` ` the UK be not able to negotiate or sign an agreement prior to a formal exit of the EU ' ' . New Zealand ' s trade minister Todd McClay say something similar recently : ` ` we have signal our interest in a free trade agreement with [ the UK ] when they be in a position to negotiate one independently of the European Union . ' ' it matter very much whether this be right , for two reason . first , if the UK can not even commence trade negotiation with other country until after it leave the EU , that mean ( give such negotiation take at least a few year to conclude and ratify ) that after it leave , Britain will have no trade agreement other than its post-Brexit EU deal . secondly , trade negotiation tend to turn out good for whichever country have strong ` ` outside option ' ' , so the UK ' s deal with the EU be likely to be good for us if we have credible deal with non-EU country in the pipeline . fortunately , the answer be that Hammond , Ciobo and the rest be wrong . they be wrong legally , in term of what the treaty demand . and they be wrong in term of pragmatic politics . Let ' s see why . the main bar to the UK negotiate its own pre-Brexit agreement with non-EU country be that , while the UK be a member of the EU , it have to stick to the rule and let the EU negotiate its trade deal . but the EU ' s pre-eminence in trade negotiation flow from treaty give it competence over the ` ` common commercial policy ' ' of member state . of course , the UK ' s post-Brexit trade policy be not part of the common commercial policy of the EU . so the EU have no more competence over it than it do over the trade policy of Brazil or Russia . moreover , it be a general principle that there can not be a competence when there be not a power . since the EU do not have the power to make new trade deal for the UK after Brexit , it can not claim competence over the making of them . even if strike our own deal be not narrowly legal under the treaty , the UK be withdraw from them , and repeal the European Communities Act @card@ , which be the mechanism by which they have legal effect in the UK . once we have do that , whether we abide by the treaty in every detail be a matter of politeness and realpolitik , not law . why would we want to accept the principle that we should have no post-Brexit trade deal ? it should be obvious that this be unacceptable and we shall not accept it . indeed , the @card@ member state who will remain in the EU after we leave rightly expect that the UK will not use its current , notional voting right to interfere with EU plan that will come into effect only after the UK leave the EU . for example , a few day ago German defence minister Ursula von der Leyen warn the UK against interfere with plan for an EU army . quite right . why should we get to stop the EU do thing that will come into effect after we leave ? the obvious pragmatic quid pro quo be that the EU can not expect to stop the UK do our deal for after we leave . the UK should not accept that we can not negotiate such agreement until after we have leave the EU . we can and should negotiate and ratify these deal , start now . until we get that straight in our own mind , we will never make the good of the opportunity such deal will offer . Andrew Lilico be chairman of the consultancy Europe Economics Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Every EU migrant could stay after Brexit ; all @card@ million will have residency right or be give amnesty by @card@ , say Home Office
all EU national currently live in Britain will be allow to stay follow Brexit , after the Home Office discover that five in six could not legally be deport . there be around @card@ million EU citizen live in the UK , more than @card@ per cent of whom will have permanent residency right by the time Britain leave the union in early @card@ , official research have conclude . the remainder - more than @card@ people - will be offer an amnesty , with several Cabinet minister tell the Daily Telegraph that those citizen will be offer the right to stay permanently , in a policy that may prove controversial . Theresa May , the Prime Minister , have refuse to guarantee the right of EU citizen currently live in the UK , say she believe that the government must not ` ` reveal its hand ' ' ahead of Brexit negotiation , which will begin when she trigger Article @card@ next year . once an EU citizen have be in the UK for more than five year , they be give permanent residency right . Home Office research have conclude that when Britain leave the EU , just over @card@ per cent of EU citizen in the UK will qualify for residency , source say . ` ` the remain people will , of course , be allow to stay in the UK , ' ' a senior source say . ` ` that ' s a give . we just need to work out exactly how we do it . ' ' another Cabinet source say : ` ` they will be allow to remain in Britain . but it be important that reciprocal agreement be make with the EU to ensure that British people abroad get the same right . ' ' although Cabinet minister be privately give assurance that they will all be allow to stay in the country after Brexit , the Home Office be still work on a way to identify the exact number of European live in the UK and establish how long they have be here . the amnesty plan be in its infancy and will raise fear that EU migrant could begin travel to the UK in large number before Brexit . some official believe the government will , therefore , have to announce a cut-off date for new arrival after which the amnesty would not apply . the health department be also conduct a major study on arrangement with Spain to allow British expats to get free medical treatment abroad . Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , be criticise this week after say that the status of EU national live in Britain be ` ` one of our main card ' ' in the Brexit negotiation and can not be guarantee . he say : ` ` the Prime Minister have make it very clear - we would like to be able to give a reassurance to EU national in the United Kingdom , but that depend on reciprocation by other country . ` ` I think we would all hope that what we get be a totally open , reciprocal agreement where UK citizen in other European country be free and welcome to stay there , as would those who have already settle in the UK . ` ` but again , as the Prime Minister say , to give that away before we get into the negotiation would be to hand over one of our main card in that negotiation and do n't necessarily make sense at this point . ' ' as many as @card@ million EU citizen resident in the UK come from the socalled EU14 , those nation that be part of the EU before @card@ , follow by @card@ million from the eight eastern European nation that join @card@ year ago . Jean-Claude Juncker : page @card@ Charles Moore : page @card@ ' the remain people will be allow to stay in the UK . we just need to work out exactly how we do it '
MP must not thwart Brexit , since @card@ of them vote for the referendum ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - you note in your lead article ( August @card@ ) that ` ` no @card@ have decide that Parliament should not be permit to stop the trigger of Article @card@ , and thus block Brexit ' ' . but whatever the Prime Minister - or indeed the Leader of the opposition - might wish , Parliament be sovereign in our representative democracy , so a vote of no confidence in the government over Article @card@ could , at the very least , delay the process by trigger a general election . I would have some sympathy with any MP who feel , in all conscience , that leave the EU be not in the interest of the country , or Europe as a whole , and vote accordingly . however , I doubt that there would be many MP prepare to vote this way , give that the vast majority ( @card@ ) vote for the referendum on June @card@ @card@ , and consequently ` ` the die be cast ' ' . Nigel Currie Bristol Sir - it seem that many of the @card@ MP who vote for an EU referendum , now seek to put barrier in the way of Brexit . they show the same contempt for democracy as the EU President , who say of the French referendum : ` ` if it ' S a Yes , we will say ' on we go ' , and if it ' S a No , we will say ' we continue ' . ' ' Those MP should surely make way for other who be ready to uphold the will of the people . such MP in area with the high pro-Brexit vote should be the first to stand down . Roger J Arthur Pulborough , West Sussex Sir - as a lifelong Tory voter I can not believe that Theresa May will proceed with Brexit without the agreement of Parliament , against the wish of the majority of elected MP . we may be frustrate by Brussels and its bureaucracy , but such a course can be see as an even great threat to our democracy . Graham King Sutton Coldfield Sir - it appear that Theresa May have receive advice from government lawyer that she can invoke Article @card@ under the royal prerogative . give the recent history of ` ` advice ' ' to PMs , and her new-found belief in popular democracy that sideline Parliament , she should publish this advice , with information on who provide it and what question be ask , in order that hoi polloi ( such as me ) can understand the basis for this monumental step . Nigel Bowker Banchory , Aberdeenshire Sir - on June @card@ , the people speak , indicate clearly they want out of the EU . can we therefore ask MP to get on with it ? B E Norton Royal Wootton Bassett , Wiltshire Sir - what be disturb about Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor , be that she have show no recognition of ( let alone remorse for ) have effectively drive Britain out of Europe by her insane immigration policy . Dr Andrew Norman Poole , Dorset
rural grant paralyse by second-guess of Brexit by British official ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - I be secretary of a charity that run Pewsey Heritage Centre , a little village museum in Wiltshire . we want to convert a building into a village research centre and an education facility for local school , use local voluntary labour . in March we initiate an application for a grant of £7,500 from the Leader programme , a rural funding initiative fund by the European Union , control by Defra , monitor by the rural payment Agency and staff by Wiltshire council . hoop be successfully jump through , ream of paper form fill in , and the grant application be submit to the review board at their meeting of June @card@ . ( the date be significant . ) we understand that decision be make and grant funding may or may not have be award . but we have now be tell that an embargo have be put on the result by the rural payment Agency , shellshock by the Brexit decision , and unsure whether the EU funding to Britain will be available . I be under the impression that until Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty be invoke , relation between Britain and the rest of the EU should continue as they be . they obviously be not . base on the performance of the rural payment agency , it be not European bureaucracy that we should be afraid of in any Brexit negotiation , it be our own dear Civil Service . frighten of its own shadow , it seem completely unable to make constructive and beneficial decision . may the Lord help our negotiator . Michael J A Asbury Pewsey , Wiltshire Sir - the glee with which Nick Clegg warn that the appointment of Michel Barnier to represent the European Commission at Brexit talk will ` ` set alarm bell ring across the City ' ' ( report , July @card@ ) be truly nauseate . the former deputy prime minister should accept that he lose the argument and the referendum vote , and he should start stick up for Britain rather than behave like a spoil child . Michael Stanford London SE23 Sir - we be inundate with minister and business leader hide behind the Brexit vote as an opportunity to divest themselves of their bad news . Bruce Pearson Godalming , Surrey Sir - Jeremy Smith ( Letters , July @card@ ) ask that , as a goal of Brexit , inappropriate EU law should be remove . here be three I can think of . 1 ) Allow the use of sodium chlorate as a weedkiller again . it linger longer than the kind approve by Brussels . 2 ) change sign that indicate the steepness of hill back to @card@ in @card@ or @card@ in @card@ . I ' ve no idea what @card@ per cent or @card@ per cent look like . 3 ) Bring back filament lamp . cheap and instant light , and a bonus of warmth on cold day . Andrew Baxter Banbury , Oxfordshire
momentum swing for Brexit give market the jitter
a potent cocktail of Brexit fear , weak factory datum from China and a slide in commodity price , inject a fresh bout of jitter into London ' s benchmark index on the first day of the new month . in just two day , more than £20bn have be wipe off the value of Britain ' s big company as investor flee to the sideline follow Brexit poll which show the leave camp be gain momentum in the EU referendum debate . meanwhile , the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development slash its view on UK growth from 2.1pc to 1.7pc and warn on Brexit risk . Mike van Dulken , of Accendo Markets , say the ` ` revival of geopolitical risk and a raft of mixed datum from across the globe ' ' be to blame for the shaky start to June . ` ` a more prominent bearish sentiment be now overpower the hitherto bullish dominance that have usher us to recent high , ' ' add Mr van Dulken . as a result , the FTSE @card@ drop @card@ point , or 0.62pc , to @card@ . mining stock be among the big casualty on the blue-chip index , as iron ore future in China tank to a three-month low amid weak demand and copper skid to a one-week low , of $ 4,577.50-a-tonne , as concern about the health of the world ' S second large economy resurface . meanwhile , oil price swing between gain and loss as the market place bet on whether or not Opec would consider a new oil output ceiling at its meeting in Vienna today . however , some analyst in the City suggest that the focus of the meeting be likely to be on defend market share rather than curb production . such volatility add to the mining sector ' S woe , drag share in Rio Tinto down 3.8pc to £18.68 , Antofagasta 3.1pc lower to 415.7p , BHP Billiton off by 1.9pc to 807.1p and Glencore 1.7pc in the red at 128.9p . away from commodity-related stock , housebuilders also begin the month on shaky foundation as fear of a UK exit from the European Union and slow house price growth cause industry confidence to waver . accord to the late nationwide survey , house price rise by slowerthan-forecast rate , at 0.2pc in May . in its wake , share in Barratt Development shed 3.1pc to 573½p , Berkeley Group tumble 2.9pc to £31.80 , Bellway slide 3.2pc to £26.45 , Galliford Try drop 3.2pc to £13.43 and Persimmon fall 3pc to £20.38 . even Telford Homes be feel the pain despite post a record revenue and profit for the @card@ month to the end of March . revenue rise 42pc to £246m and pre-tax profit grow by 28pc to £32.2m . share finish 1.4pc low at 366p . however , investor prove to be more optimistic when it come to the brick industry . Citigroup and Deutsche Bank begin cover brick producer Forterra with ` ` buy ' ' rating , follow its recent admission to London ' s main market two month ago , prompt share to rise 3.2pc to 179.3p . Citigroup analyst Ami Galla think Forterra be ` ` well place to benefit from the positive trend in the UK housing market ' ' , give its lead position in brick and block . meanwhile , Deutsche Bank reckon the British brick industry will ` ` attract increasing investor interest ' ' follow the public listing of the two large player , Forterra and Ibstock . the bank have forecast a steady increase in new home volume in the come year to address the country ' s mount housing deficit . as a result , it believe Forterra be ` ` too cheap to ignore ' ' . elsewhere , Wolseley suffer its bad day in eight month after it say like-for-like revenue growth slow from 2.8pc to 1pc in the third quarter . the FTSE @card@ heating and plumbing product supplier plunge 5.5pc to £38.28 . on the other side , the tumultuous trading session prompt investor to pile into safe-haven stock . gold miner Fresnillo and Randgold Resources make gain of 2.3pc and 0.8pc , respectively . precious metal miner Centamin also climb 2.6pc to 98.9p . the FTSE @card@ group also announce that its chairman Josef el-Raghy offload almost 12.6m share at 0.95p a piece . Unilever edge up 1pc to £31.78 after it reveal it would sell its Ades soy-based beverage unit for $ 575m . Pharma stock Shire be also among the top performer follow a bullish note from Credit Suisse . the investment bank reiterate its ` ` outperform ' ' rating ahead of its acquisition of Baxalta , which be expect to close tomorrow . the FTSE @card@ stock enjoy a boost of 2.8pc to £43.80 . meanwhile , supermarket have a mixed trading session on the back of industry datum from Kantar Worldpanel , which show sale at Sainsbury ' S slip 1.2pc in the @card@ week to May @card@ , compare with a 1pc drop at Tesco . in its wake , share in Sainsbury ' S post a loss of 4.3pc to 256.9p , while Tesco bounce 1.1pc to 167p . stay with retail , Halfords plummet 7.3pc to 406.9p after it caution that its pre-tax profit would be flat due to adverse foreign exchange rate movement . however , exclude the FX impact , analyst at UBS say the retailer enjoy a small earnings beat . on the mid-cap index , UBM eke out a gain of 0.3pc to 590½p follow an announcement that it have acquire Content Marketing Institute for $ 17.6m . finally , as widely anticipate , Inmarsat be boot out of the FTSE @card@ in the late quarterly shake up of index constituent to make way for Hikma Pharmaceuticals .
Cameron ' s cowardice over EU television debate be an insult to voter ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the Prime Minister ' s refusal to debate Brexit with senior figure from the official leave campaign ( report , May @card@ ) be not only cowardly but disrespectful of the British people . his excuse - that he do n't want ` ` blue on blue ' ' attack - would have carry more weight have he not be the first to attack Cabinet member backing leave . Phil Coutie Exeter , Devon Sir - David Cameron have claim that I want to ` ` obliterate ' ' manufacturing . this be an absurd misrepresentation . what I have say be that Brexit would optimise free trade by abolish the EU ' s protective trade barrier . over time , the economy would shift from highly protect sector towards previously unprotected one . this would imply more competition for manufacturing from low-wage country . it be already the case that , since @card@ , UK manufacturing have fall from @card@ per cent of employment to @card@ per cent . however , the substantial part of UK manufacturing that be specialist and hi-tech in nature would remain and flourish after Brexit . outside the EU , the UK would attract more investment in these area . other part of industry could be protect , use a fraction of our net contribution to the EU budget . this be what happen in the United States - there be a @card@ per cent duty on steel . after Brexit , voter would have this choice ; inside the EU they pay high price for a regime that be damage to their interest . Professor Patrick Minford Co-chairman , economist for Brexit Cardiff Sir - Maj Gen Julian Thompson ( Comment , May @card@ ) be wrong to assert that ` ` the common [ EU ] foreign and security policy be come whatever minister say ' ' . certainly , the language of the @card@ Maastricht Treaty - which speak of an ` ` eventual framing of a common defence policy , which might lead in time to a common defence ' ' - should never have be let through by the UK . as political director of the Foreign Office at the time , I advise strongly against it - and be overrule . however , the late Lisbon Treaty ( @card@ ) , which form the constitutional base for the EU , state clearly that move to a common defence would require a unanimous decision by the European Council , as well as approval by all member state through their own constitutional procedure . John Weston Richmond , Surrey Sir - Sir Nicholas Soames ( Letters , May @card@ ) say we will never join an EU army . Margaret Thatcher negotiate a rebate . Tony Blair , wish to be communautaire , subsequently give much of it away . can Sir Nicholas ensure that a future government will not change our army commitment ? I think not , unless we be not a member of the EU . G P Brown Norwich
free movement ' end on day of Brexit '
Theresa May have promise that freedom of movement for EU citizen come to Britain will end on the day Britain leave the EU in March @card@ . Brussels have insist free movement must continue to the last day of any transition period , mean EU citizen would be free to settle in Britain until at least the end of @card@ . but the Prime Minister make it clear that change the rule on migration as soon as Britain leave the EU be a must for her in negotiation over the transition period , which begin next week . speak in China on the first day of a three-day trade visit , she say people ` ` do not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU ' ' . she say that the issue of citizen ' right have be agree in December when the EU agree to move on to trade talk after ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be reach in phase one of talk . last night there be a further leak of the report to Buzzfeed , which claim that the cost to the economy from cut migration from the EU would be significantly great than the benefit bring by a US trade deal . however Robin Walker , a Brexit minister , say that the gloomy report could be redact and that the study would only be make available to MP on a confidential basis . it come as Downing Street rebuke Philip Lee , a junior justice minister , for suggest that the study could put the legitimacy of Brexit in question . he say : ` ` if these figure turn out to be anywhere near right , there would be a serious question over whether a government could legitimately lead a country along a path that the evidence and rational consideration indicate would be damaging . ' ' a Downing Street spokesman say that Mr Lee have be tell by the Chief Whip to keep his view private in future . earlier this week , Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , say Britain must accept free movement as part of a status quo implementation period . Eurosceptics rage against the EU ' S position , say Brussels want to delay Brexit . Mrs May say : ` ` when we agree the citizen ' right deal in December , we do so on the basis that people who have come to the UK when we be a member of the EU have certain expectation . ` ` they make a life choice and it be right that we make an agreement that ensure they could continue their life in the way they have want to . for those who come after March @card@ that will be different because they will be come to a UK that they know will be outside the EU . ' ' Brexiteers in the Conservative Party fear a transition deal that would turn Britain into a ` ` vassal state ' ' by force the UK to accept new EU rule and regulation with no power to block them . the Prime Minister say that business welcome the transition period because it give them stability at the point when Britain leave the EU . she also deny that British official be ` ` secretly ' ' negotiate for a threeyear implementation period , say : ` ` we be not talk about something that be go to go on and on . ' ' Mrs may yesterday repeatedly refuse to say she believe that Gavin Williamson , the Defence Secretary , have tell the truth about his departure from a previous job after an office fling . Mr Williamson have come under pressure to clarify his account of the end of his career at fireplace manufacturer Elgin & Hall after former colleague dispute his version of event . the minister tell a newspaper he decide he could no longer work at the company because it would mean he come into daily contact with the married woman with whom he have a romance while he , too , be marry . Allister Heath : page @card@ Nick Timothy : page @card@ ' the British people do not vote for nothing to change when we come out of the EU '
China be Mrs May ' s chance to shine ; establish @card@ body : embattled prime minister have often seek refuge overseas , and Theresa May will doubtless enjoy the break from domestic turmoil as she begin a three-day visit to China today . but this trip also offer her the chance to give what her critic say be currently lack - a positive exposition of the UK ' s post-Brexit future . where good to do so than in China , whose rapid growth exemplify how the world ' s centre of economic gravity have shift away from Europe ? some @card@ per cent of future global growth will be outside the EU bloc . the opportunity for the UK in such a world be legion , not that this be apparent from the juvenile political hoopla surround a leak , half-baked Treasury forecast of what the post-Brexit economy might look like in @card@ year ' time . since the number-crunchers rarely get any prediction right for one year ahead , let alone @card@ , this report can hardly be take seriously . inevitably , however , it be seize on by Labour and Remain-supporting Conservatives and relentlessly promote by the BBC as a warning against leave the EU ; but as the opposition and most Tory MP be sign up to Brexit , be they now say the referendum result should be reverse ? our politician would serve the national interest well if , have agree to Brexit , they emphasise the well possible outlook , not the bad . this be where Mrs May can show leadership . when David Cameron and George Osborne travel to Beijing , it be to hail a new ` ` golden era ' ' of cooperation between the two country . the Prime Minister need to build on those foundation . of course , we can not be naive : China , as Donald Trump say in Davos , operate an unfair trade policy in many area . but it be also a massive market , with a grow middle-class cry out for competitively price British good and www.services.UK export to China have increase by @card@ per cent since @card@ but still only make up around @card@ per cent of the total . the scope for expansion be considerable , especially in pharmaceuticals and agriculture , but most of all in financial service . as China ' s ambassador to the UK , Liu Xiaoming , write on these page on Monday , this visit be an opportunity to shift the relationship into a high gear , with the prize of a free-trade agreement available further down the track . above all , Mrs May do not travel to Beijing to hector or as a supplicant but as the leader of a proud nation , confident of its future .
break in trade talk deadlock still month away , warn EU
the European Union yesterday warn Britain it be still ` ` month ' ' away from be able to open Brexit trade negotiation as it emerge major division remain between the UK and EU over the so-called Brexit bill . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , insist that Britain would have to pay its full share of spending earmark for the EU after Brexit , as the bloc ' s own auditor criticise the EU for run up spending commitment of some £210billion - an ` ` all time high ' ' . at the end of four day of talk in Brussels , Mr Barnier say : ` ` we have have a constructive week , yes , but we be not yet there , ' ' he say , later add : ` ` it will take week , maybe even month before we be able to say there have be sufficient progress . ' ' both side say they have make progress on citizen ' right and the northern Irish border , but Mr Barnier say the EU still want the European Court of Justice to play ` ` an indispensable role ' ' in ensure the EU citizen ' right guarantee in the agreement be observe . ` ` this be a stumbling block for the EU , ' ' he say . last night Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator , claim that a majority of people in the UK no longer want to leave the EU . he say : ` ` while this [ back Brexit ] be true for most British politician , and for most English newspaper , this be not the case for what seem to be today a majority of British citizen . ' ' he joke that Mrs May choose to make her keynote speech in Florence , a city renown for ` ` back-stabbing and betrayal ' ' , because it feel familiar for her . meanwhile , back at Westminster , the Delegated Powers Committee in the Lords issue a damn report on the government ' s Brexit legislation , the EU Withdrawal Bill , warn that power grant to minister to change legislation be ` ` wholly unacceptable ' ' .
Brexit delay to @card@ [ ... ] ; two-year transition with free movement and £9bn a year to EU May speak of ' new era ' with Europe in Florence speech Eurosceptics attack PM for leave Britain ' bound ' to Brussels May ' s Brexit speech Eurosceptics dismay over five-year wait to open world market
BREXIT be last night effectively delay until @card@ after Theresa May announce a two-year transition period during which Britain ' s relationship with the EU will remain virtually unchanged . it mean freedom of movement will continue for another four year , with Britain pay its full contribution to Brussels of around £9billion per year in that period . in her long-awaited speech in Florence , the Prime Minister set out plan for a status quo implementation phase with the UK and EU maintain access to each other ' S market ` ` on current term ' ' and under ` ` the existing structure of EU rule and regulation ' ' . the 35-minute speech be aim at a European audience and Mrs May stress repeatedly that she want to build a constructive and deep relationship with the EU after Brexit . however , she face an immediate backlash from Tory Eurosceptics who say Britain would not be able to reap the benefit of quit the EU for fully five year after voter choose to leave . Jeremy Corbyn claim that Mrs May have adopt Labour ' S policy . in the speech , the Prime Minister say : ` ` the strength of feel that the British people have about this need for control and the direct accountability of their politician be one reason why , throughout its membership , the United Kingdom have never totally feel at home be in the European Union . ` ` and perhaps because of our history and geography , the European Union never feel to us like an integral part of our national story in the way it do to so many elsewhere in Europe . ' ' but she add that after Brexit she hope to usher in a ` ` new era ' ' of co-operation . she say : ` ` as we meet here today , in this city of creativity and rebirth , let us open our mind to the possible . to a new era of cooperation and partnership between the United Kingdom and the European Union . and to a strong , fair , more prosperous future for us all . ' ' Downing Street hope that the optimistic vision of the relationship - and the offer of a large financial payment - will help kickstart the stalled EU talk in Brussels which will start again next week . the EU react positively to the speech , although it represent a major gamble for the Prime Minister as million of leave voter be likely to be anger by the decision to abandon a clean Brexit until five year after the referendum . Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , say talk could now ` ` move forward ' ' as he give a guarded welcome to the speech ' s ` ` constructive spirit ' ' . ally of senior Cabinet minister , include Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , stress that the speech be far more positive than previous draft . the centrepiece of the address be the formal announcement of a transition period of ` ` around ' ' two year . Mrs May say the final length of it ` ` should be determine simply by how long it will take to prepare and implement the new process and new system that will underpin that future partnership ' ' . there be sign of friction with the Conservatives ' parliamentary voting partner , the DUP , whose leader Arlene Foster insist that the transition period should be keep to an ` ` absolute minimum ' ' . the former Tory Cabinet minister Owen Paterson say the term of the transition period mean , ` ` we ' re still bind in by European rule and we ca n't get crack and open up market around the world ' ' . Mr Johnson claim victory after Mrs May rule out a Norwegian-style arrangement with the EU . he tweet : ` ` PM speech be positive , optimistic & dynamic - and rightly dispose of the Norway option ! ' ' there be accusation that Mrs May give away her strong bargaining chip - access to Britain ' S security and intelligence might - by say the UK be ` ` unconditionally commit to maintain Europe ' S security ' ' . she also say that when there be uncertainty around underlie EU law , ` ` I want the UK court to be able to take into account the judgment of the European Court of Justice with a view to ensure consistent interpretation ' ' . the phrase ring alarm bell for some leave campaigner who feel it put the supremacy of Britain ' s court in doubt . Britain will now be free to start negotiate trade deal in earnest with third-party country , but they will not be able to come into force until @card@ at the early .
Pharma firm tell to plan for ' hard of Brexits '
the UK pharmaceuticals sector have be tell to prepare for a ` ` crisis ' ' Brexit scenario of drastically reduce access to European market and hundred of million of pound of restructuring cost unless a swift regulatory deal can be strike with Brussels . trade body the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry ( ABPI ) , which lobby for the 60,000-strong sector , tell the Daily Telegraph new regulatory guidance publish by the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) this week pose a risk to UK pharma job and to public health on both side of the Channel . the EMA - one of the two EU regulatory body base in the UK that be expect to move to the continent - issue a paper detail how firm should prepare for Brexit . it advise UK-based firm to move hundred of role and function to an EU member state ahead of Brexit to maintain their right to sell medicine in the common market . the paper also warn that the UK face a sharp hike in regulation and stringent check on medicine export from March @card@ , @card@ . Dr Virginia Acha , executive director of research , medical and innovation at ABPI , estimate the cost of take up the EMA ' S guidance would run to ` ` hundred of million of pound ' ' . but she caution that the EMA document outline only one scenario , ` ` the hard of hard Brexits ' ' , and highlight the ` ` critical importance ' ' of politician , regulator and company work to strike a compromise deal . the EMA be currently base in London ' s Docklands and employ around @card@ people .
the EU should accept reality over Brexit ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : as a symbol of globalisation , the freight train that pull into a siding at Barking in east London yesterday would take some beating . fourteen day ago it leave Yiwu , a city @card@ mile south of Shanghai , load with Chinese good . it cross seven country with vary rail gauge , require several change of roll stock , before travel through the Channel Tunnel to reach its final destination in Britain . there be no trade agreement between China and Europe ; nor be China in a custom union with the EU or a member of the single market . yet @card@ European city be on the so-called new Silk Route , and those who be concern that Theresa May ' s willingness to walk away from the UK ' s Brexit negotiation with no deal should keep that train in mind : the good will find their market , regardless of what politician in Brussels may do or say . this be as it should be . in her Lancaster House speech , the Prime Minister seek to engineer an emollient Brexit , as oppose to a hard or a soft variety . the UK have exercise its democratic right to leave the EU and this parting of the way can be achieve in a mutually beneficial fashion . however , that optimum outcome necessarily rely upon the readiness of EU leader to concede that a Brexit deal may be to Britain ' S advantage as well as their own . what they need to avoid , for their own sake as well as ours , be gang up on the UK , try to punish us for have the temerity to leave and to discourage other from do the same . some EU leader , unfortunately , do not see it that way . President François Hollande of France , who will take no part in the negotiation because he will be out of office , have say Britain must pay a price for Brexit . this attitude lead Boris Johnson into a characteristically colourful riposte in which he say , at a conference in India , that we would not be subject to ` ` punishment beating ' ' in the manner of ` ` some World War Two movie ' ' . inevitably the roof fall in , with one Belgian MEP call the comment ` ` abhorrent ' ' and Labour and Lib Dem politician queue up to denounce him . perhaps with the Prime Minister seek to mollify our EU partner , the Foreign Secretary might have choose his allusion more carefully . but this be a phoney controversy , peripheral to the real issue at stake . unexpectedly , it take Jean-Claude Juncker , president of the EU Commission , to strike the right note , say there should be a ` ` fair and balanced deal ' ' . that be all we ask for , and in a global economy , it be what the EU need , too .
' I ' d well leave now ' : may give silent treatment at EU summit
Theresa May tell EU leader ` ` I think I ' d good leave now ' ' after they respond to a short speech about her Brexit ambition with silence . towards the end of a summit she make a brief intervention in which she say she want an early deal to guarantee the right of EU citizen live in the UK and of Briton in Europe . other leader decline to respond and Mrs May subsequently have to leave the room so that the other nation could discuss their Brexit strategy . the EU be refuse to enter into discussion about Brexit until Mrs May formally start the process by trigger Article @card@ , which be due to take place by the end of March . meanwhile , Philip Hammond be criticise by Eurosceptic Tory MP after suggest that the government be unlikely to resort to a hard Brexit . the Chancellor say during a trip to South Korea that the UK be unlikely to fall back on its membership of the World Trade Organisation for access to European market , say it would not be ` ` the most favour outcome ' ' . he say that he hope that the UK could instead agree ` ` tariff-free ' ' access . some lead Eurosceptics have say that Britain should be open to leave the EU without a trade deal and rely on WTO rule in the short term while negotiate new deal . Iain Duncan Smith , the former Cabinet minister , say : ` ` there be nothing wrong with the World Trade Organisation ... people should stop try to whip up some idea that it be disastrous . ' ' Enda Kenny , the Irish prime minister , who be at the summit on Thursday , say talk on migration and Syria overrun for more than three hour before Mrs May appeal for a quick decision on expat right . Mr Kenny say : ` ` she say she would like to have the question of UK citizen live in Europe , and European citizen live in the UK , deal with in the early part of discussion that take place . there be no response . ' ' with her RAF plane wait to take off , Mrs May speak briefly about Brexit and be then expect to leave the room so other EU leader could hold a 20-minute discussion about their plan for Brexit negotiation . one leader ' S aide tell the Times : ` ` it be a difficult moment for diplomatic etiquette . ' I think I ' d good leave now , ' she say . she be very polite but it be a bit embarrassing . ' ' some MP want Mrs may to be legally bind to trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . Peter Bone , a Tory backbencher , have propose legislation that he believe will make next month ' S Supreme Court ruling ` ` irrelevant ' ' .
Remainers be clutch at straw ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : it would be a big mistake for Remainers to think that they have regain the initiative in the battle over Brexit . the Lib Dem victory in Richmond Park be good news for that party but it signify very little when it come to the wide war over Europe . Zac Goldsmith ' S mistake be that he allow the by-election to become a mini-referendum on Brexit in one of the most pro-Remain constituency in the UK ; in such circumstance the fact that the anti-Brexit party only just win suggest the strength of the nascent Remain alliance be overstate . there be far big issue ahead that will have a large impact at home and abroad . by the end of this weekend , Italy will have hold a constitutional referendum and Austria will have rerun the second round of its presidential election . Matteo Renzi may have resign as the Italian prime minister ; the Austrian head of state might be a man accuse of be a fascist . meanwhile , President François Hollande have decline to enter the French socialist primary , throw his country ' S @card@ election into further chaos . in this context , Brexit look increasingly like jump off a sink ship . in Britain the big story be the Supreme Court appeal battle , open next week , over whether or not Theresa May have to consult Parliament before invoke Article @card@ . if the government ' S case prevail , it will proceed as planned . if it lose , it will doubtless rush a bill through Parliament - and a few Remain MP and peer might imagine that the Richmond result give them the moral and political authority to impede its progress . their electoral math be wrong , however . if Richmond do represent a realignment of politics along Remain v leave line , then , yes , the Tories stand to lose a few seat at the next election . but they would gain many , many more and Ukip would presumably do well in the north . the important political question be not whether Brexit be popular : the referendum prove that beyond doubt . it be how the government make the most of the court case , steer Brexit through , get a good deal from the EU and exploit the incoming US administration ' s desire for a free trade initiative . some Tories would like Mrs May to call the Remainers ' bluff and hold an election , to give her a strong majority before the hard work really begin . that be one way forward . whatever Mrs May do , she should not be distract by one by-election . militant Remainers be clutch at straw . Britain be leave the EU .
UK could pay for single market access
Britain could pay the European union for access to the single market after Brexit , Philip Hammond and David Davis say yesterday as the Chancellor warn that the UK would have to make ` ` concession ' ' during exit negotiation . Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , confirm in the commons that Britain could continue to pay money into the EU if it mean ` ` get the good deal ' ' for good and service . any decision to pay for privileged access to the single market after Brexit would benefit the City but could cost the government billion of pound a year . the Chancellor then back those comment and say ` ` we might want to contribute in some way ' ' even after leave the EU . he warn that the government would not be able to achieve ` ` every single objective ' ' . Eurosceptic conservative react furiously to the comment , say that voter who back Brexit would be ` ` outraged ' ' if their tax be use to contribute to the EU after Britain leave . it have be predict Britain could be force to pay some £10 billion to Brussels annually to access the single market . Mr Davis ' S disclosure come in answer to a question by Wayne David , a Labour MP , who ask : ` ` Will the government consider make any contribution in any shape or form for access to the single market ? ' ' Mr Davis reply : ` ` the major criterion here be that we get the well possible access for good and service to the European market - and if that be include in what you be talk about , then of course we will consider it . ' ' in comment make at a CBI dinner in Wales last night , Mr Davis say that the government would end ` ` freedom of movement as it have operate before ' ' , but it would not be do in a way ` ` that be contrary to the national economic interest ' ' . ` ` no one want to see labour shortage in key sector , ' ' he add . on a visit to Scotland , Mr Hammond support Mr Davis , say : ` ` we need to go into these negotiation with as many tool in our toolbox as possible and as flexible an approach as we can . ` ` we ' ve get a clear idea of what we ' re seek to achieve out of these negotiation but this be a negotiation and our counterpart on the other side will also have their agenda , their objective . we need to be flexible in respond to those . ' ' press on whether Tory Eurosceptics would be furious at give the EU billion when it export more to the UK than the other way round , he say : ` ` you ca n't go into any negotiation expect to get every single objective that you set out with and concede nothing on the way . David Davis be absolutely right not to rule out the possibility that we might want to contribute in some way to some form of mechanism . ' ' Peter Bone , the Conservative MP for Wellingborough , tell the BBC : ` ` people will be absolutely outraged if we come out of the EU and then carry on pay them £15 billion a year , £20 billion a year , whatever the figure be - no I do n't think it ' s go to happen . in that very hypothetical case , people will be exceptionally upset about it . ' '
Brussels ' Brexit hardliner quit - and pose a threat to Merkel ' s hold on the Chancellery
one of Britain ' s harsh European critic over Brexit be set to become German foreign minister and could challenge Angela Merkel for the chancellorship after he quit Brussels to return to national politics . Martin Schulz announce yesterday he would not seek re-election as president of the European parliament . while that will remove one of Brexit ' s tough opponent from the Brussels hierarchy , he be likely to have even more influence on negotiation from Berlin . he be widely expect to be name German foreign minister early next year and it be think he may seek his Social Democrat Party ( SPD ) nomination to take on Mrs Merkel as chancellor in next year ' S election . his decision to step down from the European parliament will trigger a major shake-up in Brussels and could threaten the position of Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president . Mr Schulz say yesterday : ` ` my commitment to the European project be unwaver . from now on I will be fight for this project from the national level , but my value do not change . ' ' proponent of a soft Brexit have be hopeful that Germany will take a pragmatic line under Mrs Merkel . but if Mr Schulz , @card@ , be appoint foreign minister that could change . he have call for harsh term for the UK ' s withdrawal in order to discourage other member from leave , warn that Britain can not expect to cherrypick EU benefit such as the single market . he want Brexit by @card@ . Mr Schulz ' s decision to stand down at the European parliament be unexpected . he have be try to secure a third term as the parliament ' S president , but have run into opposition . his departure could cause ruction at the European parliament . the presidency should pass from the centre-Left bloc to the centre-Right , but that would leave the centre-Right with all the EU ' s major office . it could call into question the role of Mr Juncker and Donald Tusk , the president of the European council , who be both centre-Right . Mr Schulz ' s decision to quit may have be fuel by ambition . he be already be speak of as a foreign minister - under the term of her coalition agreement , Mrs Merkel be oblige to offer the portfolio to the SPD . but there be an even big prize . while the SPD are Mrs Merkel ' s junior coalition partner , they be the main challenger to her Christian Democrat party in next year ' S election . the current SDP leader be unpopular and poll have show Mr Schulz could do good against Mrs Merkel . ' I will be fight for the European project from the national level , but my value do not change '
the Daily Telegraph ( London ) November @card@ , @card@ Tuesday Trump call on white work class to hand him a US-style Brexit ; America decide ; US election ; Republican challenger end vitriolic campaign with swipe at ' corrupt Washington establishment '
Donald Trump , the Republican presidential nominee , yesterday hope to exploit the same anti-establishment anger that lead to the Brexit vote , as he make a last-ditch appeal to work class American . in the final hour of one of the most tumultuous White House election campaign in memory , Mr Trump depict a country divide in which he be the ` ` last chance ' ' for radical change . ` ` it ' s gon na be Brexit plus plus plus ! ' ' he shout to his supporter . when ask last night why Mr Trump keep use the Brexit analogy , Kellyanne Conway , his campaign manager , say it be because the Remain camp have seem ` ` pretty robust ' ' in the final day before the referendum but that leave win when it count . the leave camp ` ` be able to turn out people and ... pollster be undercount them ' ' . with poll show Hillary Clinton edge ahead , Mr Trump embark on a mad dash across America , hold six rally in five state . ` ` I want the entire corrupt Washington establishment to hear the word we be all about to say : when we win tomorrow , we be go to drain the swamp , ' ' he tell cheer supporter at his first event in Sarasota , Florida , before head to North Carolina , Pennsylvania and New Hampshire . later Mr Trump say that if he lose today , he ` ` will consider [ his campaign ] the single great waste of time , energy and money ' ' . with Hispanic and other minority community help Mrs Clinton solidify her grasp on state such as Nevada and Colorado , Mr Trump ' s clear path to victory run though toss-ups like Florida , North Carolina and Ohio as well as at least one Democrat-leaning state , probably in the Midwest . Mr Trump , Mrs Clinton and President Barack Obama all focus their campaigning effort yesterday in Michigan , which have be a Democrat-leaning state since @card@ . Mr Trump hope that his white work class appeal , fortify by his protectionist message on trade , will erode Mrs Clinton ' s five-point lead in this industrial state . he have lambaste the likes of Ford for move job to Mexico , and promise a heavy penalty for US company that manufacture good elsewhere . Robby Mook , Mrs Clinton ' s everoptimistic campaign manager , concede that the race in Michigan have ` ` tighten ' ' considerably . ` ` in his @card@ year on earth the Donald have never care about work folk . he do n't care about work people , ' ' Mr Obama say in Michigan , attempt to counter the Republican ' S message . he add : ` ` if your close adviser do n't trust you to tweet how can we trust you with the nuclear code ? ` ` , refer to report that Mr Trump ' S campaign have ` ` finally wrest away ' ' control of his Twitter account , something deny by his campaign manager . as she board her campaign plane for the day ' s first rally in Pennsylvania , Mrs Clinton acknowledge the deep division in the country . ` ` I really do want to be the president for everybody - people who vote for me , people who vote against me , ' ' she tell reporter . she aim to nail down a narrow lead with stop in three battleground state , before join the Obamas at a star-studded finale in Philadelphia . both CNN ' s poll of poll and the ABC News/Washington Post tracking poll have Mrs Clinton four percentage point ahead yesterday . a RealClearPolitics average of poll have it close at @card@ point . the election monitoring website FiveThirtyEight estimate she would take @card@ vote , put her well over the @card@ margin for victory . last night Mrs Clinton be give about a @card@ per cent chance of defeat Mr Trump , accord to the final Reuters/Ipsos States of the Nation project release last night . but analyst warn that Mr Trump ' s chance of stage an upset might well be high than the datum suggest . both campaign be predict that the margin of victory in Florida could come down to as little as one per cent . moreover , some @card@ per cent of Americans , even at this late stage , be uncertain of how to vote or have decide to choose a third party candidate.Analysts also estimate that there be some @card@ million voting age Americans who tend not to vote , and that many of those be white work class . ` ` Fault line have emerge between the old , white , constituency who remember the heyday of the 1950s , and a diverse electorate that be look for change , ' ' say David Damore , a professor at the University of Nevada . Daniel McCarthy : page @card@ ; Editorial Comment , Gavin Esler : page @card@ ' it ' s time to reject a medium and political elite that ' S bleed our country dry '
town vote Brexit after rapid rise in immigration
the proportion of migrant in part of Britain have increase by nearly @card@ per cent in the past decade , accord to a new analysis . the Resolution Foundation , a think tank , find that all area which experience a significant increase in the proportion of migrant vote for Brexit . they include Mansfield in Nottinghamshire , where the proportion of migrant in the local population rise from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent - equivalent to a rise of @card@ per cent . North West Leicestershire , West Lancashire , Maidstone in Kent , and Boston in Lincolnshire , be also among the @card@ other area which vote to leave the EU after the proportion of migrant rise by more @card@ per cent . Stephen Clarke , a research and policy analyst at the Resolution Foundation , say : ` ` while the overall share of the population in a give area bear outside the UK do not have a significant effect on the leave vote , the pace of change in the decade after @card@ do . ' ' the Resolution Foundation also suggest that low pay and some skilled British worker would receive a pay rise if minister cut net migration to ten of thousand after Brexit . it find that immigration have ` ` drag on earnings in some occupation such as skilled trade and basic cleaning , sale and security job ' ' . the Foundation argue that reduce immigration to ten of thousand could boost the wage of British worker by between @card@ per cent and @card@ per cent . however it say that any increase in wage be likely to be ` ` dwarf ' ' by overall weak growth cause by the uncertainty of Brexit . the Bank of England have suggest that Brexit could reduce average wage growth by up to @card@ per cent this year . Mr Clarke say : ` ` the impact that recent widespread migration have have on British-born worker be hotly dispute . ` ` while there have be no effect on wage overall , increase migration have cause a slight drag on wage for some low-paid British worker . ` ` however , those expect a wage boost off the back of a post-Brexit fall in migration be likely to be disappoint . any such gain will be dwarf by the loss cause by the post-referendum slowdown in the economy . ' '
fight to control climate change go on despite Brexit decision
BREXIT will make it hard for the UK to tackle climate change but its commitment to do so be undiminished by the EU referendum result , Amber Rudd , the Energy Secretary , have say . Ms Rudd , a lead voice in the Remain campaign , also insist that the propose Hinkley Point nuclear plant would not be affect by Brexit , say the project be still ` ` full tilt ' ' , despite speculation by some that it could be derail . ` ` while I think the UK ' s role in deal with a warming planet may have be make harder by the decision last Thursday , our commitment to deal with it have not go away , ' ' she tell the business and climate summit in London . ` ` however we choose to leave the EU , let me be clear : we remain commit to deal with climate change . ' ' Ms Rudd say that she would confirm the government ' s ` ` fifth carbon budget ' ' tomorrow , the target cover steep emission reduction require in the period @card@ . expert have warn that investment in new power plant in the UK could be hit by Brexit , while Ms Rudd herself warn during the campaign that the cost of electricity could rise if Britain be exclude from the EU ' s single energy market . company such as National Grid and SSE be call for the UK to remain part of that market but Ms Rudd offer no guarantee this would happen , admit : ` ` we do n't have the answer yet . have a close relationship with the European Union , with other country that can help us address issue of security , and interconnectors , be go to be critical go forward . ' ' Ms Rudd say she have speak with EDF Energy , the French company plan to build a new £18bn power plant at Hinkley Point in Somerset , and it remain ` ` absolutely committed ' ' to the project . both EDF and Government have reassure each other that there be ` ` no impact at all ' ' from Brexit on the process to take a decision on the project , they say , and she hope for a decision ' ' very soon ' ' . Emmanuel Macron , the French economy minister , and Jean-Bernard Levy , EDF group chief executive , have already say that Hinkley will proceed despite Brexit .
' House of a thousand Lords will back Brexit '
Theresa May should create as many as @card@ new peer to force the Brexit Bill through the House of Lords , say Jacob Rees-Mogg . the MP , who have just become chairman of the European Reform Group , say the Prime Minister should ensure pro-Brexit peer outnumber Remainers , as the House of Lords would not want the label ` ` peer against the people ' ' - as the people would always win . the chamber be to begin debate the EU Withdrawal Bill after it clear its final stage in the House of Com-mons . Mrs May be expect to appoint @card@ more Tory peer soon , but Mr Rees-Mogg say she should go much further . he tell Chopper ' S Brexit Podcast , available on the Daily Telegraph ' S website : ` ` she should keep up her sleeve the ability to appoint enough peer to get business through . if the House wo n't play by the constitutional rule book , then the PM have to use the extra measure available to her ... it could be a couple of hundred . there be no point in go off half-cock . ' ' he add : ` ` they be not there to challenge the democratic will . ' ' the chamber already have about @card@ member .
Wizz Air and Thomas Cook seek licence as Brexit hedge ; Hungarian airline expect UK subsidiary to start fly in March , as Thomas Cook set up in Majorca
low-cost eastern European carrier Wizz Air be apply for a UK registration as a hedge ahead of Brexit as tour operator Thomas Cook move to secure a new Spanish licence for its airline . the Hungary-based airline say its UK subsidiary have apply for an air operator ' S certificate , know as an AOC , as well as an operate licence from the Civil Aviation Authority . it say it expect Wizz Air UK to start fly in March @card@ with several UK-registered aircraft . the move come shortly after the Hungarian division of the wide group open a formal base at Luton airport . Thomas Cook have also launch a new base on the Spanish island of Majorca and also apply for an AOC there for its new Thomas Cook Airlines Balearics division , which will also begin schedule flight from early @card@ . there have be grow concern among airline that a new aviation deal between the UK and EU , which would replicate current arrangement allow flight between all EU state , might not be replicate before the UK leave the union . but if an aviation agreement be struck , have a UK AOC could be useful for Wizz if such a licence be grant parity with exist EU version . Wizz do not have any intra-UK route , something which could have be a motivation for get a UK AOC if it have domestic flight . but it do fly to non-EU destination from Luton , include Tel Aviv in Israel , which a UK licence could be useful for post Brexit . while good export would automatically fall under World Trade Organisation rule in the event of the UK fail to strike a trade deal , there be no such fallback for the aviation industry , raise the prospect that flight could be ground as highlight by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , this month . Rival EASYJET make a similar move this year by apply for an Austrian AOC . this would enable the carrier to continue its intra-European flight regardless of whether there be a post-Brexit aviation deal . on today ' S announcement , József Váradi , the Wizz chief executive , say the Luton base would become the home of its UK subsidiary and employ more than @card@ staff include manager , pilot and cabin crew by the end of next year . he add the move would not negatively impact its route network , with any route not take up by the UK subsidiary still set to be flow by its Hungarian division . a Thomas Cook spokesman say the main motivation for apply for its Spanish AOC be that it would be easy for its Balearic division to loan plane to other Thomas Cook subsidiary than be the case currently . it have choose Majorca as the base for the subsidiary , which will start with three Airbus A320 aircraft , because of the large amount of infrastructure it already have there thank to the more than 1m passenger it jet to the Majorcan capital Palma every year . but he also acknowledge have a mainland Europe AOC could be beneficial in the bleak of Brexit outcome whereby no aviation deal be strike with the bloc . ` ` in the worst-case Brexit scenario it could be beneficial to have an additional AOC in Europe because it give us extra right in Spain , which represent 45pc of our holiday . ' ' Thomas Cook technically already have a mainland European AOC through its ownership of German airline condor . but it clearly view it as advantageous to have one link directly to the Thomas Cook name alongside its UK and Scandinavian AOCs give apply for one be a relatively inexpensive process that could prove extremely useful follow the Brexit negotiation . ' in the worst-case Brexit scenario it could be beneficial to have an additional AOC in Europe '
Labour grandee accuse party of ' guerrilla ' tactic over Brexit Bill
a Labour grandee have accuse his colleague and Tory rebel of engage in ` ` guerrilla warfare ' ' for attempt to block the Brexit Bill . Frank Field be propose a new bill to help the government get on with leave the EU . he say that MP who table amendment to change the legislation be betray their constituent . write in the Daily Telegraph , the former minister say Labour be ` ` in turmoil ' ' over the EU after seven MP defy Jeremy Corbyn ' s demand to block the Brexit Bill on Monday night , include veteran left-winger Dennis Skinner who be brand a ` ` scab ' ' by Mr Corbyn ' S supporter . after the narrow win Theresa May be face a rebellion , as MP , include her own , attempt to tie her hand by demand a series of vote on the final Brexit deal and a fix timetable for transition . swathe of Tory support the Prime Minister in a crunch vote on the EU Withdrawal Bill but only on the basis that significant change will be make at a late stage . they rush to table amendment demand ministerial power be water down and MP be give the right to veto a final Brexit deal . Labour member add to the @card@ suggest change with a demand to stay in the single market and custom union for a fix term after March @card@ , and a call for more time to debate . one senior Labour remainer say a number of the measure would win cross-party support , add that the Tory demand for a final vote could allow the House of Commons to overturn Brexit and force a second referendum . while a Conservative Remain supporter add : ` ` there be no way the party be go to be railroad on this , we all want to get on with it , but it have to be right . ' ' both side have vow to join force to block aspect of the bill they be unhappy with . Mr Field write : ` ` the bill be huge , and therefore give a massive opportunity to those who say they accept the referendum decision but whose aim be to mess it up big time . ` ` the bill that I propose will allow the government to get on with the business of negotiate properly and stymie the guerrilla warfare campaign against implement the wish of the British people to leave Europe . ' ' the raft of change propose by Tory include former minister Kenneth Clarke , Dominic Grieve , Nicky Morgan and Anna Soubry serve notice on Mrs May that she face a rough ride in the remain stage of the Bill ' s passage through Parliament in October . one of the most potentially damaging amendment , table by Dominic Grieve , call for MP to be give the power to sign off the final Brexit deal . it have the support of another eight Tories MP and if pass could allow politician to vote down the agreement , which Labour source believe could lead to a motion of no confidence and a second EU referendum or even another election . editorial comment : page @card@ Frank Field : page @card@ ' the bill be huge , so give a massive opportunity to those whose aim be to mess up the referendum decision '
Britain and the EU can have a great free trade future
the Prime Minister be well aware that repeating ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' be not go to suffice for long so when she make her speech outline the government ' s strategy for Brexit negotiation she be also aware she ' d need to outline specific plan with some clarity . the White Paper on the United Kingdom ' s exit from and new partnership with the European Union confirm and elaborate on what she say . on the issue of membership of the single market she could not have be clear or indeed more emphatic . the UK will not be a member of the single market after Brexit . but there be also question about the government ' s position on the custom union . here the answer Theresa May give , and the position in the White Paper , be a little more ambiguous . what the Prime Minister essentially say about no longer be bind by the common external tariff and have our own schedule at the WTO mean that the UK will no longer be part of the custom union . however , she go on to signal a clear desire to put some form of agreement in place to preserve frictionless trade with EU member state . this be a sensible response to what must be do in the negotiation . detailed research by the Legatum Institute ' S special Trade Commission set out how tariff and non-tariff barrier that might apply outside of the custom union can be manage or indeed avoid altogether . ideally a comprehensive Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) will be agree and ready to come into force on the day after Brexit , under which the UK and the EU decide not to apply tariff or quota to import from each other . this be n't the end of the story . a custom union be an arrangement where two or more country agree to apply the same tariff and custom control on good come into their territory . they can then eliminate tariff and custom control on good . FTAs include provision reduce and eliminate tariff on good trade between the party , but do not control the party ' trade policy with other country . so under an FTA good must still be subject to custom control for various reason , include to ensure that only good that actually originate in one of the country benefit from preferential tariff . if one of the party have low or no tariff on a particular product than another , exporter could circumvent one country ' S tariff by ship their good through the other . so this be where the rule of origin come in - a mechanism to determine what country an item originate from and in what circumstance it can therefore benefit from the FTA . the complexity come where product comprise part or ingredient from several source . if tariff-free trade be agree with the EU all exporter will need time to assess the make-up of their product . this be not the system whilst Britain be a member of the custom union and move away from that may mean a phase introduction of rule of origin will be necessary . as describe in our paper , one way of do this would be for us to commit to keep the same tariff and quota as the EU as against the rest of the world for a short period of adjustment , say , a year . both side could then waive requirement to prove the origin of good we import from each other during that transition period . agree a full FTA be a challenging goal in the time allow by Article @card@ , but it be possible , and permissible under WTO rule , to agree zero tariff and quota between the two side for a limited period of time , in anticipation of an eventual FTA . even if the EU will not agree to this , there be way to mitigate the impact of tariff . the fall in the pound will allow many manufacturer to absorb the import duty , and integrated supply chain will be protect by the availability of inward and outward processing relief , which mean that duty be not payable on part that cross border as part of a supply chain until they be import as a product for sale on the market . if the EU impose tariff on our import , Britain would have the right to impose the same tariff on import from the EU , but while this could deliver significant revenue for the treasury it would increase price , especially food price , for ordinary consumer . the government could choose to keep EU import tariff free - a huge step with repercussion for UK farmer and manufacturer . it would also mean that other country might have less incentive to reduce their tariff on import from the UK , so while consumer would benefit from low price and more competition , the longer-term gain from FTAs with established and emerge market could be threaten . this may look risky , but our report describe how a balance could be strike by selectively reduce and eliminate tariff on good that the UK do not produce or compete with , or where the tariff be very low . this would shield consumer from price rise , while maintain our negotiation position with supplier country . ultimately , being outside the custom union will allow the UK to reduce and eliminate tariff and quota as part of a global free trade agenda . the commercial interest on both side strongly point towards these interim measure be agree in time for the kind of phase implementation envisage by Mrs May . to paraphrase Mrs May , it would indeed be an extraordinary act of self-harm for the European Union not to deliver the minimal level of cooperation to realise first the necessary interim measure , and then the final comprehensive FTA . Shanker A. Singham , chairman , Legatum Institute special Trade Commission , and Victoria Hewson , senior counsel ' be outside the custom union will allow the UK to reduce tariff as part of a global free trade agenda '
major be ' dismiss democracy ' over Brexit say IDS ; Duncan Smith lash out after former PM say there be a credible case for a second referendum
sir John Major have be accuse by Iain Duncan Smith of an ` ` absolute dismissal of democracy ' ' after the former prime minister say there be a ` ` perfectly credible ' ' case for a second referendum . in his first intervention since the vote in June , Sir John say at a private dinner in Westminster that Brexit must not be dictate by the ` ` tyranny of the majority ' ' . he say he ` ` could not accept ' ' that those who have vote remain should have ` ` no say ' ' on the term of Brexit , add that Parliament rather than Government should have the final say on any deal . Mr Duncan Smith , who be one of the Maastricht rebel describe as ` ` bastard ' ' by Sir John when he be in office , hit out at the former Tory leader ' S comment . he suggest that Sir John and Tony Blair may work together in future to try to make the case for a second referendum . Sir John ' S intervention emerge on the same day that Mr Blair suggest in an interview that Brexit could be halt . the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman say yesterday that Theresa May have be clear that there will be no second referendum . he say : ` ` I think even Sir John have accept that we be go to be leave the European Union . ` ` the government intend to fulfil that demand in a way that meet all our obligation . ' ' it come as Tom Watson , Labour ' s deputy leader , distance himself and the party from Mr Blair and say ` ` we be not in denial about Brexit ' ' . he say : ` ` we ' re never go to apologise for hold the government ' S foot to the fire . but nor we will ignore the democratic will of the British people . ' ' Mr Duncan Smith say : ` ` you ca n't claim democracy when you want it and reject it when you do n't . we have a vote , that vote now have to be act on , that ' S all . the idea we delay everything just simply because they disagree with the original result do seem to me an absolute dismissal of democracy . and that ' s what I think John Major ' S comment be today . the tyranny of the majority ? what ' s the tyranny ? ' ' while Sir John be say to have accept the UK would not remain in EU , he express the hope it would stay as close as possible to the other @card@ member state , add that there be a ` ` perfectly credible case ' ' for a second referendum . Enda Kenny , the Irish Taoiseach , tell Sky News that leave the EU would throw up ` ` more detailed and unforeseen issue than people might have imagine ' ' and the process would take long than two year set down in the EU ' S rule . a spokesman for Mr Blair say that there have be no contact with Sir John , his predecessor in Downing Street , about future intervention . editorial comment : page @card@
Scotland May promise a Brexit tsar ; May promise a pro-Brexit MP will head EU talk
Theresa May will today promise to put a pro-Brexit MP in charge of a department task with take Britain out of the EU as she attempt to win the support of Eurosceptic backbencher in the Tory leadership contest . launch her leadership campaign , the Home Secretary will say that there be no turn back on Brexit and that quit the EU will not be ` ` brief or straightforward ' ' . in what will be see as a tacit criticism of David Cameron , Mrs May will also use a speech to say that Britain now need a ` ` vision of a country that work not for a privileged few but for every one of us ' ' . her comment about a new government department for Brexit will be see as an attempt to win over Eurosceptic MP who be concern about her decision to back Mr Cameron ' s Remain campaign before the referendum . she will pledge that the secretary of state of the new department to take continued on Page @card@ continue from page @card@ Britain out of the EU will be an MP who campaign for leave . Mrs May ' S ally be concern that Boris Johnson ' s campaign team will argue that only someone who back the Brexit campaign can be the next Prime Minister . Mrs May will use her speech to say that take Britain out of the EU will require ` ` significant expertise and a consistent approach ' ' . ` ` I will therefore create a new government department responsible for conduct Britain ' s negotiation with the EU and for support the rest of Whitehall in its European work , ' ' she will say . ` ` that department will be lead by a senior secretary of state - and I will make sure that the position be take by a member of Parliament who campaign for Britain to leave the EU . ' ' she will add : ` ` the job now be about unite the Party , unite the country and negotiate the well possible deal for Britain . ' ' although her launch will attempt to unify the party under a positive campaign message , Mrs May ' S ally be already prepare for a bruising contest against Mr Johnson . one friend of Mrs May ' S tell the Daily Telegraph that Mr Johnson be ` ` the most divisive person in British politics ' ' and be not ` ` credible ' ' enough to run the country in the wake of the Brexit vote . ` ` some people say it have to be a Brexit person , ' ' the source say . ` ` my view be that it have to be the good person for the country . she ' S the only one who can steady the ship at a critical time . ` ` outside the Westminster bubble there ' S carnage . currency be go down , price will go up . it ' S pretty grim . ` ` Boris have move from be the Heineken politician to the Marmite politician . he be no longer a force for excitement . he be the most divisive person in British politics . as the pain bite people be go to blame him . ' ' Mrs May yesterday vow that there would be ` ` no deal ' ' with Mr Johnson in order to have a quick coronation of a new leader . a spokesman for the Home Secretary say that she would ` ` rather lose ' ' the leadership contest than do a bargain with Mr Johnson , who she have regularly clash with in the past . Mrs May receive a boost yesterday after Justine Greening , the International Development Secretary , say she would back the Home Secretary . Ms Greening , who also back Remain , tell the Evening Standard : ` ` she have the professionalism and steeliness require to look those bureaucrat in the eye and get the deal we need . ` ` Everyone know the competence and experience she have show as the long serve Home Secretary in over @card@ year . ` ` it be the tough job in government after that of prime minister and she have deal with its challenge with immense professionalism . ' ' John Hayes , the security minister in Mrs May ' S department , will today announce his support for Mr Johnson and say that the next Conservative leader must be from the ` ` people who deliver the Brexit victory ' ' . other candidate who will declare for the Conservative Party leadership include Stephen Crabb , the Work and Pensions Secretary , and Liam Fox , the former defence secretary . Andrea Leadsom , the Eurosceptic energy minister , Jeremy Hunt , the Health Secretary , and Nicky Morgan , the Education Secretary , be also consider launch rival leadership bid .
pound hit seven-year low on fear over Brexit ; European referendum ; Citibank raise probability of UK leave the EU , as two credit-rating agency warn of long-term risk ; Mayor ' S adviser insist ' panicky forecast ' on EU be not helpful
concern that Britain could leave the European Union see the pound plummet to a seven-year low yesterday - after Boris Johnson add his name to a grow list of MP who will campaign to leave the bloc . Sterling fall by as much as 2.42pc - or @card@ cent - against the dollar to $ @card@ as the London Mayor ' S decision trigger a string of warning about the consequence of a Brexit . while the pound recover some of the loss in late trading , the intra-day fall send sterling to its low level since March @card@ . it also fall by as much as 1.5pc to ( Euro ) @card@ against the euro and hit a two-year low against Japan ' S yen . Mr Johnson dismiss the idea that Britain could not thrive outside the EU as ` ` absolute cobblers ' ' as he join half a dozen cabinet minister , include Iain Duncan Smith and Michael Gove , who will vote to leave . it come as Citibank raise the probability of a Brexit to between 30pc and 40pc follow Mr Johnson ' S decision , from a previous forecast of between 20pc and 30pc . two main credit rating agency also warn of ` ` significant ' ' long-term risk if the UK opt to leave the EU in the June @card@ referendum . Moody ' S say it would put Britain on ` ` negative watch ' ' , which indicate a one-in-three chance the UK ' s credit rating could be cut . Fitch say lengthy negotiation in the event of a Brexit ` ` would weigh on confidence and delay investment decision ' ' . while Britain ' S benchmark FTSE @card@ index be lift by rise oil price , property stock fall sharply . analyst at Morgan Stanley say a Brexit mean London ' s ` ` status as a lead financial centre could be question ' ' . economist at Ing say the pound be likely to fall further in the run-up to the referendum . Goldman Sachs have warn the pound could crash to $ @card@ if Britain vote to quit , while Morgan Stanley believe sterling will drop to $ @card@ in the event of a Brexit . Jacob Nell , an economist at the bank , say the trauma would knock 1.7pc off UK GDP and ` ` push the economy close to recession ' ' . however , Gerard Lyons , the London Mayor ' s chief economic adviser , say it be important to put the ` ` panicky ' ' continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ forecast about a UK exit against a backdrop of slow Chinese growth and risk surround forthcoming US and eurozone election . ` ` it would be wrong to start make panicky forecast about Brexit give the volatility you ' ve see on the financial market since last August which have be fuel by many different factor , ' ' he say . Mr Lyons , who be in contact with the Mayor before his announcement on Sunday , say be inside the EU no longer work in Britain ' S favour . ` ` when one look at the EU , the tail be almost wag the dog in that the eurozone be dictate the outcome and outlook of the European Union . this be why so many country be unwilling to reform , which be why Prime Minister David Cameron face such an uphill battle in Brussels . ' ' Mr Lyons insist Britain could thrive outside the EU if it ` ` reposition itself in a change global economy ' ' . analyst at Morgan Stanley believe there be a 35pc chance that Britain will leave the EU . Mr Nell say this could go up to ` ` 40pc ' ' if Mr Johnson play an active role in the ` ` Out ' ' campaign . Britain ' s borrowing cost remain steady on Monday . Ten-year gilt yield edge down slightly . speak last week before the Brussels deal be strike , Robert Stheeman , the chief executive of Britain ' S Debt Management Office , say he do be ` ` very conscious ' ' that 26pc of the DMO ' s investor base be locate overseas . ` ` for the moment , I do not sense that Brexit be a concern but clearly I ' m very conscious of the fact that we have an important part of our investor base be overseas , ' ' he say . ` ` I do n't like the idea of investor con-fidence be undermine . that be not to say a Brexit would cause this to occur or would not . but in the case of Scotland , where there be little volatility , investor feel people would vote to stay . have the vote go the other way , who know . ' '
Brexit will be in peril if Theresa May be topple ; most voter want the Prime Minister to carry on . now her Tory rival should let her finish the job
why wo n't Theresa may get on with it , and set out her vision for Brexit ? why wo n't she get radical , and reform our economy and public service ? if only life be that simple . maybe if Whitehall have prepare for a leave vote before the referendum , we would be well place . maybe if the Tories have a majority the Prime Minister would have more political capital . maybe , if there be agreement in the Cabinet and Parliament about the precise relationship we should want with Europe , thing would be straightforward . frustration among some Conservative MP that thing be not straightforward be understandable . they know the country want change , they worry about Labour ' S extremism , and they want the Tories to feel optimistic again . but a change of leadership - as some MP secretly advocate - can not deliver a good Brexit and would not mean a radical policy agenda . in fact , a change could destroy the Brexit negotiation , destabilise the Conservative Party , and delay - perhaps render impossible - serious reform . whoever be prime minister , the political fact of life will not change . there will be a minority government . the conservative will be divide on Europe . and Whitehall will be swamp as it handle the complexity of our departure from the EU . on Brexit , Theresa May have take her party a long way . some Tory Remainers do not immediately accept the referendum result yet now concede we will leave the single market and custom union . some Tory Leavers want to depart with no new deal in place , but now accept an exit payment , an implementation period during which little will change , and future regulatory cooperation - in some form at least - with the EU . it have take time , and Theresa May ' s patient diplomacy , to get us this far . the next key decision - on the extent to which Britain align its regulation with the EU ' S , or instead choose to diverge - require a similar approach . nobody should want her to make an extreme move in either direction . tight alignment with little freedom to diverge would be incompatible with the referendum result . refuse any form of regulatory cooperation would make it difficult for British company to provide service in Europe . a middle way - as Mrs May propose in her Florence speech - be sensible . but it be also a complex undertaking , require detailed legal and regulatory www.analysis.No prime minister could make this complexity disappear . the logistic of change prime minister while Brexit be negotiate be also problematic . with no obvious successor and little agreement in the party on the way forward , there could be no coronation for a single candidate . there would be a protracted leadership election , during which the candidate would inevitably propose alternative negotiate position . the clock would continue to tick , and Brussels would probably cancel the talk . the public want the Prime Minister to have the space to get the job do . accord to YouGov research commission by the Westminster Policy Institute , a majority of voter - and an overwhelming majority of Tory voter - want her to carry www.on.No other potential leader would persuade more people to vote Conservative . so there should be no change . but three thing must be do . first , with limited room for action , Downing Street need to prioritise . it have reportedly choose housing , education and the environment as its most important issue . I disagree with the focus on the environment , but have set these priority , the government must be bold and deliver . secondly , if it be difficult for minister to deliver domestic reform for the next two year , that time should not be waste . the Prime Minister should establish powerful party policy commission , so MP and other can debate the party ' S future and establish a programme for after Brexit . thirdly , when the Cabinet agree its approach on regulatory cooperation and divergence , the Prime Minister can articulate an optimistic vision of life after Brexit . instead of leave people to believe dubious , leak , interim impact assessment , she can paint a positive picture of our future . she can describe how we will trade with Europe . she can explain how we will control immigration . how our security service can be free of impediment impose by the European Court of Justice . how we can spend our money on our own priority , like the NHS . how we can establish our own structural fund , to support the community that need them most . how , when we can diverge from EU rule , we can help sector like tech and life science to innovate , create the product and service - and job - of the future . the Prime Minister will always put her country and party before her own interest , and the time for her to step down will one day come . but right now the interest of the country and the Conservative Party be well serve by let her get on with the job . Tory MP - who fete her in December for the deal she strike in Brussels - must know that the alternative be chaos . follow Nick Timothy on Twitter @ NICKJTIMOTHY ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
want : leader who can read the uplift writing on the Brexit wall ; negative Hammond and nervous May have not rise to the occasion like Trump and Macron have
like most people in late middle age , I increasingly regret any unkind thing I have say over the year . in the case of our Chancellor of the Exchequer , however , I wish I have be rude earlier . I first meet Philip Hammond when he enter Parliament in @card@ . I admire his clear mind and financial grasp . I think he would make a classic chief secretary to the Treasury , carefully inspect and frequently refuse the outrageous bid for public money make by each government department . so when he be instead make defence secretary , and later foreign secretary , and the top brass of both department tell me how ghastly he be , I give him the benefit of the doubt . perhaps he be be tough with arrogant ministry that be use to tame their minister too easily . when Mr Hammond get his present post , I think that he be , at last , well place . I now realise , however , that although he be indeed an intelligent man who know a lot about money , he be absolutely unsuite for the role . at the top of politics , you must have an instinctive answer to the question with which a taxi driver once floor the philosopher Bertrand Russell : ` ` what ' S it all about , then ? ' ' Mr Hammond show no sense , at the MoD , of what the defence of the realm involve , and none , at the Foreign Office , about the role of Britain in the world . at the Treasury , he know how to count the spoon but not how to grasp an opportunity . it be not dishonourable to support Remain , as Mr Hammond do , but he become Chancellor after that cause have be lose . it be his job to shape all Brexit ' s economic aspect , yet at each turn he have be , in the precise meaning of the term , defeatist . he back the side which be defeat , and , because he have a strong sense that he be always right ( and also because Mrs May woundingly indicate she want to relieve him of his job after the election but keep him in place ) , he want his gloomy prediction fulfill . he display whatever be the opposite of the animal spirit which , famously , drive economic growth . he be relentlessly negative . if there be any purpose in minister attend the World Economic Forum at Davos , it be surely to excite their audience with the prospect of change and thereby improve their country ' s international standing . that be what Donald Trump and Emmanuel Macron do this week . obviously Mr Hammond be at a low pay grade , but since his country be about to recover control of its trade , border and law , effect the big change for nearly half a century , he should surely make the most of this . yet on Monday , the CBI , with Treasury encouragement , refloat the idea of stay in the custom union , which be explicitly against government policy . on Thursday , the Chancellor follow this up in Davos by say that the change in Britain ' s economic relationship with the European Union after Brexit would be ` ` very modest ' ' . to which , the natural question be : ` ` what ' s the point of make them , then ? ' ' Mr Hammond ' S answer , if he say what he actually think , would be ` ` none ' ' . the EU understand that it can put such a half -- heart government over a barrel . now Mr Hammond complain that his remark be ` ` take out of context ' ' . actually , it be their context - a refusal to explore new trading opportunity - which make them so depressing . after the Chancellor utter his word , Theresa May ` ` rebuke ' ' him . have you notice how that word be always apply to her ? she have rebuke Mr Trump for his tweet and the Presidents Club for its allegedly orgiastic dinner and Sir Michael Fallon for possibly touch someone ' S knee and Boris for any number of thing . at Davos , she rebuke social medium for ` ` unacceptable content ' ' . the Prime Minister be a very rebuke sort of person . sometimes , as in Mr Hammond ' S case , the rebuke be merit . indeed , if she have not issue it , her Brexit Minister , Steve Baker , would have resign . but if only she would show her Cabinet and the world which way she wish to lead , few rebuke would surely be necessary . her recent , bungle reshuffle do the opposite . if people be well lead , they usually follow . meanwhile , at Churcher ' s College , a school found in the 18th century with the admirable aim of training boy ` ` in the art of arithmetic , write , mathematics and navigation so that they could be apprentice to master of ship sail to the East Indies ' ' , Jacob Rees -- Mogg conjure up a scene even more deprave than the Presidents Club dinner . at Belshazzar ' S feast , as describe in the book of Daniel , the king and a thousand lord and his wife and concubine all ` ` drink wine , and praise the god of gold ' ' . but , as the mighty Mogg remind his young audience , all the fun of this proto -- Davos be spoil when the hand of the Lord write upon the wall ` ` Mene , Mene , Tekel , Upharsin ' ' . this be translate by the proto -- Brexiteer , Daniel , as ` ` Thou art weigh in the balance , and art find want ' ' . if Brexit ' S opportunity be take off the table , Mr Rees -- Mogg warn , ` ` then Brexit become only a damage- limitation exercise ... if we be timid and cower and terrify of the future then our child and theirs will judge us ' ' : their verdict will make Belshazzar ' s feast look like a vicarage tea -- party , he indicate . earlier in the week , the Brexit Secretary , David Davis , be reduce to laugh immoderately when Mr Rees -- Mogg accuse him of permit a two -- year transition period during which Britain would still be bind by all EU rule but have no part in make them . we would become a ` ` vassal state ' ' , he prophesy . Mr Davis could not deny this : hence his elongate ` ` Ha , ha , ha ' S ' ' . indeed , he have to admit it in his speech in Middlesbrough yesterday . because the government be , as the Mogg fear , engage only in damage- limitation , Mr Davis have be sideline . the business of Brexit be pass from the hand of the merely elect and be now be direct by the relevant official , Olly Robbins , and the Cabinet Office . this failure to take opportunity seem particularly woeful when , slowly and grudgingly , Brexit ' S opponent be shift their ground . this week , David Cameron , Mark Carney and Lord O'Neill all concede that thing be probably not as bad as they have earlier lead us to believe . difference open up even at Davos , with some EU leader take the heretical view that it might be quite stupid to punish Britain for leave . it become ever hard to believe that Brexit will not happen , and therefore ever less logical to try to fudge it . although their discontent with Mrs May be currently rise - hence Mr Rees -- Mogg turn up the volume - Tory Eurosceptics still believe , just , that she will be good than any obvious alternative at see Brexit through . but it be immensely frustrating that she feel she can not seize the political chance . once I buy a Victorian painting depict a dear little baby lie on a doorstep . it have be abandon by its mother and in its swaddle band be tuck a note , presumably beg whoever find the child to look after it . politically , Brexit be just such a foundling , and the note record @card@ million vote . conventional political society try to cast it out . this be odd , because the political reward will accrue to the first leader to adopt it with love and commitment . read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
EU expect May to sign deal today ; Brussels source say Brexit agreement be ' close ' to completion with Irish border issue iron out
Theresa May be last night understand to be finalise a Brexit deal with the European union that will unlock talk on trade and Britain ' s future relationship with Europe , source in Brussels tell the Daily Telegraph . the Prime Minister be work into the night to get final sign-offs from Belfast , Dublin and Brussels on the new text of a ` ` divorce agreement ' ' after talk break down on Monday . three separate Brussels source say last night that they be hopeful that , bar any last-minute slip-up , Mrs May would arrive in Belgium as early as this morning to finalise the deal . Margaritis Schinas , a spokesman for Jean-Claude Juncker , confirm last night that the European Commission president have speak to both Mrs May and Leo Varadkar , the Irish prime minister , and that an ` ` early morning meeting [ be ] possible ' ' . Donald Tusk , the European Council president , announce that he would make a statement on Brexit at 6.50am today , before the financial market open , prompt speculation that he could announce a deal have be do . a previously unscheduled meeting of the European Parliament Brexit work group be arrange for 7.30am today . late last night Democratic Unionist Party source in Belfast say there be still ` ` work to do tomorrow ' ' . however , the DUP ' s Westminster team be say to have agree to the wording , after Nigel Dodds , the party ' s Westminster leader , spend the day in talk with government official a senior EU diplomatic source say that the deal be ` ` close but not confirm ' ' , while an Irish official tell Reuters that event be ` ` move quickly ' ' and that a deal be just ` ` hour away ' ' . Mrs May be understand to be prepare to seek a final sign-off on the new text from Mr Varadkar and Arlene Foster , the leader of the DUP who exercise a veto on the previous deal on Monday . the contour of the new deal emerge three day after Mrs May be force to cancel a previous agreement at the 11th hour in Brussels . the Telegraph understand that a new ` ` agree text ' ' be communicate to Mr Tusk by Mrs May late yesterday afternoon . a Whitehall source say a text be be circulate and be ` ` be amend all the time ' ' . British official urge caution , mindful of the sensitivity of an issue that have sour relation between London and Dublin and threaten to create an impasse in the negotiation . yesterday afternoon EU source tell the Telegraph the deal be ` ` do ' ' and that Mrs May be expect to arrive in Brussels first thing this morning in order to seal the deal . British official deny any immediate travel plan , say the Prime Minister would only travel to Brussel if there be a rock-solid agreement . the text be be keep a secret after leak of the previous compromise language offering to ensure regulatory ` ` alignment ' ' between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland unravel the agreement . the Telegraph understand the text will concentrate on offer additional assurance to the DUP that will help to reduce concern that Northern Ireland will be force to adopt a ` ` special status ' ' compare with the rest of the UK . Chris Grayling , the Transport Secretary , use the phrase ` ` regulatory equivalence ' ' to describe the Irish border deal , provide a clue to the wording that could replace the contested phrase of ` ` regulatory alignment ' ' . he tell the BBC the UK could have law that have a similar goal and effect as EU law , without be force to mirror them exactly , or become a rule-taker from the EU - a key demand of Brexiteers who want to preserve the UK ' S option to conduct an independent trade policy . report : page @card@ Jeremy Warner and Editorial Comment : page @card@
Goldman Sachs may opt for EU hub in both Paris and Frankfurt
Goldman Sachs boss Lloyd Blankfein have warn uncertainty over Brexit will lead to the US investment bank move job from London to Paris and Frankfurt . in an interview with French newspaper Le Figaro , Mr Blankfein say Brexit be force the bank to ` ` decentralise ' ' its European operation . ` ` we will have more staff on the continent , ' ' he say . ` ` some , if they want , will come from London , we will recruit other . ' ' Mr Blankfein also join call for swift clarity on the term of the UK ' s withdrawal from the European Union , say : ` ` Everyone need a script , and fast . ' ' unlike many finance boss , the Goldman Sachs chief executive have not be backward in come forward with his opinion about Brexit . Mr Blankfein have make Brexit digs on Twitter four time , most recently champion the idea of a second referendum . he have also suggest the bank ' s new European headquarters , which be be build in central London , may have to lie partially empty . Goldman Sachs employ @card@ staff in the UK . Mr Blankfein do not clarify what role could move . the Wall Street bank recently sign a lease for space in Marienturm tower in Frankfurt ' s financial district with space for up to @card@ staff . it have @card@ worker in the city at present .
' Mutineers ' warn May : enshrine Brexit date in law risk harm Britain ' S interest
a GROUP of @card@ pro-European Tory MP rebel have insist they be not try to frustrate Brexit but warn that Theresa May ' S plan to enshrine a leave date in law risk ` ` harm our country ' s interest ' ' . in a letter to the Daily Telegraph , they warn that the Prime Minister ' s plan to fix a date when Britain leave the EU in law be ` ` too rigid ' ' and say more time may be need to negotiate . it come amid grow fear among minister that the scale of the rebellion , which be now think to have rise to more than @card@ Tory MP and include several former minister , mean they will have to withdraw the amendment . the group , label the ` ` Brexit mutineer ' ' , have tell senior party figure that they will join force with Labour to block measure to enshrine the date of Brexit in law . Mrs May tell MP yesterday that the government be ` ` listen carefully ' ' , add that it be ` ` right and proper ' ' to have a ` ` lively ' ' debate . the letter say : ` ` we do not seek to delay or thwart Britain ' s exit from the EU however much we may regret it ... what look at first blush an uncontroversial proposal , could accidentally harm our country ' S interest . put a date in law be too rigid . as negotiation reach their close , the government may need a small amount of additional time to conclude , for example , the well transitional deal . ' ' Letters , Nick Timothy & Editorial Comment : page @card@
City consultant Alpha to list on Aim as appetite for IPO return
private equity house Dunedin will float the City consultant Alpha on the London stock market next month , make it the late financial service firm to plan a listing as the UK initial public offering market splutter back to life . Alpha , which advise fund house include that of well-known fund manager Neil Woodford , be look to raise £115m on London ' s junior market next month after test investor appetite for an IPO earlier this year . it be the late financial firm look to list , with Compare the Market owner BGL Group , London & Country Mortgages , and Old Mutual Wealth among those eager to float in the next year follow a hiatus of activity after the EU referendum . pension firm Xafinity and allied Irish bank have already go public this year . market jitter follow the Brexit vote freeze the market in @card@ , but City lawyer now expect to see a wave of listing in London as business try to float before the UK formally leave the European Union in March @card@ . Euan Fraser , Alpha ' s chief executive , say that consultant be actually benefit from Brexit in the short term as company scramble for advice . financial institution in particular need to be well prepare for the forthcoming change . ` ` Brexit be unknown and may well remain unknown for quite some time , quite frankly , ' ' he say . ` ` whatever your political opinion on Brexit , change be typically good for consultant . ' ' despite political turmoil and continued uncertainty surround Brexit , there be @card@ UK IPO for the year to Sept @card@ compare to @card@ listing during the same period last year and @card@ the year before , accord to figure from Dealogic . however , Craig Coben , the global head of equity capital market at Bank of America Merrill Lynch , warn that the UK be still be ` ` perceive by some investor as a risky place to invest in ' ' . Mr Coben add that the current appetite among investor for financial service IPO be dependent ` ` on the underlie story and , in part , on the broad economic and political environment ' ' . Alpha , which have over @card@ consultant and report revenue of £43.6m for the year to March @card@ , be currently expect to have a market capitalisation of around £150m when it list on the market . Dunedin invest £80m into the group early last year , from mid-market rival Baird . £115m the sum Alpha intend to raise in an initial public offering next month , with the group due to list on London ' s junior market
' bad boy of Brexit ' plot £100m bet on property outside London
one of the founder of the ` ` leave Means leave ' ' campaign for a clean Brexit be plot a £100m return to the stock market as he set up an investment trust focus on commercial property outside London . property entrepreneur Richard Tice - who with Nigel Farage be part of the self-proclaimed ` ` bad boy of Brexit ' ' group lead the push to get Britain out of the EU - hope to raise up to £100m to invest in regional office space , where he claim occupier demand have grow since last summer ' s European referendum . the fundraising mark a return to the stock market for the ardent Brexiteer , who leave FTSE @card@ property investment group CLS Holdings in @card@ . ` ` Yes I would have do [ this raise ] have Brexit not happen , but for all the doomsayer who think the world be go to end I think the opportunity be grow , ' ' he say . the aim be for Quidnet Capital , the Mayfair-based investment group which Mr Tice run , to become the asset manager for the European Real Estate Investment Trust [ REIT ] , which would be rebranded under the Quidnet name . unlike many property investor , Mr Tice be turn his back on London - where there have be record activity in the real estate market so far this year - instead place his bet on soar rent outside of the capital . ` ` outside the M25 there ' s be very little property development since the crash , ' ' he say , add that rent on small office space will see the ` ` high rental growth ' ' in the year to come as demand rise . supply in the region be low , he say , because there have be a dearth of development outside of the big city as well as a shift from the high street to online , mean company be opt to work from cheap industrial unit and office be be convert into home . the real estate investment trust , which Quidnet estimate will pay out a dividend of more than 6pc per year , will focus on office and industrial property worth between £2m and 10m - a size Mr Tice believe will be less competitive . however , recent datum from the upmarket property agent Savills show that foreign investor make up nearly a third of all commercial property investment in UK region last year as London price soar , mean he might well have more competition than he currently expect . as the co-chairman of leave Means leave , a pressure group urge the UK not to be a member of the European single market or the custom union , Mr Tice say his return to the stock market prove his confidence in the UK economy .
Scotland Anger at prospect of Ulster join EU if Ireland be unite ; Election @card@
Brussels have be accuse of an ` ` outrageous ' ' attempt to threaten the future of the Union by use Northern Ireland as a bargaining chip in Brexit negotiation . European leader be expect to agree today that Ulster would automatically join the EU if it become part of a unite Ireland - raise the spectre of a break-up of the UK after Brexit . separately , Donald Tusk , the European Council president , have tell member state that the question of Ireland ' s border with Northern Ireland must be settle before trade talk can begin . the controversy come week after Mr Tusk stoke a row over Gibraltar ' s sovereignty by say any Brexit deal could only apply to Gibraltar with Spain ' S permission . Theresa May , who yesterday meet Shinzo Abe , the Japanese prime minister , will today tell voter on a visit to Scotland that every vote for her will ` ` strengthen the Union ' ' as well as fortify her hand in the Brexit negotiation . unionist say it be ` ` irresponsible ' ' of European leader to ` ` meddle ' ' in Northern Ireland ' S sovereignty , while one Conservative MP say Brussels have indulge in a ` ` ludicrous attempt to stir up trouble ' ' . it come as Europe expand its demand for Britain ' s ` ` divorce bill ' ' to include ` ` political ' ' commitment , such as the UK ' s share of a £2.5billion fund to help refugee in Turkey . today ' s meeting of the @card@ EU leader in Brussels - to discuss their Brexit negotiating position - will include a statement on Irish reunification at the request of the Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny . source say it would amount to a ` ` factual legal statement ' ' that Northern Ireland would join the EU automatically if it vote to become part of a unite Ireland . the @card@ good Friday Agreement allow for a referendum on reunification if there be reason to believe a majority be in favour . a day after Angela Merkel warn Britain to have ` ` no illusion ' ' about Brexit , Mr Tusk again strike a hard line in a letter to EU leader . he say the issue of Ulster ' s border with Ireland - the EU ' s only land border with the UK - have to be settle before substantive talk on a trade deal could start . minister be yet to decide how border control would be enforce . Mr Tusk say : ` ` I would like us to unite around this key principle during the upcoming summit , so that it be clear that progress on people , money and Ireland must come first . ' ' Iain Duncan Smith , the former Tory leader , say : ` ` this be the European Union play their usual game . they be attempt to bully the UK and threaten the Union . this be a deliberate and outrageous attempt to meddle in the affair of a nation state , just like they do in Gibraltar . ' ' a government source say : ` ` Northern Ireland ' s constitutional position as part of the UK be base firmly and clearly on the freely give consent of its people . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
the EU have never help Britain to project its influence in the world ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Lord Heseltine be right to say that Germany will dominate the EU after Brexit ( report , March @card@ ) - but then it do so already . the euro have benefit the German economy , which have thrive with an undervalued exchange rate , and nothing we say will influence the European Central Bank . as EU member outside the euro bloc , we have no influence on the future direction of the intended federation . we will be in a much strong position outside the EU , which have strictly control our freedom . it be time for Lord Heseltine to get behind his country . George Burne Woldingham , Surrey sir - on Wednesday the Prime Minister will formally write to the European Commission and invoke Article @card@ , thereby trigger Brexit negotiation . one of the first item to be raise , or so we be lead to believe , be the so-called divorce settlement of £50 billion . I suggest that our initial response should be to say that we will discuss this when audited account be available for the past @card@ year , so that all side be work from verify and confirm figure . Ray Seymour Bedford sir - the more one read of the punitive attitude of EU leader towards Brexit , the more one feel they be display the characteristic of a cult , rather than a political organisation . the real agenda for the EU project be hide when Britain join the European Economic Community in @card@ , so we enter with optimism . however , the reality of membership have now become clear , and we want to leave . the response have be to issue threat to intimidate us and warn other member against leave . like leave a real cult , the process will be traumatic but , in the long term , completely liberate . Larry Oster Southsea , Hampshire sir - Petitions , legal challenge and march have all fail to stop the Brexit juggernaut . the mechanism be be operate largely by MP who have stifle their doubt , and by civil servant order to perform a task they could not have expect and for which they have have little time to prepare . they be drive by the exultation of long-term Brexiteers , who feel that they be at last enter the promised land . however , long negotiation be expect . even two year be a long period of instability . it would therefore be unwise for the Brexiteers to rejoice too enthusiastically when Article @card@ be invoke . if Brexit turn out to be a disappointment or disaster , what will they say ? most important of all , if Brexit fail , who will pick up the piece and draft a policy of recovery ? it seem that nobody dare contemplate failure . this omission must be rectify and contingency planning institute . Margaret Brown Burslem , Staffordshire
hundred of Goldman Sachs staff to leave London before Brexit
Goldman Sachs have fire the start gun on its Brexit contingency plan , confirm that job will be move out of London while ` ` hundred ' ' of role will be add across Europe . Richard Gnodde , the chief executive of Goldman Sachs International , say the bank be to start execute contingency plan as it ca n't predict whether a transitional trade deal will be agree . ` ` the big question will obviously come down to transitionals : will there be transitionals or wo n't there ... here , we ca n't bank on them , so we have to have contingency plan , and we ' re go to start to execute on those . ' ' the plan include move some staff out of London and expand in Europe , Mr Gnodde tell CNBC , add the number involve will be in the hundred ` ` for this first period ' ' . while bank and financial service have be push for a transitional deal that would avoid a cliff edge once negotiation end in @card@ , Mr Gnodde say it be time to take action . ` ` what our eventual footprint will look like will depend on the outcome of those [ Brexit ] negotiation , and what we be oblige to do because of them , ' ' he say . his comment come a day after the UK confirm to the EU Brexit will be trigger on March @card@ . a spokesman for the bank do not comment further . Morgan Stanley president Colm Kelleher yesterday say ` ` certainly ' ' some of the bank ' S @card@ London staff would move out of the capital before the twoyear Brexit negotiation period end .
Scotland Major : leave EU be an historic mistake ; Britain will suffer as low-tax haven , warn Major
sir John Major have make an extraordinary attack on Theresa May ' s government over Brexit and warn that leave the EU could mean cut the NHS and welfare state . in his first intervention since the referendum , the former prime minister say Brexit be an ` ` historic mistake ' ' and warn Mrs May that she must not create ` ` unreal and over-optimistic ' ' expectation about leave the EU . Sir John also warn a hard Brexit would fuel the likelihood of a second referendum on Scottish independence . Nicola Sturgeon , the First Minister , have repeatedly warn that take Scotland out of the EU single market mean a new vote on breaking-up Britain be ` ` highly likely ' ' amid prediction she could name the date of a new referendum next month . he also criticise Donald Trump , describe the US president as ` ` less predictable , less reliable and less attune to our free market and socially liberal instinct than any of his predecessor ' ' . Sir John ' S warning follow that of continue on Page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ Tony Blair - alongside whom he campaign during the EU referendum - who urge voter to ` ` rise up ' ' against Brexit and say that voter have the ` ` right to change their mind ' ' . Sir John ' s speech at Chatham House in London last night infuriate Eurosceptic MP , who accuse him of make ` ` bitter , angry ' ' remark . minister warn that it could embolden peer try to frustrate Brexit . a Downing Street source say : ` ` the government be determine to make a success of our departure from the European Union . ' ' in a direct message to Mrs May , Sir John say that there would be a ` ` price to be pay ' ' if Britain decide to become a low-tax economy . he say : ` ` it have worrying implication for public service such as the NHS - and for the vulnerable who , I ' m delight to say , the government have pledge to help . ` ` so there be a choice to be make , a price to be pay ; we can not move to a radical enterprise economy without move away from a welfare state . ' ' he say that Brexit-supporting MP who assume that Europe would ` ` concede all we wish for ' ' be ` ` extraordinarily naive ' ' . Sir John continue : ` ` the referendum be one of the most divisive vote in British history . I have watch with grow concern as the British people have be lead to expect a future that seem to be unreal and optimistic . obstacle be brush aside as of no consequence , whilst opportunity be inflate beyond any reasonable expectation of delivery . ' ' in contrast to Mr Blair , however , Sir John suggest that a second referendum on Britain ' s membership of the EU be a ` ` long way away ' ' and add : ` ` we can not turn back the clock ' ' . ask if he believe Mrs May would have to ` ` face down her own b -- -- -- - ' ' , as he once do over Maastricht , Sir John say : ` ` you might say that , I could n't possibly comment . ' '
Scotland Davis : Britain ' s border control be not up for negotiation with the EU
Britain ' s border control be not up for negotiation in EU talk , David Davis have tell MP . the Brexit Secretary make it clear that the government will decide how its immigration system will look before present the option to European leader . and Mr Davis deal another blow to Scotland ' S First Minister Nicola Sturgeon ' S hope of a special deal for Scotland after he say Spain would ` ` probably not ' ' want ` ` differential treatment ' ' for any part of the UK . Michael Gove , the former Education Secretary and a committee member , point out Spain have resist internal pressure from the Catalans and the Basque country for ` ` separate arrangement . ' ' Mr Davis ' S comment come after a senior Spanish MEP , who be a member of the ruling party , tell the Daily Telegraph his government would oppose any preferential deal for Scotland and reject Ms Sturgeon ' s plan to stay in the single market if the rest of the UK come out . Mr Davis ' s comment on border , a sign that Britain intend to leave the EU ' s freedom of movement for worker system , come as Theresa May today travel to Brussel for tense negotiation with her European counterpart . Mrs May will warn EU leader that they risk lose public confidence if they allow hundred of thousand of economic migrant into Europe . EU leader will then hold a dinner without Mrs May in a snub to Britain . speak to MP on the Brexit select committee , Mr Davis say that Brussels will have no say over the UK ' s immigration system after its EU exit . ` ` the example I will point you to be the Swiss example , ' ' he say . ` ` they think they have control over their own migration via an emergency brake system . ` ` when they try to exercise it they be unable to because it be tie into so many other treaty . ` ` what we have to bear in mind be we have to pay respect to the outcome of the referendum , there have get to be clear control by this Parliament . ' ' he add : ` ` my job be to bring the decision back here , not exercise the decision . ' ' ask by MP if that would be part of the negotiation , Mr Davis say : ` ` no I do n't . I think that the operation of that decision after we have leave the EU will be in the national interest and that will affect all of us . ` ` the judgment the government come to as to what be necessary for university , what be necessary for business and what be necessary for fruit picking . ' ' Mr Davis say he be ready to accept a transitional arrangement to implement the term of Britain ' s withdrawal from the EU ` ` if it ' s necessary , and only if it ' s necessary ' ' . and he indicate that the government be work on possible outcome from the Brexit talk in relation to the European Customs Union . Brexit mean ... OED come up with the answer Theresa May famously declare that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' , but now the Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ) have come up with its own definition . six month after the Prime Minister deliver the elusive explanation , lexicographer have clarify that ` ` Brexit ' ' be ` ` the ( propose ) withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union , and the political process associate with it ' ' . the definition add that the term be sometimes use specifically to refer to the referendum hold on June @card@ . the word be add to the dictionary this month , with the OED note the ` ` impressive ' ' speed with which it become widely use . Grexit - ` ` the ( potential ) withdrawal of Greece from the eurozone monetary union ' ' - be also add .
co-op take the lead in ' followship ' ; the veteran company ' S chairman say good communication skill will be vital post-Brexit , report Jenny Hirschkorn
Allan Leighton know a thing or two about leadership . the 63-year-old former chief executive of Asda be not only chairman of a clutch of high-profile company - the Co-op , Entertainment One and Pandora - he have also pen a book on the subject . what be less know , however , be that he be an ardent champion of ` ` followship ' ' , a concept he describe as the flipside of leadership , and in his keynote speech kick off the @card@ Telegraph Festival of Business , Mr Leighton tell delegate that understand the term and take its message on board be ` ` probably the most important thing for any organisation of any size , go forward ' ' . put yourself in the shoe of employee , customer and peer , he say . anyone aspiring to become a leader need to think about be the type of leader that they would like to follow . he say : ` ` in my mind , the thing that be at the cut edge of the great company be their ability to understand that followship be as important as leadership . ' ' with Brexit top of the agenda at this year ' S event , much of the discussion turn to the result and its meaning for business . however , Mr Leighton caution that without take heed of the message of the vote to leave , leader both in business and politics risk danger . ` ` I think Brexit be fantastic because it be go to refresh the way we have to think about thing , ' ' he say . ` ` we can all say : ' what ' s go to happen ? ' and ' we have all this uncertainty ' or ' it be really difficult ' . all of those thing be true . but when have business ever be easy ? ` ` Brexit be a revolution but it be a democratic revolution with people say : ' I have get my own thought . I do n't want to be talk at . I want to be listen to . I want to be treat with respect . I do n't want stuff put down my throat . ' ` ` if business be go to turn the outcome into an opportunity to gain competitive advantage , he say , we must recognise that what we learn from Brexit be how ' not ' to communicate . ` ` Communication be about two thing , ' ' he say . ` ` the first thing it be about be listen , and there be two way of do it . there be the one that most of us now adopt - listen to respond - so when people start to talk , in our head we be think about what be our response . ` ` and the other , where you be suck in what people be try to say . when you listen to hear somebody , they feel much good than when you be listen to respond . and more importantly , you get more from that . ' ' it ' s a message that chime with much of what the Co-op represent . one of the world ' s old and most successful partnership , the business know good than most the importance of engage with its employee and customer and communicate clearly ( particularly in the scandal-hit recent year through which Mr Leighton have help steer the business ) . ` ` most of us talk at people , ' ' he say . ` ` people do n't want to be talk at . they want to be talk with . ' ' to do that effectively mean embrace diversity , particularly of gender and race . ` ` Fifty per cent of brain be female and brain have no colour , ' ' he say . ensure that brainpower triumph over head count be a lesson he learn during his @card@ year at Mars , which teach him what an interesting experience it can be if you go into a meeting and start count the different brain rather than the people ( who be often simply repeat of their neighbour ) . shock result such as the UK ' s decision to leave the EU and the election of Donald Trump in the United States suggest that until recently , leader in business and politics have be unable or unwilling to recognise that what people want do not match the option they have be give to date . the resultant wave these decision have make be still be feel , but as the world settle back down there be a clear opportunity for business to step up and be the kind of leader they feel their industry and their customer deserve . the question for those who will listen , say Mr Leighton , be : ` ` how be we go to turn this to a competitive advantage for us , because we be think about it differently from all those who be focus on the uncertainty ? ` ` the certainty be that it be do . but we can turn this into a catalyst whereby the process of followship become the most important thing . ' ' we need to think about be the type of leader people want to follow Allan Leighton
letter to the Editor Brexit and the law body : sir - Charles Moore ( Comment , November @card@ ) suggest that judge who oppose Brexit , or whose family member oppose Brexit , be too bias to rule on the Article @card@ case . yet the High Court judgment in no way turn on the question of whether Brexit be a good or bad idea . its focus be entirely on whether the government can act by executive fiat to overturn individual right create through an Act of Parliament , in this case the @card@ European Communities Act . all side agree that this point of constitutional law be eminently justiciable . base on century of historical precedent , the judge rule that to remove such right require a fresh act of Parliament John Peet London SW1 Sir - where be Brexit , and be Nigel Farage its president-elect ? Ranulph Bacon ( age seven ) Harleston , Norfolk
Brexit should be good for Africa , and Africa could be good for Brexit , too
just a few month after be elect Conservative Party leader , David Cameron fly to Rwanda . it be a highprofile trip so he could see first-hand the development of one of Africa ' s fastest-growing economy and launch his party ' s review on globalisation and global poverty . on his first day , he visit a textile factory in Kigali , the country ' S capital . above the hum of the silk reel , he chat to some of the worker and admire the quality of the pattern fabric . before he leave , the factory owner , Raj Rejendran , ask for a word . grow the business , he explain , require expand into overseas market . he know there be demand in the UK for his silk fabric , but he face heavy import duty . might the new party leader look into the issue ? David Cameron promise to do what he could . since become leader he have make tackle global poverty a personal priority . he have even put Africa ' s interest above those of his own constituent , head to Rwanda when thousand of home in his Oxfordshire constituency be under floodwater . but there be little help the Tory leader could offer Mr Rejendran or any other African entrepreneur who want to reach British customer . that ' S because the UK ' s import duty be set in Brussels , not London . for decade EU policy have hold back and distort African economic growth . take coffee as just one example . Calestous Juma , at the Harvard Kennedy School , calculate that in @card@ Africa earn nearly $ 2.4bn ( £1.9bn ) from coffee grow in rich African soil and pick by African worker . by contrast , Germany ' s coffee processing industry make $ 3.8bn from roast import raw bean and then re-export them . surely , you would think , African country would roast their own crop before export it to Europe so they could reap the extra value . the EU , however , slap a 7.5pc charge on roast coffee import . the tariff perfectly protect German coffee processor while stunt African manufacturing . the EU have try to address the bad iniquity of its trade policy in recent year but the Common Agricultural Policy contain a complex system of subsidy which harm African agricultural competitiveness . with more than 60pc of Africa ' S economically active population work in agriculture , it take a toll on the livelihood of million of African . Brexit - whether you welcome it or not - provide a game-changing opportunity for Africa and the UK . outside the custom union , the new government could fundamentally change its relationship with the country of the continent to the advantage of both Africa and the UK . these benefit have be identify in a report from a committee of distinguished African and British politician and business leader . their inquiry into the UK ' S effort to boost trade in Africa through the Africa Free Trade Initiative gather evidence from more than @card@ expert over six month . the report , publish a fortnight ago , do not shy away from the significant short-term challenge to trade pose by Brexit . but these be eclipse by what Ali Mufuruki , the Tanzanian entrepreneur who cochaired the inquiry , describe as the ` ` big prize ' ' . Brexit , the inquiry conclude , provide ` ` an opportunity for the UK to lead the world in structure a pro-development trade policy with Africa ' ' . the example of the US show what could be achieve . through the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act ( AGOA ) , almost all product from the continent now have duty-free entry into the US . this have be couple with a package of trade-boosting summit , mission , business council and regional trade hub . the impact for both Africa and US business have be dramatic . the Act be credit since @card@ with create more than a million job in Africa and generate more than $ 26bn in dutyfree export to the US . at the same time us export to sub-Saharan Africa have quadruple . it all point to what the UK could do . some critic of Brexit accept that the UK will now have the freedom to alter trade policy in favour of support African development but doubt the institutional bandwidth exist to develop a set of enlightened trade policy . they believe all our effort will be expend instead on try to agree trade deal with the world ' s big economy . but if British policymaker require motivation , then they should take a sideward glance at Turkey . Ankara have develop a strategic partnership with Africa , establish trade agreement with @card@ African country and grow its network of embassy from just @card@ in @card@ to @card@ today . as a result , bilateral trade volume have enjoy a threefold increase since @card@ . all this while share a 500-mile border with Syria . Brexit give the UK a chance to strike a bold and ambitious deal with African country , focus on trade as the route out of poverty . take the good from AGOA , it should combine easy access to the UK for African exporter , more investment from the aid budget to build Africa ' s trade capacity , and world-beating infrastructure on the ground to get deal flow . the Africa Prosperity Partnership , as it could be call , would then be the gold standard of trade and development policy the world over . it would be a powerful motor for employment and prosperity across Africa . importantly too , it would offer the well possible proof that Britain outside the EU be a force for good internationally and provide a sharp riposte to those who believe Brexit mean our retreat from the world . Brexit should not only be good for Africa , but Africa could be good for Brexit too . Toby Orr be a senior partner at Portland and a director of Trade Out of Poverty ' if British policymaker require motivation , then they should take a sideward glance at Turkey '
Scotland Gove : we will make Britain safter after vote to leave EU ; Gove set out vision for Brexit
Britain ' S border and national security law must be immediately strengthen in the event of Brexit , the Justice Secretary warn today . in an interview with the Daily Telegraph , Michael Gove say that good protection of the country be the most urgent priority of the leave campaign . Mr Gove back David Cameron to remain as Prime Minister in the event of a Brexit . but he say that the Prime Minister would have to ` ` instantly ' ' enact law to stop the influence of ` ` rogue ' ' European court . the power be demand in the wake of a Brexit vote include free intelligence agency from European law , allow foreign criminal and terrorist to be deport without hindrance and free the Armed Forces from Brussels diktat . it have be think that the process of Britain free itself from Brussel continue on Page @card@ interview : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ control s take year , but Mr Gove say today that it should begin immediately with a series of interim law . the leave group will today effectively begin the main campaign for the referendum with a series of high-pro-file intervention from Mr Gove and Boris Johnson . George Osborne will tomorrow give a major television interview on the EU and the Prime Minister will make a speech on Monday . in today ' S interview , his most outspoken since come out in favour of Brexit , Mr Gove also warn that Britain ' S NHS and school will not be able to cope with the further influx of immigrant that will come to the UK if the country stay in the EU . and he rule out ever stand for the leadership of the Conservative Party , say : ` ` I do n't want to do it and there be people who be far well equipped than me to do it . ' '
Brexit : what it mean for your portfolio ; Politics and YOUR MONEY ; there be now a real possibility that Britain will quit the EU . amid lurid prediction from both side , Kyle Caldwell ask people who actually manage money what they be do
the start gun have be fire . on June @card@ , a once-in-ageneration event will take place : a referendum on Britain ' s membership of the European Union ( EU ) . the run-up to the vote will bring political , economic and financial uncertainty . and uncertainty be the one thing that stock market hate more than anything . as a result , many investor be worry about the effect of the EU referendum on their portfolio . Telegraph Money run through the various scenario . ahead of the vote - prepare for sterling to fall sterling , which dip to a sevenyear low against the US dollar of $ @card@ earlier this week , will continue to weaken over the next couple of month , analyst say . uncertainty over the outcome of the vote will make the pound less resilient as investor lose confidence and move to reduce their exposure to sterlingdenominated asset . Nicholas Laser-Ebisch , an analyst at Caxton FX , the foreign exchange business , say : ` ` as the referendum draw closer , the pound will only continue to weaken . ` ` Confidence be everything when decide where to invest , and as the future of the Britain ' s relationship to the EU be call into question , this will be extremely detrimental to sterling strength . ' ' the short-term impact of a vote to leave the short-term impact of a ` ` Brexit ' ' vote be expect to be negative for Britain ' s stock market , as well as the pound . Morgan Stanley have predict a 5pc fall in sterling in the immediate aftermath of a vote for Brexit , with weakness persist into the indefinite future . Citigroup and Goldman Sachs both forecast a 15pc to 20pc hit . Jason Holland , of Tilney Bestinvest , the advisory firm , say uncertainty would reign for several month in the event of a Brexit vote , a view share by most analyst . ` ` it be an oft-repeated mantra that market hate uncertainty , so this period of debate in the run-up to the vote , and then a potential phase of ' divorce negotiation ' in the aftermath of a vote to leave , undeniably represent a period of significant risk for the British economy as investment decision by business and foreign investor be put on hold , ' ' Mr Hollands say . some fund manager already have plan to insulate their portfolio . Steve Davies , manager of the Jupiter UK Growth fund , say he would consider ` ` hedge a Brexit ' ' ahead of the vote if the opinion poll suggest that the leave campaign have the upper hand . Mr Davies say this would involve raise cash and buy US dollar instead of sterling , in order to offer some protection against volatility . to raise cash , Mr Davies say he would sell share that be more gear to Britain ' S economy and have less of an international focus . ` ` as a fund manager , I can not live in an ivory tower outside politics . if I feel I need to put the hedge strategy in place , I will , because the likelihood be that sterling will fall further and stock market will react negatively , ' ' he say . cyclical share , those that be more closely align with the economy , will also be in the firing line . Housebuilders , for instance , would suffer directly from a slow economy . of course , a weak pound be not wholly negative . some large company could even benefit because their product and service would become cheap to foreign buyer . the longer-term impact whether investor should brace themselves for a sustained period of market turbulence over the next couple of year be less clear , because at this early stage it be a guess game about whether the economy will be good or bad off . Credit Suisse predict ` ` an immediate and simultaneous economic and financial shock ' ' . Capital Economics , on the other hand , do not think a Brexit would prove an economic disaster . ` ` we doubt that Britain ' s long-term economic outlook hinge on [ Brexit ] , ' ' the consultancy say . before rush to the exit it be worth remember that Britain ' s stock market and economy be not one and the same thing . large company in the FTSE @card@ be tip to cope good with the uncertainty generate by the referendum because 70pc of their earnings come from overseas . Hugh Yarrow , manager of the Evenlode income fund , who focus on buy share that have big brand and secure , market-leading position in their respective industry , say he would resist the temptation to tinker because he be confident that the business in which he invest would be able to adapt . he say : ` ` I be in the ' do nothing ' camp . the business I invest in have their headquarters here in Britain , but they be global business and sell their product and service all around the world . business be run by clever people - if there be a Brexit , they will be able to act accordingly in the good interest of shareholder . ' ' share price be influence by various factor . but over the long term corporate profit and dividend be the most important . Mr Yarrow ' S argument be that the international bias of these business will enable British-listed firm to cope with whatever storm a Brexit might cause . Neil Woodford , the veteran investor , be also not concern . he have call the outcome a ` ` nil-sum game ' ' . Tom Stevenson , of Fidelity Personal Investing , the fund shop , say : ` ` for many company a fall in sterling would be unequivocally good news . for UK-based investor dependent on dividend from blue chip , the dollar denomination of those payout mean they be more likely to be maintain or increase . ' ' ' for many company a fall in sterling would be good news '
UK shipping ' on course for Brexit boost '
BREXIT could provide a boost for the UK shipping industry as it will allow the government to impose a more competitive tax regime than its European neighbour , industry leader have say . David Dingle , the chairman of Maritime UK , say it be vital that the government use Brexit as an opportunity to reform its tonnage tax , which allow ship owner to pay rate base on tonnage capacity rather than operate profit . he say that EU state aid rule have make member state such as Greece ` ` less globally competitive ' ' in the shipping sector . ` ` Brussels have take a very strong line on the level play field of state aid , ' ' Mr Dingle tell a press briefing yesterday . ` ` if Brussels do n't move with tonnage tax rule , we might want to in this country post Brexit . ' ' he suggest the UK could emulate the success of Singapore if it offer more flexibility and competitive rate on tonnage tax than those impose by the EU . ship firm in the UK be allow to pay tonnage tax if they meet certain condition , such as agree to train seafarer . though the tax be a piece of UK legislation , it currently must conform to guideline on state aid set out by the European Commission . it come as Greece face pressure from the commission to increase its rate of tonnage tax as it breach EU rule on state aid . this have reportedly push a number of Greek shipping firm to consider move their business to the UK . around 90pc of global trade be carry by the international shipping industry , which in the UK contribute £22.2bn to GDP and support half a million job .
Fracking fear have ease after Brexit vote , say Ineos
community opposition to fracking have soften because of concern link to Brexit , accord to an Ineos director . Tom Pickering , operation director at the firm ' s shale unit , say unease about the UK ' s energy security once Britain leave the European Union be cast the nascent industry in a more positive light . while opposition and anxiety remain , he say the change in perspective follow the Brexit vote have tighten the focus on the economic benefit of fracking . Mr Pickering have be hold public meeting to allay fear about the industry after the company snap up shale gas licence across swathe of Yorkshire , the East Midlands and Cheshire . Ineos Shale be invest $ 1bn ( £779m ) into shale gas exploration in the hope of start extraction in two year ' time . speak to the Press Association , Mr Pickering say : ` ` I have see a shift in the tone after the Brexit vote . people be say that ' you just need to be get on with this ' . ' '
EU Brexit team go hi-tech to outfox spy
the European Commission have install Mission Impossible-style fingerprint scanner to protect its Brexit team - as it fear British spy agency might be eavesdrop . Michel Barnier and his hand-picked team of seasoned negotiator be on a restricted list of official with clearance to enter the office of Taskforce @card@ , the department charge with secure the well possible deal for the EU from the ongoing Article @card@ negotiation . the office , on the fifth floor of the commission ' S Berlaymont HQ in Brussels , require both a badge and fingerprint identification , and it be guard by G4S , a private security firm . the extra security be evidence of the sensitivity around the Brexit negotiation , with EU official confide to the Daily Telegraph their fear that Britain may use MI6 and GCHQ to spy on the European side . the UK be part of the ` ` Anglo-Saxon ' ' Five eye intelligence sharing community - also comprise the US , Canada , Australia and New Zealand - which be treat with some suspicion in Europe , particularly since it emerge that the US be tap the phone of Angela Merkel , the German chancellor . ` ` Everyone be paranoid that the British be spy on us , although no one know what to do about it if they be - but everyone be aware of the risk , ' ' a Brussels-based source say . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , be to meet Mr Barnier in Brussels today for the fourth and final day of talk , which have be cloak by a gentleman ' S agreement of secrecy and radio silence . the two man will discuss the progress make on the financial settlement , citizen right and Ireland before an expect , carefully choreograph press conference . fear of spy be not confine to the EU side . Mr Davis carry his Brexit document in a briefcase fit with a Faraday cage , which protect it from spy by block all wireless , cellular , GPS and Wi-Fi signal .
Ukip have to be a radical party or it be nothing ; major internal reform and a tough line on immigration be need after the Stoke defeat
there be little comfort to be find for Ukip from the result of the Stoke by-election . this be an election that we really should have win and many will use this result to argue that Ukip ' S role be now over and the party be finish . I ' ve hear it all before . Ukip can have a big future , but it be go to need some radical internal reform . as the Liberal Democrats have show in year go by , for an outsider to win a by-election it be vital to get the tactical vote from either Labour or the Tories . perhaps Ukip ' s big failure be not to get Tory voter to come across to the party in significant number to stop Corbyn ' s Labour from win . why be this ? in many way , the party ' s election machine be less sophisticated than it be two year ago . but as we can see from opinion poll and the extraordinary win in Copeland , there be currently a bedrock of support for Theresa May , the Prime Minister . although she back Remain in the referendum campaign , she have now take up the mantle of Brexit and make some very strong speech . many in the country believe that when Mrs May say Brexit mean Brexit , she really do mean it . there be even some speculation that perhaps Ukip could do a deal with the Tories to defeat Labour as we now have a similar agenda on the key issue of leave the European Union . I fully reject this as I believe that voter may well be disappoint with what they get . already we have see that there be no desire from the government to reclaim our territorial fishing water , and I be shock when David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , say that free movement of people may continue for many year . I believe that Ukip need to bide its time as there will be many Eurosceptics who , by the end of the year , will be ask themselves why this be all take so long . I still believe that unless this government be challenge on Brexit every step of the way , we be likely to see a significant watering down of what people believe they vote for on June @card@ last year . I must confess that I get the result of this election wrong and think that Paul Nuttall would win . however , I do have some grave reservation about the campaign itself , all of which I explain to Paul some week ago . it seem to me that we have take a step backwards . simply send out army of keen volunteer to knock on every door be not a tactic that I believe could work . why would you bother speak to people that do n't even vote in the historic referendum ? I feel we waste too many of our manhour . the atmosphere in the campaign office be much too much like the Ukip of old ; we have to target the electorate in a more scientific and mathematical way . Paul be go to have a tough job on his hand to move aside people who have be in position for year and be simply not up to what a modern political party need to do to win . in many way , the hard part of lead Ukip be the internal management . that say , Paul will have many strong friend and donor around him to carry out this vital task . there be those inside the party that believe Ukip need to become more mainstream in its policy statement . Douglas Carswell and those around him feel awkward and embarrassed at the subject of immigration and think we should soft pedal on this issue . indeed our platform in Stoke be not particularly strong on control of our border . my view be that Ukip be a radical party , or it be nothing . as this week ' s immigration statistic show , a staggering @card@ people come into Britain from Romania and Bulgaria alone last year . this figure be high than anyone would have suggest back in @card@ . attitude be harden across the United Kingdom and the rest of the European Union , too . it be the issue in British politics that Ukip need to own , because once Article @card@ be trigger , I fear there may be a flood of people rush to get into our country before - as they see it - the door close . despite my criticism of the campaign and my disappointment with the result , there be still million of Ukip voter out there . they be happy and please that by switch their vote to Ukip they be able to get an EU referendum and ultimately get historic change in our country . with Jeremy Corbyn remain as Labour leader , I be confident that we can push harder still into the old Labour vote . I be also confident that Paul Nuttall be still the right man to do this and he have my full support . there be inevitably high and low lead any political party and this will have be a very bruising experience for our leader . as I say before , what he must do now be bide his time and wait for opportunity that will come again . he must own the immigration issue in a way that no other party can , and he need to make radical internal reform . I have know Paul for many year . he be a good man who be fiercely patriotic and want to do the right thing . there be many that will help him achieve what this party be capable of . and for those who be please by our disappointment in Stoke , I say this : you ' ve not hear the last of Ukip yet . follow Nigel Farage on Twitter @ Nigel_Farage ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
history be make as MP finally back Brexit ; Victory for May over the Remainers as Commons pass Article @card@ bill with huge majority
Theresa May secure a historic Brexit victory last night as her plan to take Britain out of the European Union receive overwhelming backing from MP . they vote by more than four to one in favour of trigger Article @card@ in a vote the government have initially attempt to avoid , until compel to by the Supreme Court . the legislation will now pass to the House of Lords without a single amendment , which minister say would make it ` ` almost impossible ' ' for pro-European peer to block Brexit . David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , say : ` ` we ' ve see a historic vote tonight - a big majority for get on with negotiate our exit from the EU and a strong new partnership with its member state . ` ` it have be a serious debate , a healthy debate , with contribution from MP represent all part of the UK , and I respect the strong view on all side . ` ` the decision on EU membership have be make by the people we serve . it be now time for everyone , whichever way they vote in the referendum , to unite to make a success of the important task at hand for our country . ' ' ` ` Sir Bill Cash , chairman of the European Union scrutiny committee , say : ` ` this be a historic moment . Britain be now leave the European union after four decade . ' ' ` ` Dominic Raab , a former minister , add that the result send out a ` ` clear message to the Lords ' ' . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , say : ` ` I never think I ' d see the day where the House of Commons overwhelmingly vote for Britain to leave the European union . ' ' the government now need the approval of the Lords , where the conservative do not have a majority . there have be suggestion that an alliance of pro-European Tory , Labour and Liberal Democrat peer be plot to join force in a bid to frustrate Brexit . but minister say that the 372-strong Commons majority send a ` ` clear message ' ' to the Lords and warn peer that it would provoke a ` ` constitutional crisis ' ' if they try to block Brexit . a Government source tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` it would signal a massive blow and could trigger a lot of debate about the end of the Lords if they try to block . the MP who be elect and send by the people have vote emphatically in favour of Brexit . ' ' Mrs May successfully see off a series of rebellion by Conservative MP which have threaten to impede the progress of the legislation . Conservative peer have be ban from leave the country at the end of the month as a part of an attempt to prevent Brexit stall in the Lords . while the government be confident the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill will pass its second reading , there be concern that hostile amendment could be pass . high-profile Tory peer such as Baroness Brady , Lord Lloyd-Webber and Lord Fellowes be likely to be call on to cast their ballot . one Westminster insider say the Government whip have order ` ` everyone who be not dead , lame or senile ' ' to come to the Lords to vote on the bill in sitting between Feb @card@ and March @card@ . two former Tory chancellor warn that peer would be threaten their own existence if they frustrate the government ' s attempt to start talk about Britain ' s exit from the EU . Lord Lamont of Lerwick say : ` ` I think it would be very difficult for the public to understand how an unelected house could thwart the will of the electorate . ' ' Lord Lawson of Blaby add : ` ` the constitutional position be clear and they should not go against it . ' ' Editorial Comment : page @card@
stay in single market ' will bring 12m EU migrant ' ; Research group warn that open border with EU will push school , service and housing to break point
a wave of migrant , large than the combined population of Bulgaria , Latvia and Lithuania , will come to Britain if the UK stay in the single market after Brexit , a think-tank have warn . an analysis by Migration Watch , a research group that describe itself as independent and non-political , find that unless free movement be curb after Brexit , more than @card@ million people will come to Britain in the next @card@ year , put an increase strain on public service . it warn that the scope for ` ` a significant reduction ' ' in the rate of immigration be ` ` extremely limited ' ' if Britain remain within the single market and have to retain acceptance of the European Union ' s free movement rule . the group ' S analysis add to mount pressure on Theresa May , the Prime Minister , to formally rule out remain in the single market and adopt the so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . earlier this week , Lord King , a former head of the Bank of England , say the government should stop ` ` pretend ' ' Britain would remain in the market after Brexit . migration Watch UK vice chairman Alp Mehmet say : ` ` this research spell out the very serious consequence for our society of net migration continue at its present scale with membership of the single market result in a relentless increase in our population . ` ` an increase of anything like @card@ million in just @card@ year be , quite simply , unacceptable to the British public and certainly not what they vote for in the referendum , ' ' he warn . the most recent official figure show that the estimated total international net migration - the difference between the number of people arrive and leave the UK - be at a near-record @card@ in the @card@ month to July . migration Watch suggest that net immigration of both EU and non-EU people be likely to remain at more than @card@ per year in the medium to long term unless Britain quit the single market . net migration from the EU alone will stay at around @card@ as worker be draw by the prospect of high UK wage and more job . the report say the UK ' s minimum wage remain three time high than that of Poland , five time high than in Romania and six time high than in Bulgaria , while migrant would also continue to be attract to Britain because of high youth unemployment rate in southern Europe . ` ` at a time when the UK government be seek to close the budget deficit it be hard to see where the money will come from to provide the additional school , GP surgery , hospital and housing , not to speak of how the country ' S road and rail network will cope with such rapid growth , ' ' the report say . and it warn that the current housing crisis would worsen , add : ` ` we would have to build a new home every four and a half minute just to house the new migrant and their family . ' ' Migration Watch have urge Mrs May to introduce a work permit system , say EU citizen should have visa-free access , unless they wish to work . it say : ` ` we estimate that this would reduce net migration from the EU by about @card@ a year . ' ' some @card@ people be arrest during a crackdown on alleged illegal working by immigrant in nail bar . the raid , part of Operation Magnify , take place between Nov @card@ and Dec @card@ . immigration officer go to more than @card@ business across the UK . the majority of those detain be Vietnamese national .
Scotland Holidaymakers face Brexit sterling ' rip off '
HOLIDAYMAKERS be be hit by ` ` disgraceful ' ' exchange rate profiteer amid Brexit uncertainty , expert warn after several airport outlet offer less than a euro to the pound . consumer champion Martin Lewis , of www.MoneySupermarket.com , criticise financial company for take advantage as one lead airport buy at ( Euro ) @card@ and sell at just @card@ cent . the official rate close at ( Euro ) @card@ on Friday . tweet a picture of an exchange rate board that show buy-sell spread have edge to more than a third , Mr Lewis write : ` ` no wonder they shout at me ' you ' re not allow to photograph that ' . disgraceful exchange rate profiteer . ' ' David Buik , a market commentator for lead stockbroker Panmure Gordon , say : ` ` the foreign exchange system be not down to Brexit alone ... but the pound be under pressure and we be back to the volatility day . it be somewhat inevitable that they will capitalise on vulnerable people . ' ' Holidaymakers be offer ( Euro ) @card@ for a pound at several airport on Friday after a torrid day in the market follow the overnight ` ` flash crash ' ' . investor be this morning brace for the pound to fall further , fear continued volatility would result from the government ' s ` ` hard Brexit ' ' stance . the Bank of England have ask the Bank for International Settlements to study possible cause for Friday ' s selloff when the pound lose @card@ per cent against the US dollar to reach a 31-year low of $ @card@ in just two minute . Sterling be under intense pressure after Theresa May last week give her assessment of the forthcoming EU divorce .
Brexit unit ' s legal bill exceed £250,000 in two month
the new department charge with handle Brexit have spend more than £250,000 on legal advice over the past two month . government lawyer have be pay £33,000 a week to look into the legal implication for Britain leave the EU , accord to official figure . this do not cover the cost of any external legal advice , and the government have reveal it be consider recruit from outside the civil service . ` ` detailed work be under way to establish the department ' s future budget requirement , include for external recruitment , ' ' David Jones , the Brexit minister , tell the Times . the department be create by Theresa May in July , after the leave vote in June ' S referendum . official be still assess the figure require to cover the cost of legal advice over the next @card@ month , during which Mrs May will trigger Article @card@ , the formal mechanism to leave the EU . Nick Clegg , the former deputy prime minister , say : ` ` this huge taxpayer-funded Brexit bill show how illprepared Whitehall be for what will be the big and most complex set of negotiation it have ever attempt . ' ' Dr Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , reveal earlier this week that headhunter work with @card@ office around the world be hope to recruit a ` ` Mark Carney-style ' ' figurehead as the department ' s new permanent secretary , for a salary of £160,000 a year . Mr Carney , a Canadian , be governor of the Bank of England . the news come as senior government source privately complain that pro-EU civil servant who be jealous of the new department be try to frustrate the work of Brexit minister . £33,000 Weekly sum pay to government lawyer for examine the consequence of a British exit from Europe
Carney : Brexit could harm City of London ; Vote to leave the EU could mean an ' extend period of uncertainty likely to push down on demand '
the City of London could lose its position as the world ' S lead financial centre in the event of Brexit , Mark Carney , the Bank of England Governor , have warn . speak to the House of Lords economic affair committee , Mr Carney say that the City ' S strength would ` ` unlikely be enhance ' ' by a withdrawal from the European Union . he add that Brexit would make ` ` it less likely that London would retain its position ' ' . he say that the strength of the British financial centre have be ` ` reinforce by the UK ' s membership of the EU and ease of access to the euro area that it be afford ' ' . however , the Canadian admit that the City ' S strength be ` ` not solely base on that ' ' . Mr Carney suggest that London would remain a financial centre after a vote for Brexit , but ` ` potentially to a different order of magnitude - in other word , small ' ' . it would ` ` retain a position of great importance , but I ' m not sure the adjective preeminent would necessarily apply ' ' . the Governor stress that the City benefit from what he describe as ` ` the great pool of human capital , in my opinion , in financial service ' ' , refer to the substantial skill and experience of those in the sector . he add : ` ` there be tremendous advantage to that . ' ' Mr Carney have previously say that a vote to leave the EU could result in the loss of some British banking job . he tell MP last month that ` ` certain firm would take a view in term of relocation ' ' after a vote for Brexit , and that ` ` we would expect some activity to move . there would be a logic to that . ' ' the Governor also warn on Tuesday that the forthcoming EU referendum may already be hit the wide British economy . he say it have ` ` the potential to reinforce exist vulnerability in relation to financial stability ' ' . the risk be emanate from the UK ' s ` ` very high ' ' current account defi-cit , as well as from property and financial market . ` ` some element of these risk may be begin to manifest , ' ' he say . ` ` a vote to leave the EU might result in an extended period of uncertainty about the economic outlook , include about the prospect for export growth . this uncertainty would be likely to push down on demand in the short run . ' ' Mr Carney warn that Brexit could result in ` ` less growth ' ' as a result of the UK ' s ` ` remarkably high ' ' current account deficit - the size of the gap between money flow in and out of the economy . ` ` the likelihood be that it would become more expensive to fund that defi-cit , ' ' he say , add that this would mean ` ` that there would be less activity in the economy , less growth ' ' . the Canadian chief rebuff those who accuse the Bank of become too political , explain that it be necessary to assess and report ` ` major risk ' ' . Matthew Elliott , chief executive of Vote leave , say : ` ` we be tell the City would be at risk if we do n't join the euro . those claim be wrong then and they be wrong now . London be the financial capital of the world because of its global talent pool , its tax and legal system and the dynamic nature of our economy , not because of our EU membership . ' '
Scotland Ukip target Labour rebel who defy constituent
UKIP last night vow to target the seat of MP who vote in the commons against the plan for leave the European union despite the majority of their constituent support Brexit . a total of seven MP from such area rebel against Theresa May ' s Brexit timetable on Wednesday , in a vote which supporter say give the Prime Minister a ` ` blank cheque ' ' to take Britain out of the EU . the government win a huge mandate for Brexit as @card@ MP back trigger Article @card@ , which begin formal exit negotiation , by the end of March . Labour MP who vote against Mrs May include Graham Allen , whose Nottingham North constituency vote @card@ per cent for leave , and Angela Smith , whose Penistone and Stockbridge seat vote @card@ per cent leave . Paul Farrelly , the Labour MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme , serve in an area that vote @card@ per cent for Brexit and have a slim majority of just @card@ . Labour ' S Barry Sheerman and Chris Evans also oppose the amendment , as do Plaid Cymru ' S Jonathan Roberts and SNP ' S Eilidh Whiteford . Gerard Batten , Ukip ' s Brexit spokesman , tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` these MP have just write their own political epitaph . their action be a clear invitation to Ukip to remove them . ' ' Iain Duncan-Smith , the former work and pension secretary , say most Labour MP have ` ` wake up to the fact that they themselves be in seat that vote to leave ' ' , but that some have ` ` decide they do n't really care ' ' . ` ` Ukip have say they be go to target people , so I know that have have an effect on quite a lot of MP who be worry about what they be go to do over the next couple of year if they be see to be on the wrong side of this argument , ' ' he say . Mr Sheerman tell Ukip to ` ` bring it on ' ' , add that his vote be make with the ` ` long-term interest of my constituent ' ' in mind . Ms Smith say those who vote against the motion ` ` do not vote against Brexit or indeed against trigger Article @card@ , but rather against an unrealistic timetable as far as parliamentary scrutiny be concerned ' ' .
EU leader ' belligerent rhetoric over Brexit will not benefit anyone ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - the rhetoric and manner of some EU leader , include Jean-Claude Juncker , in the wake of the Brexit vote have have all the mark of frustrated imperialist . it be now time for the language of cooperation between friend . that way , the feeling and aspiration of the majority of citizen of all persuasion across Britain and Europe will be truly represented.Richard Manchester Sanderstead , Surrey Sir - what the Brexit agenda should mean be that all EU citizen currently in this country should be allow to stay indefinitely . however , when we trigger Article @card@ and start controlling immigration , then we should equally restrict arrival from both Europe and the rest of the world , accord to our need . Peter H Ashcroft Huntingdon , Cambridgeshire Sir - even in the modern world , export country trade most with those nearby . this arrangement be not just because of transport cost ; it also reflect cultural familiarity and political influence . to sacrifice single market access in order to slow down immigration be economically illiterate , however much it may have be mandated.Ian Wood Bakewell , Derbyshire Sir - why be Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , even consider a scheme which may require Briton to have a visa simply to visit the EU ( report , August @card@ ) ? there be a clear distinction to be make between live and work in a country and holiday there . Briton can currently travel to country as diverse as Armenia and Nicaragua without a visa ; why should we need one to go to France or Spain ? I think Brexit ' S aim be to reduce unnecessary bureaucracy , not add another layer.Adrian Thomas Tadley , Hampshire Sir - I be confuse by the outrage at the idea that we would have to apply for visa in order to travel to Europe once we have leave the EU . visa be standard practice for travel outside the EU already . an extended visa system would allow Britain to gain tight control of our own border , which be what many of those who back Brexit want all along . Jennifer Anderson Oxford Sir - Those who hope for a return to the old-style , blue British passport after Brexit ( report , September @card@ ) may be disappoint . first , the change in format which the passport undergo when it change colour to Burgundy be the result of an international agreement , and be unlikely to revert . secondly , the old passport tend to be black , not blue . my British passport from @card@ be navy blue , but passport issue to me in @card@ and to my late mother in @card@ and @card@ be black . Joseph B Fox Redhill , Surrey
Brexit concern shake the foundation for housebuilders
the housebuilding sector become the main victim of Brexit fear on the FTSE @card@ , after the chance of Britain leave the European Union spike . investor become increasingly nervous after Citigroup estimate the chance of a Brexit have rise to between 30pc to 40pc , from between @card@ to 30pc , after London Mayor Boris Johnson and Justice Secretary Michael Gove join the ' out ' camp . it trigger a sell-off across propertyrelated stock . Berkeley Group sink 160p , or 4.8pc , to £32.03 , Persimmon lose 4.3pc to close at £19.73 , Taylor Wimpey drop 4.7pc to 175p , Barratt Developments slip 4.2pc to 560p and British Land fall 3.1pc to 671p . on the mid-cap index , Bellway dip 5.4pc to £25.02 and Zoopla Property be down 1.2pc at 217.3p . despite lift its rating on UK stock to ` ` overweight ' ' , JPMorgan Cazenove caution : ` ` domestic play , such as homebuilder and retailer , could come under pressure in the case of a Brexit . ' ' in December , Berkeley say London would need few new house if it bow out of the EU . around 40pc of Berkeley ' S sale be to overseas investor in the London market , who perceive the capital city to be ` ` politically and economically stable ' ' , the investment bank say . Mislav Matejka , of JPMorgan Cazenove , warn : ` ` if that perception be impact by Brexit , we could see an impact on demand and London pricing . ' ' the bank believe as long as the vote be ` ` pend ' ' , a degree of uncertainty will blight the sentiment across the housing sector . separately , Bovis Homes report a 20pc rise in pre-tax profit to £160m last year and predict growth would continue , thanks to positive housing market condition . nonetheless , share fall 4pc to 874.5p . on the wide market , Britain ' s benchmarked index charge ahead as oil and miner rally . the FTSE @card@ climb @card@ point , or 1.47pc , to @card@ . Jameel Ahmad , of ForexTime , say the blue chip index have behave in ` ` an unusual way ' ' after the vote on European Union membership be set for June @card@ . ` ` we be now look at the increase threat that corporation might threaten to leave the UK if it be to exit the European Union , and there would be huge risk to the UK market if preliminary poll show that the vote could be as close or be be underestimate as the Scottish Referendum be very famously in September @card@ . ' ' Mining stock become the frontrunner after iron ore soar to a fourmonth high of $ @card@ per tonne , while copper touch a two-week high amid hope of a revival in demand for metal in China . Anglo American hit its high level in four month - up 47.1p , or 10.8pc , to 483.8p . the possible sale of its De Beers headquarters in London also lift the FTSE @card@ stock . separately , Jefferies hike its price target from 215p to 275p for valuation reason . however , in a note entitle ' an uphill battle ' , Christopher LaFemina , say if management successfully implement its radical restructuring plan , the miner ' s share price would ` ` likely have further upside ' ' . he add : ` ` in the near-term , we think Anglo ' s share price depend on whether management can convince investor these plan be credible . ' ' its peer Glencore leap 11.8pc to 132.4p , while BHP Billiton advance 8.5pc to 795p , Rio Tinto add 8.4pc to £20.51 and Antofagasta make gain of 7.7pc to close at 517.5p . however , Jasper Lawler , of CMC Markets , caution : ` ` mining share be still wallow in a hangover from year of excessive production to meet the demand of booming industrial production and construction in China . ' ' elsewhere , share in Home Retail surge 19.9p , or 13pc , to 173.5p after South African furniture retailer Steinhoff make a rival bid for the Argos owner on Friday . earlier this month , the FTSE @card@ group agree to be buy by Sainsbury ' S . Home Retail say it be review the proposal and urge shareholder to take ` ` no action ' ' . Clive Black , of Shore Capital , say : ` ` a counter bid do not come as a surprise to our mind as Sainsbury ' s own bid , which be significantly equity base , effectively put the Argos business in-play . ' ' share in the Sainsbury ' S edge 2.3pc low to close at 255.2p . meanwhile , disappointing fourthquarter earnings dent HSBC in early trade . the FTSE @card@ banking stock slump by as much as 5.4pc to the bottom of the blue chip index , before ease back to close down 4p , or 0.9pc , at 445.9p . Ian Gordon , of Investec , point to the $ 1.5bn bank levy charge in the final three month of @card@ , which he believe ` ` offer a reminder of why HSBC be mistake in its decision last week to retain its UK domicile ' ' . Beaten-up oil major be also among the top gainer , as Brent crude jump by more than 5pc to $ @card@ . the upwards come after the International Energy Agency forecast us shale production would fall this year and next . a decline in the number of active rig in the US also boost the price of oil , amid hope it would lead to reduce output . BP be change hand at 356.7p by close , up 3.9pc , while Royal Dutch Shell B share rise 3.5pc to £16.15 . on the mid-cap index , Amec Foster Wheeler and Tullow Oil be up 4.6pc and 2.2pc , respectively . finally , on Aim , share Eden Research soar 25.5pc to 15.4p after its product 3AEY , an all-natural pesticide that tackle a destructive fungus call Botrytis in table and wine grape , be grant approval in Spain . it will be sell by its partner Sipcam Iberia .
trade union idea on Brexit and Ireland ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - as trade union organisation with member in Britain , Northern Ireland and the Republic , we want a post-Brexit deal that protect their job through frictionless trade in good and service . our union will have member both in and out of the European Union , often work for the same employer . they must continue to have equal guarantee of their basic right at work . and this be not just on Brexit day , but in the aftermath , so that right in Britain and Northern Ireland do n't fall behind the Republic and rest of the EU after Brexit . we be seriously concern about the impact of this process on our member ' job , right and livelihood . Theresa May ' s decision to rule out single market and custom union membership before the negotiation even begin be an historic mistake . all option that facilitate frictionless trade in good and service should be on the table when the UK and EU start negotiate their long-term relationship . trade union play a key role in the Good Friday Agreement . we have decade of experience of negotiation behind us , and we call on the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom to put party manoeuvre behind her . we need politician from all side , and each devolve administration , as well as business and union , involve in negotiate our future . that ' S the only way to prevent the return to a hard border , and ensure that worker do n't pay the price of Brexit . Frances O'Grady General Secretary , Trades Union Congress Patricia King General Secretary , Irish Congress of Trade union Owen Reidy Assistant General Secretary ( Northern Ireland ) , Irish Congress of Trade union
Scotland Ramsay : end the migrant influx will shake Britain out of its laziness ; celebrity chef reject bitter rival Jamie Oliver ' s complaint over effect of Brexit on restaurant trade
BREXIT will shake Britain out of laziness and give homegrown talent a chance to shine , Gordon Ramsay have say . the chef say he be look forward to an end to the ` ` influx ' ' of migrant after Britain leave the European Union and claim it would have a positive effect on the restaurant industry . his optimism contrast with his rival Jamie Oliver , who campaign for Remain and blame the closure of six of his Italian restaurant on the uncertainty that follow the Brexit vote . a curb on migrant labour would create opportunity , Ramsay tell Radio Times . ` ` that level of influx of multinational worker in this country have sort of confirm how lazy as a nation we be - when individual from across the sea be prepare to come and work twice as hard for less money , ' ' he say . ` ` if anything , it ' S a big kick up the a -- -for the industry , and it ' s go to get back to the modern-day apprenticeship . so not only do I welcome that kind of change , but I think it ' s go to put a lot more emphasis on homegrown talent . ' ' there be no love lose between Ramsay and Oliver . ` ` it ' S all very well to spout off now about sugar tax and supermarket . none of that be speak about when he be label-slapping with Sainsbury ' S for @card@ year , ' ' Ramsay say . he be refer to Oliver ' s decade as the face of the supermarket chain , a job report to have earn him £10million . ` ` sadly , the only time he open his mouth be when he ' S get something to promote , ' ' Ramsay add . in August , ask about Ramsay make regular jibe at him , Oliver say : ` ` Times ` ` he ' S get four kid and I ' ve get five kid and I do n't want to be slagging off some kid ' dad on telly . it ' S not nice . ' ' it appear to be an attempt to bury RADIO the hatchet , but Ramsay say the remark be hurtful because his wife , Tana , miscarry their fifth child last year . she be ` ` mortify ' ' by Oliver ' S remark and Ramsay say he will never talk to Oliver again until he apologise . the Michelin-starred chef give the interview to promote a new ITV documentary about the cocaine trade . he say teenager should be teach about cocaine , explain that he sit his child down and show them how the drug be often cut with cement powder or battery acid . it ` ` scare the life out of them ' ' , he say . he add that child should be give drug education in the same way that they receive sex education . Ramsay say cocaine be rife in the restaurant industry , recall an occasion last Christmas when a customer ask for a side plate to be change because he have use it to snort the class-A drug in the bathroom . a chef at a celebrity book launch press a foil wrap of cocaine into his palm during a handshake , Ramsay claim . on another occasion , while cooking for a dinner party he be ask to dust the soufflé with cocaine mix into the icing sugar . he decline . ' that level of influx of multinational worker have sort of confirm how lazy as a nation we be '
Scotland Hammond ' contempt ' for Fox will wreck truce ; Ministers ' rapprochement over Brexit predict to fail because of Chancellor ' S ' superior ' attitude
the Brexit truce between Philip Hammond and Liam Fox will ` ` inevitably fall apart ' ' because the Chancellor hold the International Trade Secretary in ` ` contempt ' ' , a Tory minister have claim . Mr Hammond and Dr Fox appear to settle their difference with a joint article in the Sunday Telegraph say Britain will completely leave the Single Market and Customs Union after Brexit in @card@ . however , fellow minister express scepticism and Eurosceptic Conservative MP suggest that Mr Hammond have be force to ` ` row back ' ' by Theresa May . the claim be strongly deny by Downing Street source . one Tory minister tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` I do n't believe it . Hammond do not have a high regard for Fox , he hold him in contempt . he ' S very superior . inevitably this truce will fall apart . ' ' however a Whitehall official insist that they be unite . ` ` I ' ve see them work very closely together , they both take their responsibility seriously , I believe they do have a strong working relationship . ' ' after a summer of bitter Cabinet infighting , the Chancellor of the Exchequer and Dr Fox , the International Trade Secretary , appear to bury the hatchet with a joint pledge that there will be a fix transition period after leave the EU . in an article write for the Sunday Telegraph , the minister - represent the Remain and leave wing of the Conservative Party - say this will be ` ` time limited ' ' and design to avoid a ` ` cliff edge ' ' that could damage British business . although they do not say how long this period will last , it will not represent an attempt to stay in the EU indefinitely , they say . however critic point out that there be still likely to be significant disagreement over the scale of the divorce bill and the length of the transition period . Nigel Farage , the former Ukip leader , say : ` ` nothing new www.here.No mention of time , cost or immigration . just about party unity and not the country as usual . ` ` we vote to leave the EU , not for a transition period after two year of talk . government weak . ' ' it come after Mr Hammond come under fire from Cabinet colleague after he suggest in the Prime Minister ' s absence on holiday that he want Britain to be able to trade freely with the EU for four year after Brexit . Dr Fox then hit back day later say that any transition period would have to end before the next general election , which be due to take place in @card@ . it be also claim that Dr Fox and Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , have be keep out of the loop on plan to allow EU citizen to continue to come to the UK after Brexit , which force Number @card@ to make clear that freedom of movement will end in March @card@ . David Jones , a former Brexit minister , say : ` ` it have get all the hallmark of no @card@ have have a serious conversation with Philip Hammond . ` ` Hammond have row back significantly from the position he state three week ago - he be accept we be leave both the Customs Union and Single Market . ` ` the only thing that remain an issue be exactly how long this transition period will be . it ' S a fairly clear assertion of authority by the Prime Minister . ' ' the claim of Cabinet split emerge as David Miliband , a former Labour foreign secretary , call for a second referendum on Brexit and describe it as an ` ` act of unparalleled economic self-harm ' ' .
shipping be key to our post-Brexit success
since the vote to leave the European Union , the future of British business have be the subject of extensive and heated debate . Peter Hargreaves , the billionaire donor to the Leave.EU campaign , be one of many lead business people to suggest that the good model for Britain , post Brexit , be that of Singapore , where there be few barrier to company who want to move there and , in some case , huge state incentive for those that do . but claim that in order to survive after Brexit the UK shipping sector will have to follow the Singaporean model by pander to business can be readily dismiss . unlike Singapore , the UK have numerous advantage that have allow British shipping to flourish . in spite of the doom and gloom surround Brexit , the UK ' S shipping will be the backbone of a truly ` ` global Britain ' ' once we eventually leave the European Union . this global Britain will be define by new trade agreement and great attention , in diplomatic and economic term , pay to the Commonwealth and emerge market . it will reprise Britain ' s position as an international trading hub . and while it ' S true that Singapore have grab a large market share of international shipping in recent year , it have not be a one-way street : over the past year , a number of ship company have move operation away from it . the UK do n't have to share the same fate . it have more to offer than low financial barrier and less red tape , and the success of the sector must not be underestimate : it support almost a million UK job and deliver 95pc of international trade . Britain , it bear remember , have a rich seafaring history and continue to be an influential maritime power . the International Maritime Organisation , the regulator of global shipping , be base in London . English language and law be universally respect in global business . more than that , in fact : English law serve as the de facto law for the majority of global business . and when you consider Britain ' S location geographically , its language and its time zone , it ' S clear to see that it be almost uniquely place to trade good seamlessly around the globe . London remain a much soughtafter business and industrial centre , and contribute greatly to make British shipping profitable . the Menon report on lead Maritime Capitals of the World @card@ place London fifth . a cluster of financial , insurance and legal service in the City make it an attractive base that allow company to conduct all their affair in one location . but the UK ' s position as a world-leading shipping hub do n't just hinge on the prosperity of London . the country be home to many worldclass cluster of maritime service , strengthen its overall offering on the global stage . as an island nation , we be accessible and well-equip to send and receive good at several point along our vast shoreline - the long of all EU member state . port include Felixstowe , Glasgow , Liverpool and Southampton all have enviable facility for international shipping . extensive infrastructure throughout the UK allow the swift delivery of international good . few country in the world can boast of have the same logistical power that the UK have . few country , too , can compete with British tonnage tax : a versatile tax system that encourage enterprise in the shipping sector . in Britain , the tax levy on ship company depend on the total tonnage of the ship fleet and not the company ' S profit . it be n't unique to the UK , but British tonnage tax be hugely competitive , and represent a very attractive incentive . the UK also continue to have a strong voice within the international community . just as its diplomatic , political and economic power remain undented by Brexit , so do the future of its grow shipping industry . we be tell on an almost daily basis that our post-Brexit future look bleak , and we be on a sure path to global insignificance . but far from face a period of decline , the UK will thrive in the post-Brexit world . and what ' s more , it be British shipping that will be the very foundation on which we build our post-Brexit success as a nation . Guy Platten be the chief executive of the UK Chamber of Shipping ' Britain have a rich seafaring history and remain a maritime power '
Davis fail to rule out Tory leadership bid
David Davis have warn that a Tory leadership contest would be ` ` catastrophic ' ' for Brexit negotiation , but refuse to rule out the possibility that he could challenge Theresa May while the talk be ongoing . Priti Patel , the International Development Secretary who be tip for a potential leadership bid , also fail to rule herself out of the running in a series of interview yesterday . Mrs May ' S position be so precarious that MP know she could be one more error from be force to step down , with several rival wait in the wing should the opportunity arise . Mr Davis , the Brexit Secretary , Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be see as the frontrunner to take over before the next election . but there be those within the Conservative Party who believe it be now time to skip a generation and look to the @card@ intake of MP for the next leader , include , potentially , Ms Patel . Mr Johnson have already rule out run to be Tory leader until after Brexit be deliver in @card@ and Mr Davis be invite to do the same yesterday . appear on BBC one ' S the Andrew Marr Show , Mr Davis be ask : ` ` you could say , like Boris Johnson , you ' re not go to stand against her until Brexit be do , probably not ever ? ' ' he pass up the opportunity , say : ` ` no , look , I ' m not go to get into it . I really be - it ' s self-indulgent . ' ' ask if a Tory leadership contest would be ` ` catastrophic ' ' for Brexit talk , he say : ` ` Yes . listen ... I happen to think we have get a very good prime minister . ' '
Scotland SNP Brexit chief attack for say lack of deal could help independence
Nicola Sturgeon ' S Brexit minister be yesterday accuse of ` ` willing ' ' Theresa May ' s negotiation with Brussels to fail after he say there be a ` ` high ' ' chance of a breakdown that could lead to Scottish independence . Mike Russell admit the odd of failure be less than @card@ per cent but claim it be more likely to happen near the start of the two-year negotiation period and the Scottish Government be work on contingency plan . he say the most likely issue to derail talk be the moot £100billion ` ` divorce ' ' demand from the EU and predict the UK will try to re-join in @card@ year . but the Scottish Conservatives accuse him of want the talk to fail after he predict that even a ` ` moderate ' ' Brexit deal could lead to independence , and they urge him to get behind Britain ' S negotiation . the row break out as Ms Sturgeon yesterday accuse the Tory of ` ` poison the well ' ' of the Brexit talk by refuse to unilaterally guarantee the right of EU citizen in the UK . however , the Daily Telegraph disclose earlier this month how the EU have be plot for week to thwart the Prime Minister ' S plan to secure a reciprocal deal for EU migrant and British expats in Europe . Mrs May have warn that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' as she set out her stall with EU leader and Mr Russell say he think ` ` the chance of the UK not stick with the negotiation be high ' ' . he tell Holyrood ' s Europe committee : ` ` I do n't think they be necessarily @card@ or @card@ per cent but they ' re high . it be in our mind that we would have to be prepare in those circumstance . ' ' the former education minister predict the UK would try to return to the EU in @card@ year but say ` ` it will have lose @card@ year ' influence and @card@ year of progress and @card@ year of prosperity . ' ' Professor Adam Tomkins , the Scottish Tories ' constitution spokesman , say : ` ` Mike Russell ' s hysterical outburst give the impression that he ' d love nothing more than for the UK to fail in these talk . ' ' he say this be a ` ` disgrace ' ' for a minister .
Scotland Why Sturgeon ' s grand tour of Europe be give a chilly reception ; Brexit : Scotland ; despite intense diplomatic effort by the SNP leader , there be little appetite in Brussels to complicate Brexit with a Scottish sideshow
when Nicola Sturgeon claim at her independence referendum press conference to have win ` ` incredible ' ' support for Scotland across Europe , she give a clear indication that she expect the EU to grant single market access in double time after independence . Scotland ' S First Minister have embark on an extensive tour of European capital and the power base of Brussels since the Brexit vote , which have result in a flurry of photo opportunity and press release . however , the reality behind the spin be far less impressive , with her official attempt to hide the fact that she be force to meet a German minister in a restaurant because he would not allow formal talk in a government building and her Brexit minister infuriate the Spanish government with mislead claim about non-existent talk between them . even a photo opportunity with Scotland ' s EU consul and diplomat backfire when it emerge one man in the picture be a pest contoller from Paisley who be Estonia ' s ` ` honorary consul ' ' . although there be huge sympathy for Scotland ' s predicament in the corridor of Brussels , after its healthy @card@ per cent Remain vote , foreign MEPs say this be play second fiddle to the ` ` Realpolitik ' ' of maintain good relation with the UK after Brexit . ask in the Commons yesterday whether she have come across support for an independent Scotland join the EU , Theresa May say : ` ` I do not detect any such support . ' ' Anders Vistisen , a Danish MEP , estimate it would take an independent Scotland between four and six year to get EU membership but only if it commit to the euro and cut its huge deficit , which be high than Greece ' S . ` ` although there be a lot of sympathy , the problem be the interest of have good relation with England massively outweigh help Scotland , ' ' he say . although he predict a few ` ` hardcore federalist ' ' would campaign for Scottish independence in a second referendum , he conclude that the vast majority will not want to antagonise Mrs May during the Brexit talk . the First Minister be quick out of the block after the vote last June , visit Brussels the very next week for meeting with Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , Martin Schulz , the European Parliament president and Guy Verhofstadt , the former Belgian prime minister who be now one of the Commission ' s lead Brexit negotiator . the photo opportunity of her shake hand with such senior dignitary be suppose to create an impression that Ms Sturgeon be carve out her own foreign policy but she be soon give a harsh lesson on where the real power lie in Europe . speak the same day not far away , follow a European Council meeting in Brussels , François Hollande , the French president , rule out any negotiation with Scotland and make it clear that talk would only take place with the UK . Mariano Rajoy , the Spanish prime minister no doubt mindful of the Basque or Catalan dimension , go even further when he state unequivocally that ` ` if the United Kingdom leave ... Scotland leaf too ' ' . pa BARLOW/ Germany , Denmark and the Czech Republic also make it clear that they consider Scotland ' s situation to be an ` ` internal ' ' British issue . jane Ms Sturgeon then host a summit of EU consul general at Bute House , her official residence in Edinburgh where she stage her referendum press conference on Monday . the Scottish Government issue a photograph of all the attendee pose together in the drawing room . but it later emerge that some of the attendee have honorary title , with little power and no consular function . Iain Lawson , the honorary consul for Estonia , be a pest controller from Paisley whose link with the Baltic state begin when he visit Tallinn with the Tartan Army in the 1990s . other attendee include British lawyer and a physiotherapist . however , Ms Sturgeon appear to have pull off a diplomatic coup in August @card@ when the Scottish Government announce that she have meet Michael Roth , then a junior minister in Angela Merkel ' S cabinet , in Berlin . the meeting be not publicise to the Scottish press before the trip and a photograph be issue of the pair in the German foreign office . but it later emerge as a result of a Freedom of Information request that the meeting be actually hold in a nearby restaurant , call Vau . Michael Russell , her Brexit Minister , then make a major mistake in November after he be catch make inaccurate claim to Brussels diplomat that five million Scot have vote Remain in the referendum and that the only MSPs to vote for Brexit be four Tory . more seriously , he also indicate that the Scottish government be in talk with the Spanish over a special Brexit deal , despite them be vigorously oppose to set such a precedent give their own problem with separatist movement . his comment reach the ear of Alfonso Dastis , the Spanish Foreign Affairs Minister , and Esteban González Pons , who lead the Spanish delegation of MEPs in the European Parliament ' s large political grouping . their retribution be swift and harsh . Mr González Pons agree to an interview with this newspaper in which he make clear that Spain would reject any attempt by Ms Sturgeon to stay in the EU single market if the rest of the UK come out . he say the Spanish government be plan to be the United Kingdom ' s ` ` good friend ' ' during the Brexit negotia-tions and they share ` ` the same point of view about the Scottish question ' ' . in the same month , Alex Salmond hold talk in Switzerland about Scotland become a member of the European Free Trade Association ( Efta ) , the four member of which also get access to the EU single market . Monica Maeland , Norway ' s trade minister , tell the meeting that Scottish membership be not possible because it be not a sovereign state and advise Scotland to ` ` talk to the government in the UK about these matter ' ' . but the Efta option , otherwise know as the Norway model , be the one that Ms Sturgeon be understand to be consider as her first step , after win an independence referendum , rather than full EU membership . the fight for the Union some big fish within the ' no ' campaign Keith Cochrane/ Sir Ian Wood Selection of a senior Scottish businessman for the Unionist side would highlight the economic argument . Mr Cochrane , a former CEO of Weir Group , and Sir Ian Wood , the oil tycoon , be among possible candidate amid a grow feeling that a non-political figure be best-placed to take on the SNP . Mr Cochran have say Brexit increase the need for the Union , add that ` ` uncertainty be unhelpful ' ' . Sir Ian play a pivotal role in @card@ , warn SNP prediction for North Sea oil be too high . Lord Darling he run the successful @card@ better together campaign and take on the SNP in head-to-head debate . he be unlikely to reprise the role but have show he be ready to join the fight . he tell BBC Radio @card@ ' S today : ` ` if Nicola Sturgeon ' S argument be OK , the UK vote to leave but Scotland be different . what ' s the deal between Scotland and Europe ? we simply do n't know ... I think it ' s highly unlikely Spain for example , would allow a situation ... that somehow the UK can leave but Scotland can have its own carve-out . ' ' Gordon Brown the ex-PM make a passionate intervention in @card@ , but Labour will not campaign alongside anyone else in the wake of its decimation in Scotland at the general election . Mr Brown say : ` ` Scotland belong to all of us ... what we have build together by sacrifice and share , let no narrow nationalism split asunder . ' ' Theresa May/ Ruth Davidson The PM will be central but will not lead . for the highly rate Ruth Davidson , the leader of the Scottish Tories , it would be nigh on impossible to lead a cross-party campaign for a ` ` no ' ' vote . however , she have already take the fight to Ms Sturgeon , accuse her of go ` ` full Donald Trump ' ' over a series of tweet . JK Rowling the author be see as a potential leader for the unionist campaign give her widespread appeal . she be see as nonpartisan and an outspoken critic of Jeremy Corbyn . in the last independence campaign she directly take on nationalist who abuse her on Twitter . it be think unlikely she will lead but could make a series of intervention .
it ' s time for the City to move on from the gloom
oops : another good thing we be tell have now become impossible have just happen . and another , and another . in fact , it sometimes feel as if we be see several impossible thing every day before breakfast , and not just when it come to global geopolitics . there have be an avalanche of positive business story over the past few week , with company after company announce a new investment or a fresh job-create initiative . in most case , these be the kind of project we be tell would no longer be possible after the Brexit vote . take commercial property , the one sector that even I be worry about in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote . yet the City of London have just give the green light to one Undershaft , which will become the Square Mile ' s tall building and London ' s second-tallest after the Shard . it be back by Singapore ' s Aroland Holdings . next door , the Pinnacle at @card@ Bishopsgate , which have be dormant for year , seem permanently stick at the foundation , be now shoot up again : it will be the City ' s second tall building . the developer - French firm Axa - hesitate briefly before and after the referendum but have decide to press on . further East , the Chinese be open their pocketbook : Greenland , a developer , be build Europe ' s tall residential tower , Spire London , in Canary Wharf , and another consortium want to redevelop the still largely derelict Royal Albert Dock , just next to City Airport and the Excel centre . ABP London and Citic Group want to turn the area into a major new business hub : they want to erect low-rise block intend for Chinese firm seek European or global headquarters , in what would be a major boost for UK-Asian trade tie . the developer have just sign up four major Chinese bank to finance the first stage of the £1.7bn plan and say that demand be high . in an interview with the Wharf , the local paper , ABP ' S chief operate officer John Miu be ask whether he think there have be any impact on the project from Brexit . his answer : ` ` the only issue be uncertainty . but I see in the long run it will be beneficial to the UK as a whole , economically and competitively . ' ' the Chinese be also pour cash into the UK commercial property market in other way , snap up numerous building - include Societe Generale ' s London headquarters and spend an estimated £4bn in this way in @card@ alone . in the immediate aftermath of the referendum , many property fund be hit by redemption and force to temporarily close , spread panic ; they have now all reopen , with Aviva the last of the big name to do so earlier this month . all of these developer and investor may be wrong for other reason , of course : the commercial property market look fragile regardless of geopolitics . the sector be incredibly cyclical and investor have a tendency to pick the bad possible time to spend money . there be always boom and bust , and yield be already far too low well before anybody have the faint inkling that Brexit be a realistic possibility . but it be clear that investor be as bullish about the UK and London as they have always be and that be great news . the same be true of the big US tech firm : Amazon , Google and Apple be all hire and spend in London . Apple ' s new headquarters in Battersea will anchor that scheme ; Google be help to build the new King ' s Cross business district ; and Amazon be also expand dramatically . the news be even good for steel : Tata Steel could sell its speciality UK business to Liberty House , save @card@ job . as to the car industry , it be plan to expand , though unfortunately some state subsidy appear to be involve . Jaguar Land Rover want to build its new generation electric car in Britain , and Nissan and all the other will grow their UK operation . it ' s time for those City professional still in denial to readjust and to make the most of the new order . the economy may well dip temporarily at some point , but there will be no Armageddon . the challenge of Brexit be now to get it right . it be time , therefore , for as many academic brain as possible to dedicate themselves to build the most successful post-Brexit economy possible . there be a great model to follow . a group of top , public-minded lawyer be help map out a new route for an independent UK competition policy . the Brexit Competition Law Working Group have be convene by the excellent Ali Nikpay , a partner at Gibson Dunn & Crutcher and one of the world ' s pre-eminent expert in European competition law ; its chairman be Sir John Vickers , who have be among other thing chief economist of the Bank of England , Director General of the Office of Fair trading and chair of the Independent Commission on Banking . other member include John Fingleton ( another former boss of the OFT ) , Richard Whish , Amelia Fletcher , Jon Turner and Sir Nicholas Forwood . the group have already publish two fascinating paper . the late , by Sir Philip Lowe , argue ( among other thing ) that ` ` there be every reason to believe that the Competition and Markets Authority ( CMA ) post-Brexit will be able to maintain and strengthen its position as one of the lead competition authority in the world ... [ Brexit ] can only enhance the influence of the UK in the handling of competition issue on worldwide market . ' ' I would recommend that anybody with an interest take a look at the site - and that other City profession create similar work group . the government and the civil service ca n't do everything - they need the urgent help of lead practitioner in every field to help build a successful post-Brexit Britain . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk ' it be clear investor be as bullish about the UK and London as they have always be '
MP aim for Brexit vote before court appeal ; Tory Eurosceptics seek to pre-empt legal process with parliamentary debate to trigger Article @card@
Tory MP be plan to force a Commons vote on trigger the Brexit process to stop Parliament be dictate to by the Supreme Court . the news come as the Scottish government launch its own legal action to try to frustrate plan for Brexit . British government lawyer be give the formal go-ahead to challenge the High Court ruling at the Supreme Court yesterday . however , Eurosceptic Conservative MP be poise to press their case with Commons authority . they be hope that a backbench debate - follow by a vote on trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty - will satisfy a High Court rule last week that Parliament must have a say . the government be under pressure to pass a law pave the way for Britain to leave the EU and not wait for the Supreme Court to hear an appeal on the High Court rule next month . MP meet Jeremy Wright , the Attorney General , on Monday to raise concern that a long parliamentary process might delay the start of the Brexit process . David Davis , the Exiting the European Union Secretary , admit that peer and MP could vote on a bill authorise Article @card@ before the start of the four-day hearing on Dec @card@ . the Tory MP ' draft legislation would say that the Prime Minister can start Brexit talk at any point between now and the end of March next year . Sir Gerald Howarth , a Eurosceptic Tory MP back the plan , say : ` ` the public can not be leave in limbo . industry and commerce want certainty . ' ' a Government source admit a vote in the Commons could help its case in the Supreme Court , but minister could not endorse the debate because it could be see as pressure the justice . Nicola Sturgeon say her government would argue in the court that the Scottish Parliament should have to consent to the trigger of Article @card@ . although Ms Sturgeon deny that she be try to infuriate the rest of the UK , the motion would allow MSPs to block Brexit as a majority of member in the Holyrood chamber be vigorously oppose to leave the EU . the Prime Minister ' s deputy official spokesman say : ` ` it be a matter for the Scottish government whether they apply to intervene in this case . we be firmly of the opinion that it ' S the UK government that will deliver on the instruction of the British electorate as set out in the referendum result . ' ' in an interview with Sky News , Theresa May urge Remain supporter to get over the fact Britain be leave the EU . she say : ` ` people vote to leave ... and what I ' m focus on and what I ' m determine to do be to deliver on that and make a success of it . ' ' Mr Davis be today expect to outline a plan to share civil service analysis of leave the EU with the devolve administration and offer ` ` informal engagement ' ' with the Scottish , Welsh and northern Irish government . Philip Johnston , Alan Cochrane : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@
may plot a new year comeback that will shift the focus from Brexit , say insider
Theresa May will use Damian Green ' s downfall as an opportunity to relaunch her premiership in the new year by create a legacy that go beyond Brexit . the Prime Minister be consider create a new Whitehall department to concentrate on a major domestic issue , such as housing and infrastructure , rather than replace Mr Green with another First Secretary of State . she will also make a third major speech on Brexit to set out exactly what she want Britain ' s future relationship with the EU to be . this come as ally of Mr Green say his 40-year friendship with Mrs May have ` ` cool ' ' as a result of his enforce resignation because he resent the way she have handle the matter . after a turbulent @card@ , Mrs May want to seize the initiative after her Christmas break . she be desperate to avoid be remember as ` ` the Brexit Prime Minister ' ' and want to make meaningful progress in area such as housing , education and social mobility . one option under consideration be the creation of a new Department for Housing and Infrastructure , merge some of the responsibility currently hold by Sajid Javid , the Communities and Local Government Secretary , and Chris Grayling , Transport Secretary . a Whitehall source say : ` ` the Prime Minister have two week over Christmas to think about what to do next . she will start the new year want to keep move forward on Europe but she also have a lot of domestic priority . one possibility be create a new Whitehall department with a new Cabinet post to go with it . it would be something big , such as housing and infrastructure . that be really important to her . ' ' a Ministry of Housing be create in @card@ to rebuild Britain ' s housing stock after the Second World War , and be head by Harold Macmillan before he become prime minister . it be merge with the Ministry of Transport in @card@ to form the Department for the Environment . Mrs May could yet decide to replace Mr Green with another First Secretary of State . Mr Green feel bitter after it emerge that Mrs May have wait two day to inform him he have be find in breach of the ministerial code of conduct . a friend of Mr Green say : ` ` it ' S fair to say he be not overly happy with the way this have drag on and be drag out . I hope when the dust settle he and Theresa will be able to speak again as friend , but in the short term he be disappoint with the way this have play out . his relationship with Theresa May have cool . ' ' Fraser Nelson : page @card@ ' it ' S fair to say he [ Mr Green ] be not overly happy with the way this have drag on and be drag out '
the historic turning-point when betray Brexit seem the only way ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - whatever Theresa may read at Oxford , it can not have be history . Danegeld never work . this Government and Parliament , dominate by Remainers , be betray Brexit and allow the EU to treat us with contempt . Mrs May and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , be the Chamberlain and Halifax of their day , but where be the modern Churchill ? Rodney G James Brasschaat , Antwerp , Belgium sir - Charles Moore ' s brilliant article on his disillusionment with our Brexit approach ( Comment , December @card@ ) reflect an issue that be rarely mention , in the welter of acrimony about trade talk , but be the drive force behind my decision to vote to leave . that be : the loss of our national self-respect . for year we have , in effect , be govern by foreigner . this be a state of affair that would have appall the million who die in world war defend this country ' S freedom . the EU be now routinely insult and humiliate us , with no apparent reaction . be I alone in yearning for an aggressive approach from this country that put them firmly in their place ? Clive Green Bristol sir - many who vote to leave the EU will be horrify to read of Mrs May ' s late giveaway proposal to allow the European Court of Justice to make ruling above our own Supreme Court ( report , December @card@ ) . she have offer too many concession and a lot of cash already without secure anything much . if she add this late offering to Brussels , she will effectively have reverse the will of the British people , and be know as the Conservative PM who lead to the death of her own party . Suzanne Greenhill Bishops Cleeve , Gloucestershire sir - since its inception , the Supreme Court have follow the jurisprudence of both the ECJ and the ECHR ( European Court of Human Rights ) . after Brexit , clarity and guidance be need on how past judgment of the Supreme Court be to be regard . whatever the future legal relationship between the UK and the EU , the judgment of both the ECJ and the ECHR will still be submit and rely upon as persuasive authority . James Keeley , Barrister London WC1 sir - Mrs May now think Brexit do n't mean Brexit . what do it mean , pray ? John K Greenwood Southampton sir - my congratulation to Theresa May and her government for secure a new first for Britain , and indeed , for the world . we be to be the first and only country in history to purchase a trade deficit . M J W Daley London W4
Labour ' s double game over Brexit Body : in February , the House of Commons pass the legislation to trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty and begin the process of Brexit by @card@ vote to @card@ . at that point , even those MP who dislike the use of a referendum to supplant the decision-making of Parliament have to accept that all the constitutional hurdle have be negotiate . but in order for that vote to be fulfill , to make the transition from EU member to independent nation a reality , it be necessary to put the necessary law in place . the EU Withdrawal Bill , currently before Parliament , be design to do just that . this be not a flawless measure and there be debate to be have , especially over the so-called Henry @card@ power . it be the duty of MP and peer to improve legislation , not just swallow whatever the executive serve up . however , there be a risk that the Bill will turn into a proxy battleground for continued warfare over Brexit itself . the government have twice postpone debate on the committee stage of the legislation because of the large number of amendment table , many by Conservative Remainers . at this rate , the Bill may not get through the Commons before Christmas and it then face a serious challenge in the Lords next year . Labour , which profess to support Brexit in the light of the referendum result , none the less sense an opportunity to frustrate the process . Sir Keir Starmer , the party ' S spokesman , have vow to support the potential Conservative rebel unless the government accept six change to the bill . it be no surprise to discover that the opposition want to make the government ' s task as difficult as possible . Labour do the same to the Maastricht Treaty in @card@ , side then with Tory Eurosceptics . but have claim to accept the result of the referendum , Labour be now reluctant to make Brexit happen . the Brussels summit last week appear to revive the prospect of achieve an EU-UK agreement that be acceptable to both side . moreover , a large majority in the commons be in favour of observe the referendum mandate and leave the EU . but a minority inside and outside Parliament think this can be reverse and hope parliamentary chaos , coincide with ongoing dispute over money and future trade relationship , will wreck the process , as well it might . those who claim to support Brexit must not now use parliamentary tactic to obstruct it .
Labour ' s secret plan to increase migration ; the Telegraph Election @card@ ; Leaked document reveal Corbyn would reinstate visa scheme for unskilled worker post Brexit ; Labour proposal welcome low-skill migrant to the UK
labour have draw up a secret plan to allow thousand of unskilled migrant to enter the UK after Brexit , accord to leak document see by the Daily Telegraph . Jeremy Corbyn ' S party be consider bring back a scrap visa scheme that allow unskilled labourer to move to the UK and compete with British worker for job such as seasonal work on farm , and in factory . the policy paper also set out plan for a green card scheme and admit Labour do not consider cut net migration a priority . it give the first real look at the party ' s immigration policy after its manifesto set out aim but no detail on how Labour would tackle a new visa system . after Brexit , EU national be likely to require a visa to live and work in the UK as both the Conservatives and Labour have vow to end freedom of movement . however , Mr Corbyn ' S plan make clear that Labour would extend the visa to worker in low-paid job that require no qualification . immigration be one of the define issue of last year ' s EU referendum and swathe of Labour voter back Brexit cite high number of low-skilled migrant move to northern town as a reason to ` ` take back control ' ' and end freedom of movement within the EU . the decision to open up a new visa route for low-skilled labour , think to include people from country outside the EU , will lead to fear that Mr Corbyn ' S party will reinstate freedom of movement by another name . last night Robert Goodwill , the Immigration Minister , say : ` ` this leak plan be the late sign that Jeremy Corbyn and Diane Abbott will never reduce immigration because they simply do n't believe in do so . ` ` only Theresa May and her Conservative team will reduce immigration as we leave the EU , while make sure our economy continue to attract the bright and good worker it need . ' ' the five-page document , write by Lachlan Stuart , Mr Corbyn ' s immigration policy adviser , emerge after the Labour leader admit during a television appearance on Monday that the net migration figure may go up under his government . it be mark ` ` Leader of the opposition ' s Office ' ' and write as a question and answer-style piece think to have be prepare for Labour candidate to help them explain the party ' s policy during television and radio appearance . it have a ` ` confidential ' ' watermark and be date from earlier this month . it will come as a blow to Labour MP in northern England who be work hard to convince voter that the party will be tough on immigration if elect . during his live appearance on Sky and Channel @card@ , Mr Corbyn say he would not ` ` stand here and put a figure ' ' on the number of migrant come to the UK . previously Ms Abbott , the shadow home secretary , tell a Bloomberg event : ` ` we will not , as Theresa May have do , prioritise controlling immigration ; not to say that we do n't believe we should n't have fair rule and management of migration . we will prioritise the economy , that ' S what will be different . ' ' the document cast significant doubt on Mr Corbyn ' s promise to put UK worker first . it reveal Mr Corbyn will scrap restriction on how much money family member must have before they be allow to relocate to the UK to join other and make it easy to claim asylum in Britain . all current EU national live in the UK would be give a green card , give them the right to live and work in Britain although not British citizenship . five huge new it project would be need for the new immigration system . the party put the cost at £2 million , but expert say it would be much more . the leak plan suggest the means test that ensure people can support family member who want to live in Britain will be scrap , say : ` ` we would revisit the family connection rule in order not to discriminate between rich and poor family . ' ' the paper also detail plan to bring back the tier-three entry route create by a Labour government and scrap by David Cameron in @card@ . that scheme be design to encourage low-skilled worker to fill job in factory and farm , but be never need because of high migration from country such as Poland and Romania . the leak paper state : ` ` we envisage a requirement to make continued use of the current five-tiered tier visa system , include the currently unused tier applicable to those seek lowskilled , unskilled or seasonal work . ' ' on whether net migration would go up under a Corbyn government it add : ` ` immigration be drive more by economic requirement of both migrant and host far more than it be regulate by system of permit control . ` ` the number might go up or down but not as a consequence of these change . we be not set false , misleading , divisive target . ' ' a Labour spokesman say : ` ` after Britain leave the EU , free movement of labour will come to an end . Labour will introduce fair rule and manage migration , base on the need of our economy . as part of our work in explore the option , a number of discussion paper have be produce . this be part of one such document . it be not a statement of Labour policy , which be set out in our manifesto . ' ' the party ' S manifesto state that Labour will put ` ` growth , job and prosperity ' ' ahead of ` ` bogus immigration target ' ' but give no detail . ' Jeremy Corbyn and Diane Abbott will never reduce immigration because they do n't believe in do so '
the endgame for a very political banker ; Mark Carney have show that he be not afraid to stray well beyond economics to get what he want
be he jump earlier than she want him to go ? do she push him out sooner than he want to leave ? or have the two most important figure in Britain ' s Brexit saga reach an accommodation that suit both their purpose ? we may never know . but one thing emerge clearly from the drama over Mr Carney ' S future : he be a very political central banker indeed . I do n't mean that as a criticism , nor as an endorsement of the argument that Mr Carney have overstep his remit over Brexit . I be simply make an observation of the skill and dare that the Governor of the Bank of England have display in the wrangling over his future - skill and dare that yesterday morning see Downing Street ' s endorsement of Mr Carney as ` ` absolutely ' ' the right man for the job . Theresa May ' S spokesman express the hope that the Governor would stay on after his five-year term end in @card@ . it be a shift from her speech at the Conservative Party conference last month , where she start a conversation about the impact of Mr Carney ' s ultra-loose monetary policy and promise ` ` change ' ' . that slightly clumsy intervention may not have be intend to raise question about Mr Carney ' S future but that be its effect . it embolden conservative seek to punish Mr Carney for his referendum warning about the risk of Brexit . but call for Mr Carney ' S head give the Governor an opportunity - one he use deftly . it give him the pretext to force Mrs May to choose : back me or sack me . remember , this issue be raise above the level of Westminster chatter to become a real question of importance by Mr Carney himself last week at a House of Lords committee , when he speak of his ` ` entirely personal ' ' decision about whether to stay on as Governor . of course he insist that no one should read anything into his comment , but a central banker as smart as Mr Carney do not say such thing without know exactly what the consequence will be . and the consequence be that sooner or later Mrs May would have to answer Mr Carney ' s challenge over his future . to underline the point , ` ` friend ' ' of Mr Carney last week brief newspaper that a man who only week ago be privately insist wild horse could not drag him out of his job be actually ready to walk , perhaps even before @card@ . Mr Carney and friend be bet that the Brexiteers ' line of attack have make it hard for Mrs May to do anything other than back him to the hilt . before the row over his political stance on Brexit blow up , there be a legitimate question to be ask about Mr Carney ' S future , base on his economic competence . some of his policy , especially ` ` forward guidance ' ' about interest rate , have be less than impressive . but the Carney-bashers allow the debate to shift from economics into politics . he bet that Mrs May could not afford to have market and investor ( and even some voter ) see Brexit Britain as a country where the central bank governor could be purge for fail to pass a political purity test over Brexit . Tory attack on him up the stake , but Mr Carney raise them again . he could afford to walk away ; could Britain afford to have him go ? Mrs May have answer that question . Mr Carney stay , but not for the eight year his admirer have hope for . do she deny him the full threeyear extension to placate his critic and punish his attempt to bounce her into back him ? do Mr Carney manoeuvre her into offer him the full extension , then turn it down ? or do they compromise , both give ground to get something they want : for her , continuity at the Bank during the crucial year before Brexit , and a Governor who know who be boss ; for him , the public backing of the PM in the face of Tory attack ? Mr Carney ' S movement will be of prime importance to Brexit Britain ; they will also be closely follow in his native Canada . he once dream of return home as a Liberal Party prime minister . that role be currently occupy by the 44-year-old Justin Trudeau . he do not have to call an election until October @card@ , a few month after Mr Carney start look for a new job . Mr Trudeau , like Mrs May , will be in no doubt that Mark Carney be not afraid to play politics in order to get what he want . follow James Kirkup on Twitter @ jameskirkup ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
backlash at prospect of more Brexit uncertainty
business leader be grapple with new uncertainty over Brexit and battle to salvage plan for a new industrial strategy after Theresa May ' s snap election backfire to leave Britain with a weakened minority administration . the conservative failure to win an outright majority stoke fear that manifesto pledge on skill and infrastructure investment could fall by the wayside as Mrs May attempt to keep her government in power . the Prime Minister face tacit criticism in public and scathing comment in private from business leader over her campaign , which be view as have make a series of misstep and fail to answer key question over Brexit and the economy . write in the Daily Telegraph , Virgin Money chief executive Jayne-Anne Gadhia say that while she disagree with some of Jeremy Corbyn ' s policy he ` ` express his vision clearly at this election ' ' and that she ` ` know what he stand for ' ' . the banking leader make no direct comment on Mrs May , but praise the ` ` energy , passion and vision ' ' of Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson . Adam Marshall , director general of the British chamber of Commerce , say : ` ` there be a great weariness from business after two year of non-stop politics . they be frustrate that practical issue be ignore in favour of high politics . this situation do n't seem likely to change that . ' ' with the sway gain by the Democratic Unionist Party , Dr Marshall say northern Irish company would lobby their politician hard to keep an open border with the Republic . with all eye on Westminster , cloud gather over the wide economy as manufacturing and construction datum for April fall short of forecast . Carolyn Fairbairn , director-general of the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) , warn Mrs May that it be ` ` a serious moment for the UK economy ' ' . she renew call from big business for Brexit negotiation to move quickly on a smooth path . she say : ` ` we need to move much faster to fix the foundation of the UK economy and our productivity problem . we need meaningful progress on a modern industrial strategy . ' ' the new government be due to begin negotiation with the EU in nine day , and face a ` ` tick clock ' ' , the CBI chief say . while the planned industrial strategy should be drive through , big business call for a rethink on Mrs May ' s plan to regulate executive pay and force company that import skilled labour to pay a levy . Ms Fairbairn say : ` ` we completely understand that it can be appropriate for Government to intervene in market - particularly at the moment . but they should be do with a strong evidence base and full consultation . ' ' small business put pressure on Mrs May to negotiate a soft exit from the EU than her campaign present . Mike Cherry , national chairman of the Federation of small business , demand ` ` easy access to the single market and the ability to hire worker with the skill they need ' ' . David Page , a senior economist at Axa Investment Managers , warn that Mrs May ' s minority government could find itself challenge over Brexit . he say : ` ` the problem for this government be that its new fragility increase the difficulty in drive its version of Brexit , raise the chance of a chaotic Brexit with no deal in place . ' ' it mean market reaction to the hung Parliament be relatively mute , as analyst and trader continue to look ahead to the crucial Brexit negotiation . by the end of the day the FTSE @card@ be up slightly and the pound regain much of the ground lose in the wake of the shock exit poll on Thursday night . Jayne-Anne Gadhia : page @card@
Scotland Pro-EU campaigner raise fund to support Remain MP
Gina Miller , the businesswoman whose legal action force Theresa May to hold a parliamentary vote on Brexit , have launch a fundrais campaign to support pro-Remain MP in the general election . Ms Miller have ask for £40,000 in donation to prevent an ` ` extreme Brexit ' ' by secure the election of as many MP as possible who oppose it . within hour of the launch , it smash the original £10,000 target and Ms Miller increase her demand to £25,000 and then £40,000 after raise £33,000 in a day . the campaign will tour marginal seat and provide extra campaign staff for anti-brexit MP . on the gofundme website Ms Miller write : ` ` we need to prevent MP and the people be force into an extreme Brexit that be not in Britain ' s good interest . ' '
city watchdog gear up for Brexit with wishlist for talk
make sure the financial sector remain resilient through Brexit as well as look after vulnerable customer and an age population will be among the priority for the Financial Conduct Authority in the next two year , the regulator have promise . the City ' s finance watchdog have outline how it will support the government through Brexit , as it warn that uncertainty surround the exit from the EU could hamper liquidity and limit access for UK client . it point to a wishlist of five thing it deem important during the Brexit negotiation and which will guide its ` ` technical support ' ' to the government throughout the process . these include ensure cross-border market access , consistent global standard ` ` to minimise the risk of regulatory arbitrage ' ' , co-operation between regulatory authority , influence over standard and the opportunity to maintain a skilled , diverse workforce . it warn that a lack of clarity over how the negotiation will go could ` ` potentially lead to a period of prolonged uncertainty for market , firm and consumer ' ' with the impact spread beyond the financial market and into the UK economy . the regulator make the comment in its @card@ business plan publish yesterday , alongside a document outline its view on the sector and its mission statement , which aim to lay out the rationale behind its decision . ` ` take together , these document reflect our aim for the FCA to be more transparent and accountable to the UK public , ' ' say chief executive Andrew Bailey , later add that challenge ` ` come thick and fast ' ' for the FCA . those challenge not only span Brexit , which have see the regulator put aside an ` ` unavoidable ' ' cost of £2.5m to help partly cover withdrawal cost and be clearly a key concern for the financial sector , but also make financial advice safe and more accessible to consumer and ensure that whistleblower be properly protect . the latter have be even more of a focus since the FCA open an investigation into Barclays ' boss Jes Staley over an attempt to identify a whistleblower . Mr Bailey would not comment on Barclays but say the watchdog take whistleblowing ` ` very seriously ' ' .
UK business will prosper , even with a ' hard Brexit ' , say Fitch
British company across all sector will remain resilient after the country leave the European Union , even if the UK head for a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , accord to Fitch . official at the rating agency say business would cope even if Britain do not secure a transition deal with Brussels and fall back on World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rule for trade with its former EU partner . ` ` we ' ve not see any sector where Brexit will be the bogeyman that cause everything to fall over , ' ' say Alex Griffiths , a group credit officer at Fitch . however , Mr Griffiths warn that it be important to resolve uncertainty surround the UK ' s trading relationship as quickly as possible . ` ` a long period of uncertainty will be very bad for corporate , ' ' he say . ` ` as soon as you look at trade , and global supply chain , for these company there be go to be a big impact if we have a hard Brexit will tariff go up . there will be a lot of shuffle around to do , but ultimately the company will cope . ` ` it ' S pressure . but it ' S not company fall over rapidly . ' ' retailer be expect to come under pressure from the weak pound , which have push up import cost , as well as ongoing competition on the high street , Mr Griffiths say . Fitch also warn that it could strip the US of its prized top rating if Donald Trump embark on a fiscal splurge . Ed Parker , head of European sovereign rating at Fitch , say rise debt level and weak growth would lead to a ` ` heavy flow ' ' of credit rating downgrade this year , add that a trade war trigger by the new US president present one of the big risk to the global economy . ` ` fiscal stimulus be back , ' ' he say at a conference in London . ` ` we do see increase medium-term pressure [ on the US credit rating ] . even before election , the US have the high level of government debt of any AAA country . ` ` if we add on top of that Trump ' S plan to cut tax by $ @card@ trillion over the next @card@ year , that could add around 33pc to US government debt [ in @card@ term ] . ' ' Fitch also warn that political risk in Europe be also a threat to the global recovery . it come as minute of the European Central Bank ' s late policy meeting show ` ` a few member ' ' opposed proposal to extend the central bank ' s multi-billion-euro bond-buy programme beyond March . the minute of its December meeting show that policymaker be divide over whether to continue purchase at ( Euro ) 80bn a month until September @card@ , or extend the programme to the end of the year at a reduce monthly pace of ( Euro ) 60bn , which policymaker eventually opt for . however , the minute show that ` ` a few member could not support either of the two option that have be propose ' ' .
Scotland Labour at odd over Brexit and immigration control
labour ' S policy on immigration descend further into chaos last night after Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , call for change to freedom of movement after Britain leave the EU . Sir Keir say Labour could not avoid the issue as he acknowledge that abandon the principle of free movement of labour would make it hard to maintain tariff-free access to the single market . his comment put him at odd with shadow cabinet colleague such as Diane Abbott , the shadow home secretary , who argue there must be no change to freedom of movement rule . in a speech in London Sir Keir say : ` ` no comprehensive approach to Brexit or response to the referendum result can ignore the issue of freedom of movement . ' ' as he vow to produce a ` ` bold and ambitious ' ' response to Brexit , the frontbencher say the ` ` status quo be not an option ' ' and insist that the rule must change . Sir Keir say : ` ` it be strike that the referendum result show the area in the country with the high level of immigration vote most strongly to Remain . but the area with the high pace of change vote most strongly to leave . that tell me that the British people be open and tolerant ; but that they also expect change to be manage , rather than simply allow the free market to rip through community . ' ' his comment come just day after Ms Abbott say the UK could not ` ` dump ' ' free movement and stay in the single market . she say : ` ` Access to the single market and freedom of movement be inextricably link . ' ' Sketch : page @card@
Judge warn Brexit could be ' difficult ' to achieve
a Supreme Court judge have suggest that Theresa May could be force to unpick every piece of EU legislation before Brexit be trigger , in comment that one critic say could prompt a ` ` constitutional crisis ' ' . in a speech that raise the prospect of Brexit be delay by year , Justice Hale say a ` ` simple act of Parliament ' ' may not be enough to ensure the UK leave the European Union . Justice Hale be one of @card@ Supreme Court judge who will sit next month to rule on whether the Prime Minister must seek the approval of parliament before trigger Article @card@ . the government have appeal against a ruling by High Court judge , who be accuse by MP of attempt to thwart the will of voter who back Brexit by demand Mrs May consult Parliament over her plan . in her speech earlier this month Justice Hale say the case raise ` ` difficult and delicate issue ' ' . she also stress that the referendum on June @card@ be not ` ` legally binding on Parliament ' ' . Iain Duncan Smith say Justice Hale ' S remark raise serious question about whether she can be impartial in the ruling on Article @card@ appeal . Dominic Raab MP warn that Justice Hale ` ` risk the perception that she have prejudge a case she be about to hear ' ' . Mr Duncan Smith , a former Cabinet minister , tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` the President of the court should look at this and ask the question , because it seem to me that we may be in a position of her literally rule herself out . ' ' he add : ` ` if they be to do this , it ' S a constitutional crisis . ` ` the individual concern herself have always be oppose to Britain leave the EU and have make her expression quite clear about that so her opinion be fine , but generally I do not think they will be the majority opinion in the Supreme Court . ' ' in her speech , Justice Hale say : ` ` the argument be that the European Communities Act @card@ grant right to individual and other which will automatically be lose if the Treaties cease to apply . such a result , it be say , can only be achieve by an Act of Parliament . ` ` another question be whether it would be enough for a simple act of Parliament to authorise the government to give notice , or whether it would have to be a comprehensive replacement for the @card@ Act . ` ` the contrary argument be that the conduct of foreign affair , include the make and unmake of treaty with foreign power , lie within the prerogative power of the Crown . ` ` what have to be do instead be perhaps not so clear . but the case be destine for our court , so I must say no more . ' ' a spokesman for the Supreme Court say that Justice Hale be ` ` present the argument from both side of the Article @card@ appeal in an impartial way ' ' . regret Lady Hale say we would miss Rights Act Lady Hale , the most senior female judge in the country , have previously be criticise for her outspoken view on the Human Rights Act and her intervention in family law . in @card@ she warn that her fellow justice would ` ` regret ' ' the repeal of the Act , something discuss as part of the decision to leave the EU . the baroness , @card@ , have champion feminist cause and have warn of ` ` sexism ' ' in the legal profession for its failure to hire talented woman .
stay focus on the ' know known ' ; EXPERT View
Donald Rumsfeld , the former US defence secretary , once say : ` ` there be known known . these be thing that we know . there be known unknown . that be to say , there be thing that we know we do n't know . but there be also unknown unknown . there be thing we do n't know we do n't know . ' ' I be amaze by how much time and effort people waste try to guess what will happen in know unknown . Brexit , China , commodity , interest rate , the oil price , quantitative easing and the US presidential election be all know unknown . take Brexit : who would feel confident in take an investment stance base on the outcome of an event that every pollster get wrong ? evidently some fund manager do : ` ` Brexit change everything ' ' exclaim one absolute return ( what an inappropriate title that be ) fund manager who be down by more than 20pc over the year to date . on the contrary , so far I think it have change very little . after all , it have n't happen yet . I have just as little sympathy with the few fund manager who be praise for be up by 20pc immediately after the referendum . they be willing to bet their investor ' money on a coin toss , it seem . the problem be n't just that these event be difficult or even impossible to predict . market be what be know as ` ` second order ' ' system : to invest successfully on this basis you would not only have to predict the outcome of the event but would also have to know what the market be expect and how it would react . good luck with that . then there be the problem of the unknown unknown . the event that may cause a major move in the market may be one that no one have even spot . it ' S hard to predict the outcome of something you do n't even know exist . one propose investment solution to this uncertainty be the so-called absolute return fund , which have attract huge amount of money in recent year , rise from a total of £2bn of asset in June @card@ to £63bn by June @card@ . how have they fare ? the average absolute return fund be up by 0.7pc in the past year and have gain of 2.9pc in @card@ and 4.3pc in @card@ . by contrast , Fundsmith Equity be up by 42pc in the past year , 15.2pc in @card@ and 15.3pc in @card@ . absolute return fund have also underperform the MSCI World index in four of the past five year . leave aside the fact that absolute return fund use complex hedge strategy that neither you nor I understand , their hedging have pretty much ensure that while their investor have not lose money , they do not make any either , to the point that the word ` ` return ' ' in their title look inappropriate . so what should you focus on ? I would suggest just three thing . first and foremost , invest in the share of good business . they be not that difficult to identify , have typically be around for age and produce good financial result by provide product and service that customer want . the average company in the portfolio of the Fundsmith Equity fund , which I run , be found in @card@ . have survive two world war , the Great Depression and the financial crisis , they will probably survive whatever known or unknown unknown lie ahead . second , stick to invest in thing you understand . I have never find anyone who disagree that this be an essential ingredient for success . but investor be terrible at define what it be they understand narrowly enough . do you really understand banking nowadays ? if not , why do you own bank share ? how do an absolute return fund use derivative ? no idea ? then why do you own it ? how do an exchange-traded fund work ? do n't know ? then buy an index tracker fund ( and if you think ETF and index tracker fund be the same , you definitely do not understand the subject ) . third , do n't worry too much about valuation . you will find pundit and commentator who will tell you that good company ' share be too highly value . sooner or later they be bind to be right , albeit temporarily , but what gain will you forgo while you wait for that to occur ? if you be a long-term investor , buy share in a good business be more important than valuation . if you be not a long-term investor , what be you do investing in the stock market ? Terry Smith be the chief executive of Fundsmith , the asset manager
Scotland EU leader gang up on May over Brexit ; Hollande ' posturing ' as he warn of hard negotiation hard if MP push for a clean break
Theresa May be last night round on by EU leader , who demand that Britain continue to accept hundred of thousand of migrant if it be to have any hope of access the single market . the Prime Minister face a series of threat from her counterpart as she arrive at her first European Council meeting in Brussels . she will today hold talk with Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , who be expect to criticise her over signal that the government be push for a clean break from Brussels rather than a compromise solution . however , yesterday Mrs May face a barrage of criticism as she arrive in Brussels . François Hollande , the French president , tell her he intend to make exit negotiation ` ` hard ' ' if Mrs May push for a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . he say : ` ` I have say it very firmly to her . [ if ] Theresa May want a hard Brexit , the negotiation will be hard . ' ' Martin Schulz , the president of the European Parliament , accuse Mrs May of try to ` ` set a trap ' ' by not tell the EU exactly when she intend to trigger Article @card@ , which formally begin Brexit . he say Britain will only be give access to the single market if Mrs May accept the ` ` fundamental rule ' ' of the EU , mean abiding by freedom of movement rule allow all European migrant to live and work in the UK . ` ` I refuse to imagine a Europe where lorry and hedge fund be free to cross border but citizen be not . ' ' Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , say that there will be no substantial discussion about Brexit with Mrs May until the UK trigger Article @card@ . ` ` I want to make clear again that we be wait for the UK ' S notification . it ' s up to Great Britain . ' ' Syed Kamall , a Conservative MEP , describe the hostility as ` ` posturing ' ' say : ` ` the EU leader be blow hard now but they will soon see sense when the detailed negotiation begin . ` ` no @card@ play down the row , insist that Mrs May will press ahead with her plan . a source say : ` ` it be a negotiation . there be a lot be say . ' ' Fraser Nelson : page @card@ Editorial Comment : page @card@ Jeremy Warner : page @card@ Theresa May have say she be ` ` categorically ' ' not consider whether to exclude student from the net migration target in an apparent rebuke to her Chancellor . Philip Hammond say on Wednesday that there be ` ` conversation within government ' ' on whether the figure should be include in the target to reduce net migration . but the Prime Minister ' S spokesman insist yesterday ` ` our position have not change ' ' .
Scotland Germany warn UK it ca n't join single market after Brexit
Germany ' s finance minister have rule out Britain join the single market if the country vote to leave the European Union , declare that ` ` out be out ' ' for the UK . Wolfgang Schäuble , the influential German politician , make the comment in a special referendum edition of the magazine Der Spiegel urge British voter not to leave the EU . the intervention appear to deny hope of pro-EU MP that they could use their majority in Parliament to keep Britain in the single market if there be an Out vote . Mr Schäuble also warn that Brexit could trigger a string of snap referendum across the continent amid grow Euroscepticism . the single market guarantee free movement of people , good and service but contain some member who be not part of the EU , include Switzerland . because Vote leave have not speci-fied what relationship the UK would have with the EU after Brexit some MP believe they could remain inside the single market after an Out vote . however , in an interview publish today , Mr Schäuble say : ` ` that wo n't work . it would require the country to abide by the rule of a club from which it currently want to withdraw . ` ` if the majority in Britain opt for Brexit , that would be a decision against the single market . in be in . out be out . one have to respect the sovereignty of the British people . ' ' Mr Schäuble also suggest Brussels could start a drive to decrease red tape even if the UK back retain membership . ` ` in response to Brexit , we could n't simply call for more integration . that would be crude ; many would rightfully wonder whether we politician still have n't understand , ' ' he say . ` ` even in the event that only a small majority of the British voter reject a withdrawal , we would have to see it as a wake-up call and a warning not to continue with business as usual . either way , we have to take a serious look at reduce bureaucracy in Europe . ' ' he also raise the prospect of referendum across the continent if Britain vote to leave the EU . Lord Mandelson , the former Labour business secretary , say : ` ` this finally knock on the head the leave campaign ' s claim that we can leave the EU and still enjoy the benefit of the single market . we can not leave the club and continue to use its facility . ' ' Charles Moore : page @card@
free trade deal after Brexit ' in EU interest '
Europe have a ` ` large economic interest ' ' in strike a free-trade agreement with Britain follow withdrawal from the EU , the Dutch government forecaster say . a Brexit would have a ` ` severe ' ' impact on the Dutch economy and result in ` ` substantial loss ' ' for the wide EU . but this toll will be reduce if the EU sign a free-trade agreement with Britain that could result in a ` ` substantial reduction ' ' in cost , the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis say . the analysis bolster the leave campaigner , who argue that the price of punish the UK be too great for the EU , mean it would be force to offer preferential term . for the Netherlands , strike a freetrade deal in the event of Brexit would see GDP fall by @card@ per cent in @card@ . if a deal be not do , and trade be do on World Trade Organisation term , GDP would fall by @card@ per www.cent.UK loss would be four per cent of GDP under a WTO option , fall to @card@ per cent if it get a free trade deal . the report say that EU country would have to choose between want to punish Britain in order to discourage other from leave the bloc , and inflict harm on themselves by leave . ` ` on the one hand , the EU want to avoid the Brexit set a precedent , and therefore the EU could be willing to increase the cost of the withdrawal by as much as possible , ' ' the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis say . ` ` but this would then also lead to high cost for the EU itself . a new trade agreement would reduce those cost again - but this would also benefit the withdraw country . ' ' the worsthit sector of the Dutch economy - chemical , plastic , electronics and motor part - which account for @card@ per cent of output , would see loss of five per cent . but this could be cut to three per cent if a deal be do . Britain to suffer a punitive cost of exit . Elisabeth Guigou , the head of the foreign affair committee in the French National Assembly , tell Politico : ` ` Our president be right when he say that Brexit will have serious consequence . we will need to fight the centrifugal force , to show that we can draw conclusion from Britain ' S decision . ' ' 4pc the percentage of UK GDP likely to be lose after a Brexit , if trade be do on WTO term , compare to 3.4pc loss with a deal
the leave campaign must answer Obama Body : Barack Obama ' s dramatic intervention in the EU referendum come at a halfway point . two month ago , David Cameron unveil his renegotiation deal . in two month ' time , on June @card@ , Briton will cast their vote . as thing stand , Remain enjoy an advantage in the poll - and many will judge that Mr Obama have help them further . yesterday ' s article in the Daily Telegraph and his joint press conference with Mr Cameron raise important question about what would happen after Brexit . the leave campaign suddenly need to up its game . Eurosceptics have complain about US interference in British politics . but it be hardly surprising that our most important ally would want to be hear , while it be surely incumbent upon the leave campaign to respond , point-bypoint , to the argument that Mr Obama have make - chiefly that Britain ' s membership of the EU have ` ` magnify ' ' our relationship with the rest of the world and , by implication , Brexit would reduce it . the president say that our present relationship with the EU have make us rich . be this true or have over-regulation and the eurozone crisis weaken us ? he also say that Britain ' S security be strong in the EU . again , critic might answer that porous border and the refugee crisis suggest otherwise - but would security network continue post-Brexit ? perhaps the most important question raise by the president be what would happen to the UK ' s trade post-Brexit . what form would it take with the EU and how long would a renegotiate relationship take to achieve ? moreover , at the press conference , Mr Obama say that the UK would go to the ` ` back of the queue ' ' when it come to trade with the US . how do leave respond to that ? they have long insist that Britain would easily secure fresh deal with the rest of the world . the president clearly say otherwise , although , of course , his term be come to an end . the EU referendum will be win by court undecided voter in the centre ground . Mr Obama ' S intervention may well have an impact on their thinking . the leave campaign can complain about ` ` project fear ' ' as much as it like , and with some legitimacy , but that do not change the fact that many voter see reason to fear a future outside the EU . to win them over , leave have to show that a prosperous alternative be possible . they need to turn an intellectual proposition into a coherent , detailed plan .
Scotland concern over Brexit be already hurt the British economy , warn Bank governor ; Brexit will liberate Europe , say Gove
the possibility of Britain leave the European Union have already have a damaging impact on Britain ' s economy because it have reduce the value of the pound and hit business , the Governor of the Bank of England have suggest . he tell a House of Lord ' s select committee that a vote to leave the European Union on June @card@ could result in low growth , and high inflation and may see the City of London lose its place as one of the the world ' s ` ` pre-eminent ' ' financial centre . his intervention , which will lead to accusation of scaremongering by Eurosceptic MP , come just a day after George Osborne publish a Treasury analysis claim that Britain would be poor by £4,300 per household if it vote to leave the European Union . Mr Carney make his comment as Michael Gove , the Eurosceptic Justice Secretary , say a Brexit could prompt the ` ` democratic liberation of a whole continent ' ' and see the EU crumble like the Soviet Union . he use a speech in London to set out for the first time his vision of how Britain could thrive outside the European Union and the single market . he say that it could follow the example of Bosnia , Serbia , Albania and Ukraine by join the European freetrade zone . he say : ` ` Our vote to leave will liberate and strengthen those voice continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ across the EU calling for a different future - those demand the devolution of power back from Brussels and desperate for a progressive alternative . ` ` but for Europe , Britain voting to leave will be the beginning of something potentially even more exciting - the democratic liberation of a whole continent . ' ' Jean Claude-Juncker , the President of the European Commission , admit that the European Union be unpopular with voter because ` ` we be interfere in too many domain in their public life ' ' . in a candid and highly pessimistic assessment , he say the bloc face ` ` ruin ' ' because of a backlash from voter anger by a lack of respect for the power of national government . Mr Carney yesterday tell that the Economic Affairs Committee that the risk of a Brexit be ` ` begin to manifest ' ' . he say that the value of the pound have fall significantly since November and that the value of UK-focused company have ` ` underperform ' ' . he add that commercial property deal in Britain have fall by @card@ per cent in the first quarter of this year , and @card@ per cent in London . Lord Lawson , the former Conservative chancellor , accuse Mr Carney of intervene in the referendum in a ` ` political ' ' way . however Mr Carney say there be a ` ` public duty ' ' to report on the economic risk of a Brexit , add that fail to do so would ` ` suppress ' ' the Bank ' S judgement . Mr Carney add : ` ` a vote to leave the EU might result in an extended period of uncertainty about the economic outlook . ' ' it come as it emerge that Mr Osborne be plan to release a second treasury analysis , on the short-term impact of a Brexit , just week before the referendum , . the document , which will be publish just before the government be formally bar from campaigning , will warn that a Brexit will push up mortgage payment and food price . it will infuriate Tory MP , who yesterday criticise the Treasury ' s first analysis of the long-term impact of a vote to leave . Philip Hollobone , one of the MP , say the ` ` disgracefully dodgy document ' ' be ` ` worthy of the child ' s programme Jackanory ' ' .
Boris dismiss ' millennium bug ' Brexit fear
Boris Johnson have say that leave the EU would result in ` ` no economic shock ' ' at all to the UK , despite the claim of economist include the Bank of England ' s own Governor to the contrary . the London mayor compare fear over an economic shock on the event of a Brexit to the concern people have over the ` ` millennium bug ' ' , a much prophesy computer glitch which be predict to wreak havoc as the world move into the year @card@ , but pass without incident . appear before the Treasury Select Committee ( TSC ) to answer question on his support for leave the EU , Mr Johnson say that ` ` people would understand the consequences [ of Brexit ] ' ' , add that , as with the millennium bug , the nation will have ` ` freak out so much that it pass without the batting of an eyelid ' ' . Mark Carney , the Bank ' s Governor , take question from the TSC earlier this month and argue that the economy could be affect in the run up to the EU vote on June @card@ , as uncertainty over the UK ' s political future weigh on business decision . he argue that join the EU have add to the ` ` dynamism of the UK economy ' ' , and that ` ` there would be an [ economic ] impact ' ' . the Canadianborn economist also say that the possibly of leave the EU ` ` be the big domestic risk to financial stability ' ' . Mr Johnson describe a claim make by Mr Carney that the come EU referendum could weigh on international investment into the UK as ` ` rubbish ' ' . the London Mayor argue that there be ` ` no good economic argument ' ' against Brexit , and that the Governor be make ` ` political argument ' ' . Rachel Reeves , a Labour MP who sit on the TSC , ask : ` ` so the Governor of the Bank of England be not make good economic argument for stay in the EU ? the Chancellor be not make good economic argument for stay in ? the CBI ? they ' re all make political argument and not economic argument ? ' ' Mr Johnson reply : ` ` Yes . ' ' Mr Johnson say : ` ` I ' ve look at foreign direct investment into London , confidence in the City , what ' s happen in our economy ... [ there be ] no sign whatsoever of people be discourage from invest , [ or ] come to London . I seem to remember that when we be consider whether or not to go into the euro , and thankfully make the right decision not to do so , people be say very much the same sort of thing . on the contrary London flourish , and prosper as never before . ' '
delay throw early transition hope into doubt ; Brexit in depth
Britain ' S aim to secure an early transition agreement on Brexit be ` ` not a foregone conclusion ' ' , EU source have warn . the Daily Telegraph can reveal that a deal last month between Britain and the EU which promise ` ` an agreement as early as possible in @card@ on transitional arrangement ' ' - mean the March @card@ European Council - have be throw into doubt as France try to pursue a business advantage . EU source warn that bureaucratic delay , legal issue and political opposition from France , which want to drive home its Brexit business advantage , all risk delay an early deal . ` ` it be absolutely not a foregone conclusion there will be a deal on transition in March , ' ' say a senior EU diplomat . ` ` there be a constituency that believe this would give away our leverage far too easily and want to keep the pressure on the brit . ' ' failure to secure a ` ` handshake agreement ' ' on transition at the March European Council would be a major setback for Theresa May , who want to seal a deal on transition and clear the way for negotiation on the EU-UK future relationship . this week a top supervisor at the Bank of England warn MP that preparation by the bank for Brexit would ` ` go up a gear ' ' if the government fail to secure transition by the end of March , in an implicit admission of UK vulnerability to EU foot-dragging . Senior UK official remain adamant that an in-principle deal can be do in March on the same basis as the December deal , with Mrs May and Jean-Claude Juncker publicly commit to an agreement . the final legal text would not become binding and ratify until the end of the deal process in March @card@ , but the political agreement would provide business with the certainty they need . ` ` never underestimate the power of a handshake , ' ' say a senior UK negotiator . other senior figure in Whitehall be privately less optimistic that the EU will not give in to temptation and delay an agreement transition . ` ` there be both a belief that fuel uncertainty will be to their commercial advantage while other argue that increase uncertainty will force the UK to take a ' more realistic approach ' to the trade negotiation , ' ' a Whitehall source admit . the time frame even for an inprinciple transition deal remain tight , with the EU only due to approve formal guideline on transition on Jan @card@ , allow the Commission to produce an ` ` essential principle ' ' paper for EU member state early next month . formal negotiation on the transition be not , therefore , expect to start until mid-February , leave just a few week before the March leader ' summit to iron out any potentially divisive disagreement . a leak draft of the EU guideline see by the Telegraph this week show the EU already toughen up term for transition , in which the UK will have to continue to accept free movement and all EU law . there also remain several outstanding area from the first phase of the negotiation not agree in December , include set up a body to govern EU expats ' right , as well as other separation issue , include intellectual property right , datum question and custom issue . accord to the leak guideline , the EU will only make progress on trade and future relationship if all commitment make in December be ` ` respect in full and translate faithfully in legal term as quickly as possible ' ' , open up the pretext for delay . the Telegraph understand Brussels negotiator be worry that Britain will not fully honour its December pledge , instead seek only to mirror EU law and regulation , rather than accept them wholesale . Mujtaba Rahman , a lead analyst at the Eurasia Group consultancy , say : ` ` it ' s give rise to the view that the EU should skip the political declaration in March and move straight to legal text , which have the advantage of provide clarity but carry the risk of delay and deepen the uncertainty over the transition , ' ' he add . with UK negotiator only begin preparatory talk with their opposite number in Brussels this week , it remain unclear if a deal can be do in time , though pressure from more pragmatic member state could soften the hard line take in Paris and Berlin . Charles Grant , of the Centre for European Reform , say both side ultimately have an interest in move on to second-phase negotiation . ` ` it would be difficult for Paris or Berlin to take such a line , partly because the British be likely to agree to most of what the EU request during the transition , but also because some other member-state would object , ' ' he say . increase uncertainty will force the UK to take a ' more realistic approach ' to the trade negotiation
show a unite front , Macron tell EU leader ; French president warn of potential split over Brexit as individual country pursue their own interest
Emmanuel MACRON have warn of the risk of split emerge between EU state over Brexit negotiation , in an implicit admission that Europe ' s ` ` united front ' ' over the talk be under threat . speak to the Daily Telegraph at the Elysée palace , the French president warn fellow EU leader not to fall for the ` ` prisoner ' S dilemma ' ' - a notorious paradox in game theory in which two party act out of individual self-interest and both lose out in the process . Mr Macron ' S comment be a French clarion call for unity as Brussels plead with the remain @card@ EU state not to allow individual self-interest to trump common goal in the come trade negotiation . his remark come despite France aggressively prosecute its own Brexit agenda to erode UK dominance in financial service , include plan what the Financial Times this week dub as a ` ` raid ' ' on the UK ' s £8trillion asset management industry . at a new year ' s presidential event on Wednesday evening , Mr Macron , who be due to meet Theresa May at a Franco-British summit on Jan @card@ , be ask by the Telegraph how he think Brexit negotiation be go . the centrist Europhile say that the same unified EU approach to get a deal in the first phase of talk would be carry into the second phase as the EU seek to agree a ` ` common mandate ' ' on a UK-EU future relationship . ` ` I think this be the right method as it avoid division and once again allow us to preserve the collective interest , ' ' he say . he add : ` ` each of us can have our own interest . that ' s what the prisoner ' S dilemma be all about . everyone can have an interest in negotiate on their own , and think they can negotiate good than their neighbour . ` ` if we do that , it be probable that collectively we will create a situation which be unfavourable to the European Union and thus to each one of us . ' ' Mr Macron announce that he would host @card@ head of state on Nov @card@ to commemorate the end of the First World War , include US President Donald Trump . EU head of state allow Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , to move into ` ` phase two ' ' last month after secure a commitment from Mrs May on the financial term of the divorce , the right of European citizen reside in the UK and the Irish border . Mr Barnier can now engage in ` ` exploratory ' ' trade talk with Mrs May ' s cabinet before receive formal , more detailed guideline in March . but as EU member state try to reach agreement on the guideline they could be tempt to push their own agenda to try to shape a deal suit their economic interest or domestic politics . Donald Tusk , the European Council president , have already warn that trade talk will present the ` ` true test ' ' of EU unity , while Enrico Letta , the former Italian prime minister , have warn that unity would be ` ` harder to maintain ' ' now EU member state ' interest be directly at stake . Ireland and Hungary hint that they could become ally of Britain during trade talk as they call for a comprehensive deal to be strike . after a meeting between Leo Varadkar , the Irish taoiseach , and Viktor Orbán , the Hungarian prime minister , in Budapest yesterday , Mr Varadkar say : ` ` we be both commit to work constructively to ensure that the agreement on both the term of its withdrawal and the nature of its future relationship with the EU be favourable . ' '
Scotland Davis hand judge extradition power to see off rebel ; Ministers bow to Tory rebel over EU arrest warrant
British judge will be able to block extradition request by EU nation after Brexit under government plan to avoid a rebellion by Eurosceptic Tory backbencher . David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , have say that the Supreme Court will act as the final body of appeal for British citizen face extradition under the European Arrest Warrant instead of EU court . the approach , which will be set out in a Brexit position paper publish ahead of negotiation , be intend to address the concern of dozen of Eurosceptic Tory MP who be consider rebel over the issue . many of them remain concerned that retain the European Arrest Warrant will still see British citizen extradite and force to face ` ` substandard ' ' judicial system abroad . a source close to the negotiation say : ` ` Downing Street be hyper-sensitive to re-opening the long-running row over the European Arrest Warrant with hard Brexiteers . of all the position paper it ' s the one thing they be worry about lose the backbencher over . ' ' Mr Davis be also likely to face opposition from senior figure in the EU , who insist that the European Court of Justice must continue to have oversight of the system . Guy Verhofstadt , the European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator , tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` we seek a close relationship with the UK after Brexit particularly on justice and security matter . criminal and terrorist must continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ not be the beneficiary of Brexit . however we be also determine that the legal order of the European Union be respect . the European Arrest Warrant be an instrument of European Union law and will therefore continue to be oversee by the European Court of Justice . ' ' the arrest warrant enable member of the European Union to extradite suspect from other member state . Britain surrender an average of @card@ individual a year to other EU state and issue around @card@ . the government have say retain membership of the European Arrest Warrant be a ` ` priority ' ' after Britain leave the EU and describe it as ` ` absolutely essential ' ' in bring murderer , rapist and paedophiles to justice . however , Tory Eurosceptics have long criticise the system amid concern that it infringe on Britain ' S sovereignty and have lead to British citizen be deport on flimsy evidence . Theresa May opt back into the system when she be home secretary in @card@ . at the time , Mr Davis be one of @card@ Tory MP who rebel against the government over the issue . he say at the time : ` ` let us remember what we be talk about - take British citizen , with no prima facie evidence , and send them off to court elsewhere in Europe . ` ` what we have be ask to debate assume that those court all deliver equal justice . Romania do not deliver equal justice . ` ` nor do Bulgaria , Greece or Italy . some of them have post-Soviet justice system to which we be send our constituent . ' ' Mr Davis be now propose that after Brexit the Supreme Court will have ultimate oversight of request to extradite citizen live in the UK , while the European Court of Justice will have oversight of those living in the EU . he tell peer last month : ` ` if we issue a European arrest warrant you would expect that within the European union to be subject to appeal all the way up through the normal national court and from them to the ECJ . ` ` if a Polish police force submit a request for a British citizen in Britain , or anybody in Britain for that matter , it will go up to the British Supreme Court . ' '
Scotland May cling on to Brexit lifeline ; PM admit she need to gain trust of voter as she drop major pledge from today ' s Queen ' s Speech ; unpopular policy leave out of Queen ' s Speech by May
Theresa May will today put Brexit at the heart of the Queen ' s Speech and jettison a raft of key manifesto pledge in the hope that she can remain Prime Minister for at least two more year . however , Mrs May still have no guarantee that she can form a viable government after the DUP last night threaten to walk away from a propose deal . the Prime Minister will admit that the general election result ` ` be not the one I hope for ' ' and that she need to ` ` gain the trust and confidence of the British people ' ' . she will start that process by drop unpopular policy on social care , winter fuel payment , free school meal , foxhunting , grammar school and the pension ` ` triple lock ' ' . in an attempt to cling to power , Mrs May will pack the Queen ' s Speech with Brexit legislation on migration and trade , which will dominate parliamentary business until @card@ . Mrs May will also promise to show ` ` humility ' ' and learn the lesson of ` ` the message the electorate send ' ' . the State Opening of Parliament will go ahead despite no deal yet be reach with the DUP , without whose support Mrs May can not command an overall majority . last night , the DUP threaten to walk away from the talk altogether , claim Downing Street be in ` ` complete chaos ' ' and urge the government to give ` ` great focus ' ' to the negotiation . dup source say the party should not be ` ` take for grant ' ' in talk that have not ` ` proceed in a way that the DUP would have expect ' ' . there be even speculation last night that the conservative could approach the liberal democrat for support now that Tim Farron , the party ' S leader - who oppose any deal with the Tory - be step down . Whitehall source say they be ` ` confident ' ' the DUP would support the Queen ' s Speech , even if a deal be to be delay , with negotiation over money say to be the final sticking-point . an agreement could still be announce tomorrow , with Downing Street say talk be ` ` ongoing ' ' and that no deadline have ever be set . a spokesman for No10 say : ` ` both party be commit to strengthen the Union , combat terrorism , deliver Brexit and deliver prosperity across the whole United Kingdom . ' ' the DUP be understand to have agree the content of the Queen ' s Speech , which be postpone from Monday , because talk over a deal be take longer than anticipate . the Speech will contain little in the way of new policy . it will include the Great repeal Bill , which will transfer EU law to the British statute book before they can be repeal , and the government ' S White Paper set out Mrs May ' S @card@ principle for leave the EU , include exit the single market and the custom union . however , the Prime Minister face opposition within her own Cabinet , as well as from the majority of MP who favour a soft Brexit . yesterday Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , use continue on Page @card@ report : page @card@ & @card@ editorial comment : page @card@ continue from Page @card@ his annual Mansion House speech to the City - delay because of the Grenfell Tower fire - to promise a ` ` job first ' ' Brexit , with business need prioritised over migration control , in direct conflict with Mrs May ' s own plan for leave the European Union . Mr Hammond say immigration would be manage but not ` ` shut down ' ' as the country leave the EU ` ` in a way that prioritises British job and underpin Britain ' S prosperity ' ' . the Chancellor favour a deal that allow Britain to maintain the benefit of membership of the custom union , but Mrs May and David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , have make it clear that membership of the custom union will end . Mrs May will tell the commons : ` ` this Queen ' S Speech be about recognise and grasp the opportunity that lie ahead for the United Kingdom as we leave the European Union . ` ` it be about deliver a Brexit deal that work for all part of the UK while build a strong , fair country by strengthen our economy , tackle injustice and promote opportunity and aspiration . ' ' she will insist that the ` ` priority ' ' of the electorate be ` ` to get Brexit right ' ' , even though other issue dominate the election campaign . the Prime Minister will point out that more than @card@ per cent of the electorate back the Tories or Labour , both of whom support the need to deliver on the result of last year ' s EU referendum . in truth , however , Mrs May do not command enough support to put her most controversial manifesto promise into the Queen ' s Speech , know she would risk defeat .
Brexit fail to deter Malaysian hotelier ' S plan for London tower
a scion of one of Malaysia ' s wealthy real estate dynasty have say that plan to build one of the tall residential tower in London will not be bulldoze by Brexit . Abigail Tan , head of the St Giles Hotels Group , be to press ahead with a £800mto £1bn mixed use development in Blackfriars despite rise cost link to the collapse in the value of the pound . she tell the Press Association : ` ` Our plan have n't be alter by Brexit , yet . Blackfriars be still viable and we ' re push ahead with it , although we ' re cautious of cost rise . ` ` we ' re still invest heavily in the UK and still have faith in the UK economy as a hub for business and finance . ' ' St Giles , whose parent company be list Malaysian firm IGB Corporation - head by Ms Tan ' S father Robert Tan - be wait for Southwark Council to rubber-stamp planning application . the development will consist of a hotel and one of the tall residential tower in London , along with commercial and retail space . if Southwark approve the plan , the development could be up and run as soon as @card@ . however , Ms Tan also say the group might have to ` ` get creative ' ' if the pound continue its downward trajectory and cost soar . ` ` we do n't really know about Brexit because the government have n't say anything about its plan . we might have to get creative if cost go up , ' ' she add . but Brexit have provide a tonic for St Giles ' two London hotel , with the fall in sterling against the euro result in increase spending power for Europeans in London . ` ` we have see European spend more , especially in our bar , since the collapse in the value of the pound , ' ' Ms Tan say . the London hotel , which be situate at Heathrow and in central London , be turn over £17m with gross profit of £10m . the St Giles Hotels Group be also on the expansion trail . there be currently nine hotel under the St Giles moniker , but Ms Tan want @card@ by @card@ . with a site secure in Birmingham , she be also look at opportunity in Spain , Cuba and the US , where it already operate the Court and the Tuscany in New York . £1bn the estimated cost of the development by the St Giles Hotels Group in Blackfriars , which could open as soon as @card@
Britain and the EU set for high-stakes game of blackjack ; Analysis
Theresa May leave the EU leader ' summit with talk still deadlock over the question of the so-called Brexit bill . as a consolation , EU leader have agree to open ` ` internal preparatory discussion ' ' on the future UK-EU relationship , but this would be strictly intra-EU . Britain will not be invite to participate . for her part , Mrs May still refuse to spell out what ` ` commitment ' ' the UK would honour in a Brexit financial settlement , insist the ( Euro ) 20billion she offer in her speech in Florence ought to be enough to move talk forward . so what happen next ? here we look at Mrs May ' S option ahead of the next EU leader summit on Dec @card@ . Stick : May stand her ground how will the European Union react ? the EU remain wed to its hardline position that there will be no trade or transition talk until it judge that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' be make on the Brexit bill , Ireland and citizen ' right . EU diplomat expect concrete proposal if they be to give the go-ahead to discussion on the future relationship . that mean the UK say what it will pay for , though not necessarily specify how much . ` ` the only way this process move be if May talk specific . that mean she must address pension , loan liability and the reste à liquid [ the EU budget overhang ] , or nothing move , ' ' a senior EU official tell the Daily Telegraph . while they expect the December European Council to make progress , they may yet stand their ground and rely on the Brexit deadline to force up the price of the financial settlement . one senior EU diplomat put the chance of sufficient progress at ` ` @card@ ' ' while Donald Tusk , the European Council president , warn that consideration of what be possible will start to narrow and shift if no progress be make . ` ` we will have to think about where we be head ' ' if the December deadline be miss . how will the conservative react ? Theresa May will face increase pressure from Eurosceptic backbench MP who until now have be broadly supportive of her approach . their backing be essential in shore up her leadership during an attempted coup after the party conference . the December meeting of the European Council will become a crunch point . if talk do not move on , Eurosceptics could openly revolt , with Cabinet minister include Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , and Michael Gove , the Secretary of State for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs , embolden . the Prime Minister ' S premiership will hinge on whether she can secure a breakthrough without commit to a huge Brexit divorce bill . if the EU do n't blink , Mrs May could find herself in trouble as market react negatively to the grow uncertainty . twist : concession on the bill how will the European Union react ? any concession from London be sure to be welcome , but it will be no guarantee that trade and transition talk will get the green light . much depend on the size of the concession . for most member state , the question of the Brexit bill loom large . ` ` this be not peanut , ' ' one senior EU diplomat say this week , ` ` this be taxpayer ' money ' ' . the EU do not want Mrs May to sign up to a number , but to concede that the UK will honour commitment make during its membership . this mean Eurocrats ' pension , the EU loan book and the UK ' s share of billion of euros already commit to future EU project ( road , hospital ) . the EU side be also insist that the European Court of Justice have a role in the EU-UK withdrawal agreement . this remain a serious obstacle . however , ` ` sufficient progress ' ' do not have to mean full agreement on the three issue , so some concession could persuade the EU to talk trade , particularly as some member state worry that the process will be run into the ground by hardliner . how will the conservative react ? it depend on how big the concession be . if the Prime Minister agree , even tacitly , to a divorce bill of ( Euro ) @card@ billion there will be an explosive reaction . Eurosceptics object to the very principle of a divorce bill , argue the EU should be give the UK money . hand over such a significant amount could trigger an open revolt . not all Eurosceptics see the Brexit divorce bill as a red line . for some , the short-term pain outweigh the gain . the Prime Minister could win support from the Remain wing of her party who argue that the UK need to honour its obligation and get on with talk on a future trade deal . for them , avoid an exit without a deal be the big priority . bust : May walk away how will the European Union react ? with horror and anger . the European Commission have always say it want a deal and will carry the can if talk fail . however , Brussels have a history of theatrical walkout and even if May do go , the door would be leave open for her to come back to the negotiate table , provide she do so before the March @card@ , @card@ Brexit Day deadline . Brussels believe the UK will suffer far bad damage from a crash-out than the EU , and will not rush to grant concession to bring the UK back to the table . it will just watch as business and market react to the walkout . the EU would expect concession to overcome ill will create by a no-deal . the crunch will come if , face with the reality of a chaotic Brexit , the @card@ EU member state be angry enough to accept the economic damage that come with the hard of Brexits in order to defend the integrity of the EU . how will the Tory react ? Eurosceptic Tory MP would be delight . some have say they would cheer from the rafter if Theresa May leave without a deal . Mr Johnson and other Eurosceptics have repeatedly say that leave the European union without a deal be nothing to be afraid of . for some Tory , it be the ideal result ; the UK will be free to forge its own way in the world and strike deal . for other Eurosceptics , it be a means to an end . cabinet minister have tell the Telegraph that Britain and the EU need to have a mighty row to galvanise talk . threaten to leave without a deal could break the deadlock . however , the Prime Minister know she face the wrath of pro-European MP and minister . the government have already be force to delay the EU Withdrawal bill amid fear that Tory would rebel and block a no-deal scenario . that could well see the handful of Tory MP prepare to rebel turn into a landslide . state of the talk leader ' view Emmanuel MACRON ' today , we be not halfway down the road ' Donald TUSK ' report of deadlock between the EU and UK have be exaggerate ' JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker ' Our work assumption be not the no-deal scenario , I hate the no-deal scenario ' Angela Merkel ' we would hope that we will be ready by December to initiate phase two ' Theresa M AY ' I be ambitious and positive for Britain ' S future and for these negotiation . but we still have some way to go '
face the Brexit fact ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : with every day that pass , the petty objection of those who still oppose Brexit become ever less tenable . for month , unreconciled Remainers accuse Theresa May of lack a coherent plan for Brexit . she then provide that plan in a powerful and convincing speech describe the bright future that await Britain outside the EU . then the critic demand a White Paper . Mrs May have duly oblige them with a paper that set out her strategy and objective in detail . that document leave MP such as Labour ' S Keir Starmer reduce to cavil that Mrs May have not set out the precise form that Britain ' s relationship with the EU will take , something that be obviously impossible give that this relationship will be the product of a complex international negotiation . voter have be able to see this for some time , but it must soon dawn even on parliamentary obstructionist that Mrs May have a plan and it be a good one . instead of bitter sniping and undeclared attempt to slow or even halt the Brexit process , they should think about offer constructive criticism , look for way to make a good plan even well . that will require a shift in attitude for some Remainers , accept that Brexit be not , as they have believe , bad for Britain but be actually a chance to prosper . to help them with that mental leap , they should consider the late forecast from the Bank of England , which have again raise its prediction for economic growth . if the Bank , which once subscribe to Project fear pessimism , can admit its mistake and face the fact on Brexit , Remainers in Parliament should do the same . it be time to stop complain and embrace a great opportunity .
a clear strategy and real leadership ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : good thing come to those who wait.Theresa May ' s excellent speech on Brexit be month in the making , but that time be well spend . Mrs May vote Remain , and need time to think through all of the issue with expert , civil servant and her Cabinet before decide exactly how to proceed . it be greatly to her credit that she have now develop such a clear and radical vision of a thriving post- Brexit Britain . her optimistic global outlook - reminiscent of the upbeat , positive spirit of the Vote leave campaign - will stand Britain in good stead in the negotiation to come . her enthusiastic belief in Britain ' S potential to be even great satisfy the demand for a clear sense of direction ; this be real leadership , of the sort we see all too rarely . it be no exaggeration to describe this speech as a define moment in British politics , one that will one day be remember in the same light as Lady Thatcher ' S famous Bruges address , which launch the modern Eurosceptic movement . the Prime Minister have a plan , and it be the right one : we will leave the single market and , in effect , the custom union , cooperate closely with our European ally on a range of issue and seek to be the world leader in free trade . we will remain a proimmigration society but will choose who we want to move here . the plan represent a masterclass in common sense and be exactly what Britain vote for last June . Mrs May ' S plan deserve support and will surely get it from most reasonable people . that be because it be root in confidence . confidence about Britain and its prospect in a global economy . confidence in this country ' s ability to grow and prosper regardless of how EU negotiation conclude - crucially , the Prime Minister be willing to walk away from a bad deal and understand the strength of our bargaining position , unlike David Cameron . some will carp that Mrs May ' s vision for a post-Brexit relationship with the EU be too optimistic , that her suggestion about access to the single market for key industry and a new customs-free deal amount to hope to have our cake and eat it . in fact , Mrs May ' S approach be absolutely right : global Britain should seek the free possible trade with Europe while remain free to strike trade deal with other economy , not least the US . the plan be ambitious , and all the good for it . the doubter underestimate the strength of Britain ' S hand . she be right to observe that trade make everyone rich , so a sensible EU will seek the deal that allow the great possible trade between the EU and Britain . yet Britain be more than a first-rank economy and trading partner . we be a first-rank military power and a world leader in intelligence . those capability be of crucial importance to the EU , and its eastern member in particular , in a world where Donald Trump regrettably call the Nato alliance into question . Mrs May be not so crude as to directly link British cooperation on security to Brexit negotiation , but security must be a dimension in those talk . the Prime Minister be do what Britain want , and do it boldly . she deserve to in time , EU leader who bluster about punish Britain for succeed leave will come to realise that it be in everyone ' S interest to take a more constructive approach . Mrs May do not say it explicitly , but there be steel behind her word : Britain can be a good friend to the EU , or a bad enemy . and the EU today need all the friend it can get . as a result , the chance of a good deal with the EU be high than many observer suggest , especially one who work in financial market . Recent day have once again prove that currency trader be poor analyst of the Brexit story : market be surprise that Mrs May reject remain in the single market even though that be the only logical outcome of the referendum vote , then surprise again when she promise a vote in Parliament on the final Brexit deal . a jump in the pound after the speech suggest trader believe that vote could yet block or slow Brexit , a mistaken conclusion , not least since Mrs May will offer MP a choice between her deal or no deal , leave the EU without a trade agreement other , of course , than our membership of the World Trade Organisation . and either outcome will be much good for Britain than the market ' mistaken pessimism suggest . that pessimism can also be find in the House of Commons , where some MP continue to look for excuse to impede the Brexit process and frustrate the instruction voter deliver in the referendum . those MP can no longer say that Mrs May have no plan for Brexit . claim that the government have ` ` no mandate ' ' to leave the single market be always flimsy but now collapse outright : Mrs May ' S plan would deliver the good market access for those British business that need it , leave those that do not operate in the EU free of EU regulation ; if she do decide to walk away , it will be because Europe , not the UK , decide to indulge in childish protectionism and nativism . that pledge to put the final deal to Parliament also invalidate claim that Mrs May be ignore MP . the obstructionist argument be fall away one by one . should the Supreme Court rule that Mrs May must consult Parliament before invoke Article @card@ , there can now be no justification for either MP or peer stand in her way . doubtless some diehard Remainers in Parliament will attempt legislative sabotage none the less , but they should pay careful attention to public opinion . Mrs May be the popular leader of a popular government , dedicate to the popular policy of leave the EU . her plan to deliver Brexit will no doubt increase that popularity still further . she may have take her time about it , but she be do what Britain want , and do it boldly . she deserve to succeed . the Prime Minister be do what Britain want , and do it boldly . she deserve to succeed
Brexit mean a very different kind of conservatism to Mrs May ; she be woo working-class Labour and Ukip voter by be tough on migrant than Brexiteers want
it ' s wrong , really , to tease Theresa May for say that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . it ' S an elegant and memorable soundbite that say , simply : trust me . if you vote to leave the European Union , you wo n't be trick into Britain stay a member in all but www.name.No more European Court of Justice , no more ` ` free movement of people ' ' . British voter will live under their own law , control their own border and set their own democratic future . but what kind of future do she have in mind ? this be prove the far thorny question . we learn , this week , that the Prime Minister believe Brexit mean a whole lot more than Brexit . it mean the start of a new approach to immigration , where company be ask to draw up a list of the foreigner in their workforce and make the figure public . an approach where voter be tell that they may have lose their job , or be suffer low pay , due to these immigrant ( who ` ` take job British people could do ' ' ) in spite of employment be at a record high . and those who might have reservation about such language ? the sneering metropolitan elite , who disparage the patriotism of the work www.class.No one doubt that the vote to leave the EU be dramatic.But this ? it ' S all very new indeed , and a radical departure for conservatism . Mrs May see this as follow the momentum of the Brexit vote.Intriguingly , Brexit Britain be one where the frontier of the state be roll forward , rather than back . to a great many grassroots Tory , this be a courageous , timely and welcome overture to the million of Ukip and Labour voter - at a time when both party be in chaos . to other , it ' S a terrifying sign that the nasty party be make a comeback . an American visitor to this week ' s party conference in Birmingham spot the conundrum . why be it , she ask me , that the Brexiteers be the one most uncomfortable about this more robust language on immigration ? and why be those who back Remain far more at ease with crack down on these Europeans ? and be n't this a tad hypocritical : if the Brexiteers ride to victory on the back of anti-immigration sentiment then how can they be surprise when the PM act on these concern ? the answer be that , from the offset , the Tories who campaign to leave the EU be very keen to portray it as a internationalist endeavour - not a nativist yawp . a mission to raise the national sight to more distant horizon ; to go out into the world . Boris Johnson , Liam Fox , Michael Gove , Daniel Hannan , all spoke of Britain as a globally mind country strain at the leash of the EU . as they know , the Remainers be keen to portray Brexit as a sinister , xenophobic cry from little Englander who want to stop www.immigration.No , they reply , immigration be good and we want more of it , but in a way fully control by an elect government . the Vote leave campaign say plenty about what Brexit should mean : to end discrimination against non-EU migrant , with a points-based system that would be ` ` fair , more humane , and good for the economy ' ' . and the unachievable pledge to reduce net migration to the ` ` ten of thousand ? ' ' the Brexiteers do not repeat it . even in government , Boris Johnson have warn that make such pledge lead to disappointment . Liam Fox argue in Cabinet for loosen immigration control with Australia . both be slap down and remind : the government be play the number game . the Brexit vote be a reset moment , a chance to abandon the immigration pledge . in her first few day as Home Secretary , Amber Rudd have think the target be be abolish because no one have mention it to her . now , she ' S in charge of meet it . hence the ever-more-desperate idea , like name and shame of company that employ too many foreigner . this dismay Brexiteers because it send out such a toxic message . the world be still ask : what just happen in Britain ? why be it now talk about make list of foreigner ? the same divide can be see over the fate of the three million EU national in Britain . the Brexiteers want to offer them immediate assurance that they can stay , no matter what assurance be give to brit abroad . David Davis tell me this week the chance of their staying be ` ` @card@ per cent ' ' . Michael Gove tell me that this may be a weak negotiate tactic but ` ` decency come first ' ' . it ' S the two most senior Remainers , Philip Hammond and Theresa May , who be adamant that no such assurance be give . so in this way , the Polish nurse and Italian mechanic now find themselves collateral in negotiation and it ' S mainly Brexiteers who find this repugnant . in her speech , Mrs May say her main enemy be the socialist Left and the ` ` libertarian Right ' ' - a faction whose troop be perhaps even thin on the ground than Lib Dems . I suspect what she really have in mind be liberal conservatism , the type that Boris Johnson and Michael Gove be prepare to champion have their joint leadership bid not end in such a debacle . they would have carry on the type of Tory liberalism that underpin David Cameron ' S leadership , and make the coalition possible . Mrs May be appeal not to Lib Dems , but what she see as the abandon working class . and who can deny the scale of the opportunity ? Steven Woolfe , who be favourite to be the next Ukip leader before he be assail in Strasbourg yesterday , would have speak just as robustly and eloquently about patriotism and immigration . his Ukip might have supplant Labour in the north of England , as the SNP have do in Scotland . ` ` we could do business with Woolfe , ' ' one Cabinet member tell me this week . ` ` he ' s our kind of kipper . ' ' Mrs May see it differently : why bother with a deal , or a coalition , if you ' re not too squeamish to take Ukip voter for yourself ? it ' S a fascinating , daring and audacious move but it have precious little to do with leave the European Union . indeed , much of it be the very opposite to the direction the Brexiteers would have take have any of them go on to succeed . Brexit , it turn out , mean a very new type of muscular conservatism - whether the Brexiteers like it or not . follow Fraser Nelson on Twitter @ FraserNelson ; Read More at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Juncker try to heal rift as he give way on refugee ; Migrant quota will not be impose in olive branch to East Europe , but rebuke for Britain over Brexit
Brussels yesterday publicly back down over its plan to force eastern EU state to accept refugee quota in an attempt to heal the continent ' S grow East-West rift before a crucial Brexit summit in Bratislava tomorrow . Jean-Claude Juncker , the president of the European Commission , use his annual state of the Union address to declare that accept refugee ` ` must be voluntary , it must come from the heart , it can not be impose ' ' . it represent a major concession to eastern EU country , lead by Poland and Hungary , who have rebel against attempt by Berlin and Brussels to impose refugee quota on them . the olive branch come a day after Donald Tusk , the European Council president , warn Poland against ` ` rock the European boat ' ' over demand for treaty change to reverse the EU superstate and return power to European capital . as the head of @card@ EU government prepare to meet in the Slovakian capital , Mr Juncker say it be time to stop the ` ` endless dispute , quarrel and bickering ' ' and focus on shape a new post-Brexit future for the EU . acknowledge that Europe be more divide than at any time in his memory , Mr Juncker say that split on the euro , EU value and migration be an ` ` existential crisis ' ' for Europe . ` ` never before have I see such little common ground between our member state , ' ' he say . with the British vote to leave have shake the EU , Mr Juncker propose a series of measure design to restore confidence that Europe could deliver real prosperity and security , not the ongoing austerity and uncontrolled migration of recent year . EU army Europe need a military headquarters and ` ` should work towards a common military force ' ' , Mr Juncker say , but be quick to add that any effort to create what critic dub an ` ` EU army ' ' must ` ` complement Nato ' ' . ` ` more European defence in Europe do n't mean less trans-Atlantic solidarity , ' ' say Mr Juncker in another nod to restive eastern European and Baltic state who view Nato as the cornerstone of their security in the face of an increasing Russia aggression . other security measure include strong EU border check , a bolster EU Coastguard and a new EU visa scheme . job and investment Mr Juncker acknowledge Europe ' S citizen , particularly its young , be suffer from chronic unemployment and risk become the first generation to be bad off than its parent . among a raft of popular measure design to ward-off the ` ` galloping ' ' force of anti-EU populism , Mr Juncker propose double his flagship investment fund to ( Euro ) @card@ billion ( £537 billion ) by @card@ to try to create job and improve infrastructure . other measure include promising 5G mobile phone network as early as @card@ and equip ` ` every European village and every city with free wireless Internet access ' ' . Brexit on the subject of Brexit , Mr Juncker urge Britain to begin withdrawal talk as soon as possible and reiterate the European Commission stance that there would be no à la carte deal . ` ` only those can have unlimited access to the internal market who accept that there will be free access for person and good , ' ' he say , add that while Brussels regret the British vote to leave , ` ` the European union as such be not at risk ' ' from Brexit . however , in a sign of his anger at what the Commission see as Britain ' s irresponsible encouragement of populist force during the referendum campaign , he single out the murder of a Polish man in Essex as an example of Europe fail to live up to its value . Response Mr Juncker ' S critic accuse him of recycle old idea in his speech and fail to learn the lesson of Brexit - which conservative and Eurosceptics say be that the people of Europe want less Europe , not more . Syed Kamall , the British MEP , say Mr Juncker be ignore the ` ` voice of discontent ' ' in Europe that Brexit represent . ` ` they be ask for more military integration , more request for money from member state , more debt to keep today ' S socialist happy . but the more Europe you build , the more detached its citizen feel , ' ' he say . however , Guy Verhofstadt , the arch-EU federalist appoint by the European Parliament to negotiate Brexit talk , say ` ` more Europe ' ' would quash populist force , not stoke them . in the end , there be only one point of absolute agreement - that Mr Juncker , know for give three-hour speech - have surprise everyone with his brevity at only @card@ minute .
Scotland Britain must stand firm on Brexit bill , say Boris ally ; EU demand for progress threaten ' collapse ' of talk
Britain must not cave in to EU demand for a big Brexit divorce bill after Brussels set a two-week deadline for the UK to improve its offer , ally of Boris Johnson have warn . Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , yesterday say Britain must show ` ` real and sincere progress ' ' on the Brexit bill if it want to break the deadlock by the end of the year . it come amid report that Theresa May be prepare to increase the UK ' s offer to the EU after Brussels say that the ( Euro ) 20billion ( £18billion ) she have already commit be not enough . the EU want at least ( Euro ) 60billion . the Foreign Secretary , who have previously say that the EU can ` ` go whistle ' ' if it want a huge divorce bill , be understand to believe that the UK must hold its nerve ahead of the December summit . an ally of Mr Johnson say : ` ` you do n't pay your bill at a restaurant halfway through ; you pay at the end . that ' s sensible business . ' ' last night source close to the British negotiation warn the EU that Brexit negotiation would ` ` collapse ' ' if it do not take a more reasonable approach to talk . Tory Eurosceptics have warn the Brexit divorce bill be ` ` critical ' ' and that the UK can not afford to give any more ground . Iain Duncan Smith , a Tory MP and former Conservative leader , tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` they think we blink in Florence and now they believe we will blink again . we must not blink . ` ` the one big hand we have be money . they be desperate . if we give away that we give away any chance of get a good free trade agreement . the two get decide at the same time . ` ` the money be critical , we can not give any more ground on this . Tory Eurosceptics be get really unnerved by this . it be stretch them to break . ' ' Senior EU diplomat tell the Daily Telegraph that the UK must commit to pay outstanding budget contribution , pension and other liability if it want to make progress with talk . ` ` Trust have suffer a lot in the last few month , and the possible interpretation of what these item stand for be very broad , ' ' the source say . ` ` so we need all three to be mention , and only then we need to work on the amount . ' ' however , the UK be dispute the way that the EU be calculate the bill and believe that the weak pound mean the UK should pay considerably less than the ( Euro ) 60billion expect . a UK source say : ` ` the problem be that it be disingenuous - to put it mildly - for the EU to suggest that they just want us to say a single sentence to move on . ` ` they say they do n't want to generate ' a number ' but they want to define what that sentence mean in such a way that , in practice , those commitment be define within a very narrow band . ' ' British negotiator say that the UK would , in theory , be prepare to discuss the principle of the Brexit divorce bill but do not want to give away their hand . another source familiar with Britain ' s negotiating position warn : ` ` if the demand for sufficient progress become too big , there be risk that the whole process will collapse . ' '
Scotland business tell Sturgeon : ' get on with day job ' ; Business chief tell Sturgeon to forget indyref2 and ' get on with the day job '
business leader be ` ` feed up ' ' of Nicola Sturgeon ' s bid to break up Britain and want her to get back to her day job , accord to the head of one of Scotland ' s best-known brand . Les Montgomery , the chief executive of bottled water firm Highland Spring , say the Scottish government should be help the conservative achieve the well possible Brexit outcome . his comment come after the First Minister ` ` reset ' ' her timetable for a second vote on Scottish independence , say she would revisit the issue in autumn @card@ when the detail of the Brexit deal be know . she say a new ballot before @card@ remain ` ` likely ' ' , and have be accuse of ignore the message Scot send to her in the general election when the SNP lose @card@ seat . in March this year she have call for a new vote between autumn next year and the spring of @card@ . Mr Montgomery say independence be a distraction and the Scottish Government should instead be ` ` get on with the job they be there to do ' ' , which he say include focus on continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ employment and investment . he say : ` ` I have @card@ people that I be responsible for , and I be try to do the good for them . I would think the Scottish government should also try to do the good for the people as a whole . ' ' on Brexit , Mr Montgomery say the Scottish government should be help the country ` ` exit as effectively as possible ' ' , rather than create more division . ` ` what we and the wide industry need be for the UK and devolve government to continue work together , swiftly and decisively , to bring clarity to key question for business as the Brexit process continue , ' ' he say . he add that the UK ' s divorce from the EU would not have a meaningful impact on Highland Spring , but a vote for independence could be more of a risk . ` ` we ' re base in Scotland but we ' re a British company , ' ' he say . ` ` we send @card@ per cent of our product to England , and we be fortunate to consider ' local ' to mean ' British ' . that ' S how it should be . ' ' Jackie Baillie , Scottish Labour ' s economy spokesman , say business be ` ` tired of the SNP obsession with independence and the damage the uncertainty of another referendum be do to our economy ' ' . she add : ` ` just last week a report from the Fraser of Allander Institute warn that Scotland face slip back into recession . we need a government focus on invest in our economy and create job in Scotland , not constitutional game playing . ' ' meanwhile , Jamie Hepburn , the employability minister , tell the BBC ' s Sunday Politics the low oil price be responsible for about two third of Scotland ' s sluggish growth , although there be ` ` other underlie trend ' ' . a spokesman for the Scottish Government say Brexit be ` ` far and away the big threat to Scottish job , investment and living standard ' ' . he add : ` ` at the same time , Scotland vote overwhelmingly against leave Europe , and we have make clear that the country should still have a choice on its future at the end of the Brexit process , once the term of the deal be know . ' '
this Brexit deal will be the legacy of our time , say May ; Britain ' s plan to negotiate new term on trade and immigration be make clear and give a warm reception
Theresa May yesterday set out a blueprint which will guide Britain ' S negotiation to leave the European union over the next two year . Mrs May say her speech , entitle a Global Britain , be ` ` the framework of a deal that will herald a new partnership between the UK and the EU ' ' . it be ` ` a comprehensive and carefully consider plan that focus on the end , not just the mean - with its eye fix firmly on the future , and on the kind of country we will be once we leave ' ' . Mrs May and her minister will not reveal ` ` blow by blow ' ' detail of her negotiate strategy because it would be against ` ` the national interest ' ' . the Prime Minister say : ` ` this be not a game or a time for opposition for opposition ' S sake . it be a crucial and sensitive negotiation that will define the interest and the success of our country for many year to come . and it be vital that we maintain our discipline . ' ' Mrs May ' s 12-point plan for Brexit centre on regain control of border , end the jurisdiction of the European court and get a good deal for British business . in a passionate plea for Britain to get behind her plan , Mrs May say that it would be ` ` the legacy of our time ' ' . controlling immigration Britain will create an immigration system that ` ` serve the national interest ' ' after the UK quit the EU . the Prime Minister say : ` ` in the last decade or so , we have see record level of net migration in Britain , and that sheer volume have put pressure on public service , like school , stretch our infrastructure , especially housing , and put a downward pressure on wage for work class people . ` ` as Home Secretary for six year , I know that you can not control immigration overall when there be free movement to Britain from Europe . ' ' she continue : ` ` Brexit must mean control of the number of people who come to Britain from Europe . and that be what we will deliver . ' ' Mrs May warn that ` ` while control immigration can bring great benefit ... when the number get too high , public support for the system falter ' ' . verdict : the comment on immigration will delight Eurosceptics who for year have call for the government to curb number . this be the red of line in the negotiation and end freedom of movement must be deliver by the Prime Minister . however , business will want assurance that they will have access to enough labour in the year ahead . out of the single market Britain will leave the EU single market and ` ` be free to strike trade deal across the world ' ' . Mrs May also signal that Britain would most probably have to leave the custom union , or agree different term with the EU , to sign these new trade deal . the UK want ` ` the free possible trade in good and service ' ' with the EU after Brexit . Mrs May say Britain be a ` ` great , global nation with so much to offer Europe and so much to offer the world . ' ' a ` ` bold and ambitious Free Trade agreement ' ' with the EU be a priority . it would ` ` give British company the maximum freedom to trade with and operate within European market - and let European business do the same in Britain ' ' . Mrs May say ` ` the day of Britain make vast contribution to the EU every year will end ' ' . verdict : for Britain to prosper in the world after Brexit , it would have be nonsensical to remain a member of the single market unable to do free trade deal with America , China and India . the deal over the custom union will remain perhaps the most crucial , albeit technical , part of the negotiation . right for British expats the right of British expats to carry on live in the EU - and EU national live in the UK - will be enshrine ` ` as early as we can ' ' , Mrs May say . Britain have make clear to the other @card@ EU country that a reciprocal deal could be sign now to ` ` give people the certainty they want straight away ' ' . verdict : Mrs May ' S commitment will be a relief to the UK ' s hundred of expats in the EU who be worried they may have to move back to the UK . however , the detail of the effective amnesty for EU national live in the UK represent a major challenge for Whitehall . smooth , orderly Brexit Shared rule between the UK and the EU on immigration control , financial regulation and law and order could continue after Brexit , Mrs May pledge . it be in ` ` our mutual selfinterest ' ' to phase out regulation from the EU . she say : ` ` this will give business enough time to plan and prepare for those new arrangement . ' ' the transitional period , however long , would seek to avoid a ` ` disruptive cliff-edge . ' ' Verdict : Anthony Browne , chief executive of the British Bankers ' Association , say Mrs May have provide ` ` important clarity ' ' on the UK ' s future relationship with Europe and the Federation of Small business welcome plan for a transition period . Ukip say any continued cooperation be ` ` diametrically oppose to the independence the British people vote for ' ' . protect worker ' right worker ' right which be currently set out in EU employment law will be enshrine in British law after Brexit . there have be fear from union that protection such as the Working Time Directive which stop staff be force to work for more than @card@ hour each week will not be write into British regulation . verdict : design to appeal to Labour voter in the north of England who back Brexit . however , the move may prove controversial with free market conservative who have long hope for deregulation away from Brussels . strengthen the Union the ` ` precious bond ' ' which tie together the United Kingdom will be strong , not weak , outside of the EU . Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland will each receive more power as responsibility be ` ` repatriate ' ' from Brussels , Mrs May say . she invite written submission from Northern Ireland and Wales , have already receive one from Scotland , about how they view the UK after Brexit . she say her ` ` guiding principle ' ' will be that there be ` ` no new barrier to live and do business ' ' . verdict : SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon say a different future for Scotland be more likely following Mrs May ' s announcement about the single market . she call for ` ` serious engagement ' ' on Scotland ' s proposal to be allow to remain even if the rest of the UK leave . cooperation on security Britain will continue to share intelligence with EU member state about threat from terrorist after Brexit . leave the EU would have no bearing on a share desire to combat ` ` crossborder crime ' ' , terrorism and ` ` the danger present by hostile state ' ' , Mrs May say . she want the UK ' s future relationship with the EU ` ` to include practical arrangement ' ' on law enforcement and intelligence sharing . she add : ` ` we will continue to work closely with our European ally in foreign and defence policy . ' ' Verdict : the comment will have reassure EU leader who rely heavily on Britain ' s expertise Providing certainty member of both Houses of Parliament will have a vote on the term of Brexit . Mrs May also confirm that when the European Communities Act be repeal the government will write ` ` the body of EU law into British law ' ' . verdict : business group welcome Mrs May ' s commitment to provide certainty wherever possible and the value of the pound rise after she confirm the Brexit agreement would have to be approve by MP and peer . control our own law leave the EU will mean that the UK ` ` will take back control of our law and bring an end to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice in Britain ' ' . verdict : the news cheer Eurosceptics . but Tory MP Ken Clarke say Britain could still find itself under the jurisdiction of the European court as part of its new trade deal with the EU . new trade agreement Ministers will ensure that they ` ` get out into the wide world , to trade and do business all around the globe ' ' , Mrs May say . free itself from the single market will allow the UK ` ` to increase significantly its trade with the fast grow export market in the world ' ' . talk about trade deal have already start with China , Brazil and the Gulf States as well as Australia , New Zealand and India . Britain would not be ` ` at the back of the queue ' ' for a new trade deal with the US , as President Obama have say last summer , but at the ` ` front of the line ' ' . verdict : Allie Renison , of the Institute of Directors , say : ` ` business leader will be hearten by the Prime Minister ' s strong argument for the value of free trade , an argument currently be make by all too few global leader . ' ' travel across Irish border people will still be able to travel between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic after Brexit without show their passport . Mrs May say a Common Travel Area cover the island of Ireland be ` ` an important priority for the UK in the talk ahead ' ' . this pre-date Britain join the European Economic Community and there be no reason why this ` ` special relationship ' ' could not continue . verdict : business in Northern Ireland welcome Mrs May ' s commitment to maintain the Common Travel Area but warn of the danger of leave the single market . science and innovation a post-Brexit Britain will be at the forefront of new thinking in science , space exploration , research and technology . the UK will ` ` welcome agreement to continue to collaborate with our European partner ' ' . verdict : the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry say the comment be a ` ` welcome statement of intent that provide the UK ' s pharmaceutical industry with confidence for the future ' ' . look familiar ? May ' s trusty tartan Theresa May turn to her ` ` lucky ' ' suit whenever she need to deliver a serious message . the Black Watch tartan suit be craft by the very British designer Dame Vivienne Westwood . the Prime Minister first wear the £1,190 outfit at the @card@ Tory conference , and again when she announce her Conservative Party leadership campaign in June last year , below . but wear Best of British on the day she declare that she want to negotiate new trade deal with the entire world be a smart move on Mrs May ' S part . Bethan Holt
Scotland May ' s Brexit rebuke to Boris ; EU talk should not take two year , say Johnson
Theresa May last night say that only she will decide the term of Britain ' s departure from the EU , after Boris Johnson begin set out a strategy for Brexit . speak in the US , the Foreign Secretary suggest yesterday that the UK will begin formal Brexit talk ` ` early next year ' ' and leave the EU by @card@ . in comment that will delight Conservative Eurosceptics , he say that the discussion could be wrap up before the two-year deadline and that Britain will be able to control its border and do a ` ` jumbo free trade deal ' ' . he also indicate that country such as Australia could send more migrant to the UK in return for trade deal . he also say it be ` ` absolute baloney ' ' to suggest that Britain will be unable to retain access to the European single market unless it keep free movement . however , Downing Street source last night make clear that all decision on the timing of Brexit be the Prime Minister ' S alone . ` ` the decision to trigger Article @card@ be hers , ' ' the source say . ` ` she will be do it at a time when she continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ believe it be in the good interest for Britain . ' ' the source add : ` ` the Prime Minister ' S position have not change . ' ' Mrs May have repeatedly refuse to set out her plan for Brexit , believe that the UK should not ` ` put its card on the table ' ' before the negotiation have start . David Davis , the Brexit minister , be earlier this month slap down after he suggest that Britain could leave the single market . Mr Johnson say : ` ` what we ' re do be talk to our European friend and partner now in the expectation that by the early part of next year you will see an Article @card@ letter . we will invoke that and in that letter I ' m sure we will be set out some parameter for how we propose to take this forward . ` ` you invoke Article @card@ in the early part of next year . you have two year to pull it off . I do n't actually think we will necessarily need to spend a full two year but let ' s see how we go . ' ' Mr Johnson say that it be in the ` ` overwhelming interest ' ' of the EU to do a deal with the UK that allow it to control its border while still have a free trade deal . ` ` we be go to benefit from the fantastic opportunity for great free trade with our friend in the EU . it ' S overwhelmingly in their interest to do that , ' ' he say . ` ` not only do we buy more German car than anybody else , we drink more Italian wine than any other country in Europe , @card@ million litre of prosecco every year . they ' re not go to put that at risk . ` ` of course , we need a proper deal for our financial service industry . we need to sort out the question of free movement but it be all doable . ' ' Mr Johnson suggest that the citizen of Commonwealth country could get easy immigration access to the UK . ` ` at the moment it be more difficult for Australian than it be for anybody from Slovakia or wherever it happen to be [ to move to Britain ] . ' ' he reject the claim make by EU leader that Britain can not have access to the European single market unless it accept free movement of migrant . a think tank have say that the EU have more to lose than the UK over the Brexit negotiation . Civitas say the EU have @card@ million job link to trade with the UK , while Britain have only @card@ million job tie to the bloc . port development million of taxpayer cash waste million of euros of EU taxpayer ' money have be ` ` waste ' ' on ambitious seaport project , a report by the European court of auditor , say . between @card@ ( Euro ) @card@ billion of EU fund be spend on port , but there be a ` ` high risk ' ' that almost ( Euro ) @card@ million be waste , with project that go unused or duplicate facility nearby .
industry ' S fear over EU exit deserve to be hear ; Comment
rexiteers would rather we do n't listen to business leader who , on the whole , be in favour of the UK remain a member of the European Union . BHaving see the shambles that Lord Rose , the former head of Marks & Spencer who be lead the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign , be make of their case , Inners may increasingly be of a similar mind . in Parliament last week to face the Treasury Select Committee , Lord Rose say : ` ` the benefit of be in the EU be outweigh by the cost . ' ' presumably he mean the opposite . he then say wage will rise if Britain vote to leave the European Union . presumably he do n't realise how this would be interpret - that the EU may be good for business but not necessarily for their employee . the City be make a similar hash of its case for stay in the EU . the economist at a range of investment bank have lay out what they think Brexit will mean for the economy . most agree that the political uncertainty will weigh heavily on sterling and this could force up inflation , which could , in turn , deter foreign investor . last week BlackRock , the world ' s large asset management company , say that Brexit offer lot of risk and little obvious reward . the only trouble be that it be front by Rupert Harrison . who ' S he ? BlackRock ' s chief macrostrategist for multi-asset fund but also George Osborne ' s former chief of staff . this hand the Out campaign a Mandy Rice-Davies line of rebuttal to Mr Harrison ' s warning about the economic danger of Brexit : ` ` well , he would say that , would n't he ? ' ' many feel that the financial industry be more worry about the danger to itself . be in the European Union give bank base in the UK access to the single market under the current ` ` passporting ' ' arrangement . yesterday , Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank of England , tell MP the City of London would ` ` without question ' ' lose business if it fail to negotiate the continuation of exist mutual recognition agreement follow Brexit . he warn that these kind of negotiation ` ` in general take a very long time to achieve ' ' . the Governor add that a number of major financial sector firm have contingency plan to move headquarters out of the City of London if Britain vote to leave the European Union . there be , however , three problem with these warning . one be that when banker say that they might shift in the event of Brexit , many cry out ` ` good riddance ' ' . ' many feel the financial industry be more worry about the danger to itself ' then there be the question of where they would go . would swathe of banker really want to relocate to Paris , Frankfurt , or , as the European head of one US investment bank suggest to me , with a straight face , Portugal ? lastly , be the threat of a post-Brexit banking exodus another example of the industry cry wolf ? after all , HSBC rather spike everyone ' S gun by recently commit to keep its headquarters in the UK and say it would have to move only a few hundred banker to Paris in the event of Brexit . so that ' S that then - we can safely ignore the financial and business naysayer who worry that the UK would n't be able to make it out there in the big , bad world on its own ? not quite so fast , I ' m afraid . bank may be argue for European Union membership out of self-interest . but it do n't necessarily follow that their interest be mutually exclusive to those of the rest of the country . financial service be responsible for about a 10th of the UK economy and a 10th of all its tax revenue . Brexiteers like to make the distinction between company ( who may suffer from a vote to leave ) and consumer ( who may gain ) . but that be a false dichotomy - consumer be also employee - the balance of benefit be far grey . it ' S also worth bearing in mind that bank be argue in favour of the European union despite all the brickbat that Brussels have throw their way . these include the threat of a financial transaction tax and the banker ' bonus cap , which the Mayor of London , Boris Johnson , back when he champion the City , describe as ` ` possibly the most delude measure to come from Europe since Diocletian try to fix the price of grocery across the Roman Empire ' ' . then there be a misunderstanding of any potential ` ` exodus ' ' - there will be no financial Moses to part the English Channel and lead his people to a promised land of champagne and money . but when staff quit job , as they very regularly do , bank make a decision about where they will replace them and whether the cost of an exbanker in London can be well spend hire someone in Paris , Frankfurt or even Lisbon . Brexit could put a little pressure on the wrong side of those scale . the business model of bank be already under threat , a raft of new regulation have make many of their activity uneconomical and squeeze the margin of other . in this the City be similar to the UK ' s £69.5bn-a-year car industry , which recently come out overwhelmingly in favour of stay in the EU . both certainly think even a small difference in our trade relation with Europe could have a big impact on their future . to be clear , I have n't yet make up my mind about Brexit . I suspect that the economic effect one way or the other will be small ( although , let ' s not kid ourselves , we ' re all guess ) - a weak pound and a bit more inflation might even be a good thing . however , I do n't see how you can argue that the economic effect of Brexit will be marginal and then ignore the view of low-margin industry . if they ' re worry , that should , at the very least , give us pause for thought . ben.wright @ telegraph.co.uk ' many feel the financial industry be more worry about the danger to itself '
City ' s worry at heart of Brexit talk , say Davis
David Davis reassure City firm he have their concern at heart before head off to Brussels for the late round of Brexit negotiation yesterday . ` ` when I sit around the negotiate table with [ EU chief negotiator ] Michel Barnier , or round the Cabinet table with my colleague , it ' S always with the importance of the City very much in my mind , ' ' the Brexit Secretary say , add he be ` ` determine to maintain the City ' S competitiveness ' ' . speak at an award ceremony this week , Mr Davis say he want to ensure that employ EU citizen remain ` ` as easy as possible ' ' post Brexit . ` ` while leave the EU will allow us to bring back control of immigration , it wo n't mean pull up the drawbridge , ' ' he say . relationship between the City and the Government have be strain in the wake of the Brexit referendum as some boss have feel their interest have be overlook in negotiation . but minister have be attempt to reassure business recently . talk between Mr Davis and Mr Barnier resume yesterday , with negotiation expect to be focus on the scale of Britain ' s exit bill , right of EU citizen and the future of the Irish border .
weary Davis hand out fudge for the viper to sink their tooth into ; Sketch
Ilove watch David Davis in the Commons . his body language say so much about him . other minister simply stand at the dispatch box . Mr Davis , however , lean against it , on one elbow , while jauntily wave his spectacle around in his free hand . he make it look as if , rather than answer question in Parliament on matter of grave national import , he ' s lean against the bar of his favourite pub , have a chinwag with the landlord while wait for his pint to settle . yesterday , though , the Brexit Secretary seem to lack his usual blokeish twinkle . he ' d be summon to the House to explain why , the day before , he ' d tell a select committee that MP might not get to vote on the final Brexit deal until after Brexit have take place . as he haul himself to his foot , Mr Davis look uncharacteristically weary . you could tell what he be think . all this dratted bother : have to write a statement , read it out , spend the next @card@ minute answer angry question about it ... and all because of one tiny , unthinking slip . ` ` we ' ve be very clear right from the start ... ' ' he begin , tiredly . Labour MP guffaw . ` ` what a mess ! ' ' snort Sir Keir Starmer , Mr Davis ' s opposite number . the government , sigh the Brexit Secretary , still ` ` expect and intend ' ' MP to get a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' before Britain leave the EU in March @card@ . Labour and Tory Remainers , though , be not satisfy . what , they demand to know , do ` ` meaningful ' ' mean ? surely a vote would only be meaningful if MP could tell the government to reopen negotiation ? if they could only choose between accept the government ' S deal and leave the EU with no deal , be that really a choice at all ? ( if this do prove to be the choice on offer , it could give rise to a fascinating spectacle : Labour Remainers voting with the government in order to avoid no deal , while some Tory Brexiteers vote against the government in order to secure no deal . ) in general , Remainer MP be pretty cross - and by far the cross be Barry Sheerman . ` ` can I say this [ to Mr Davis ] in the friendly of term , ' ' begin the Labour MP for Huddersfield , ominously , ` ` will he stop FUDGING ? we understand why he fudge yesterday - because the nest of VIPERS behind him MAKE him a fudger ! Stop FUDGING ! ' ' even before Mr Sheerman have finish shout about fudge , the Commons be in uproar . ` ` what ? ' ' splutter Sir Desmond Swayne , a vocal Tory Brexiteer . ` ` Me ? a viper ? ' ' soothingly , the Speaker reassure Sir Desmond that neither he , nor any other MP , be a viper . however , he add , the use of the word ` ` viper ' ' be not in itself unparliamentary . Labour MP be delight . ` ` Ssssssssssssss ! ' ' they hiss at Sir Desmond with relish . ` ` Ssssssssssssss ! ' ' Sir Desmond appear to take the joke in good part , although word later go round that several Labour MP have be rush to hospital with severe bite to their ankle .
if Theresa May can not deliver on Brexit she will lose her core supporter Bird-friendly energy ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - as she fine-tunes her forthcoming speech on Brexit and ponder the division in her Cabinet , Theresa May should be aware that if she fail to deliver our exit from the single market , the custom union and the rule of the European Court of Justice then many million of people will not vote Conservative again . she will lose the hard core of the party , and deliver the country to Jeremy Corbyn and his hard-left government . Sheila Ellison Thatcham , Berkshire sir - you be right that the Prime Minister ` ` must clarify her own stand on Brexit ' ' ( lead article , September @card@ ) , and one hope that she will do so during her speech in Italy this Friday . however , the danger be that her stance may be one of appeasement rather than strength . that be why the Foreign Secretary ' s article in the Daily Telegraph last Saturday be so important and why its timing be actually exquisite . thanks to her ill-advised decision to call a general election , Mrs May have diminish her own authority as Prime Minister . she would do well to embrace Boris Johnson ' S optimism and determination , in order to direct Brexit negotiation from the position of strength which be the reality of Britain ' S situation relative to the EU . John Waine Nuneaton , Warwickshire sir - argument for a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' start to unravel when they be articulate by politician who advocate a short transition period after April @card@ . these politician ignore the practical impact of international commerce . the British Retail Consortium ( BRC ) have warn that leave the EU without a tariff deal would see shopper face an average price increase of @card@ per cent in everyday food product , with cheese , for example , up @card@ per cent and tomato up @card@ per cent . this forecast be base on the impact of World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) tariff and ignore the additional inflationary effect of an everweakening domestic currency . however , with up to @card@ truck use the port of Dover every day , many contain perishable food , and with no infrastructure to inspect cargo and paperwork under WTO rule , the BRC ' s line of argument fall away , as there wo n't be much food leave on shelf anyway . Paul Bendit Arlington , East Sussex sir - I be at a loss to understand the apparent terror of company executive over the possibility of a ` ` cliff-edge ' ' exit from the single market and custom union . by the time we leave the EU in March @card@ they will have have two year and nine month to prepare for Brexit . if they have n't get all their duck in a row by then , frankly they have no right to the position they hold and deserve to go to the wall . John Todd Stoke-on-Trent , Staffordshire sir - we warmly welcome the recognition in Ambrose Evans-Pritchard ' s article on offshore wind ( Business , September @card@ ) of the need for a debate around our ecological duty to the North Sea . it be vital for the protection of our struggle wildlife that Britain , as well as our European neighbour , pursue an energy transition that be in harmony with nature . the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds consider that there can be space for renewable energy and wildlife to thrive together , but there be significant ecological data gap that need to be fill before we will fully understand the impact of the extensive expansion of wind energy in the North Sea , and how we can avoid or minimise that impact . Britain may have win the ` ` zeroemission lottery ' ' , but rush ahead and spend its winning with abandon be unlikely to end well . Simon Marsh Head of sustainable development , RSPB Sandy , Bedfordshire
Brexit stalemate arise out of the EU ' s failure to abide by its own rule ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - why be Michel Barnier , the EU ' s chief negotiator , be allow to ignore the requirement of Article @card@ in the current Brexit talk ? the article state that , when a state have notify the European council of its intention to withdraw from the union , ` ` the Union shall negotiate and conclude an agreement with that state , set out the arrangement for its withdrawal , take account of the framework for its future relationship with the Union ' ' . it be not logically possible to take account of ` ` the framework for the future relationship ' ' until that framework have be settle . the EU should therefore have start by negotiate the framework for the future relationship and only then move to conclude the agreement on the arrangement for the withdrawal . Robert Heather Southampton sir - the condescending response from Michel Barnier et al towards any proposal put forward by the Brexit secretary , David Davis , show only too clearly that the EU side have never have any intention of reach a mutually agree outcome . by continue to insist on a resolution on their term , they be well aware that they can delay and obfuscate to their heart ' content . would it not be realistic to accept this , agree that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' and walk away now ? Paul Strong Claxby , Lincolnshire sir - Michel Barnier , Jean-Claude Juncker and the rest should stop carp about the UK ' s approach to the Brexit negotiation and pay a little more attention to what ' s happen on their side of the English Channel . accord to a ` ` mini poster ' ' for student , purchase in a French supermarket at St Omer , ` ` L'Union européenne ' ' have only @card@ member - and Britain be not one of them . James A Cowan Belmont , Co Durham sir - Venetia Caine ( Letters , August @card@ ) be quite right ; this Brexit farce should be bring to an end , and quickly . the referendum should never have be call and the result majority be too small for such a significant motion to be carry . furthermore , David Cameron say clearly at the time that the outcome be not necessarily a mandate . strong leadership would have end this whole ridiculous affair a long time ago . Let ' s hope that enough people will come to the same conclusion and that common sense will prevail . Ron Stubberfield Beaconsfield , Buckinghamshire sir - Dr Millan Sachania ( Letters , August @card@ ) list three condition which he believe would be appropriate for the running of future referendum . may I suggest a fourth ? ` ` that in the event of the wrong result be return by the electorate , further referendum will be hold until the right result be achieve ' ' . Lord Willoughby de Broke ( Ukip ) London SW1
Scotland Greece demand return of Elgin Marbles as condition of exit deal
Greek politician be campaign for the Elgin Marbles to be return to Athens as part of the Brexit negotiation between Britain and the European Union . Stelios Kouloglou , a member of the European Parliament for the govern hard-left Syriza party , claim that EU treaty law mean that the European Commission ' s Brexit negotiator must raise the controversial issue . the Elgin or Parthenon Marbles be a collection of sculpture , inscription and architectural feature acquire by Lord Elgin between @card@ and @card@ . Lord Elgin have be accuse of steal them or bribe official to remove them from the Parthenon . they be now house in the British Museum , which insist the marble be legally buy from the Ottoman Empire , which rule Athens at the time . Mr Kouloglou , a respected investigative journalist , have twice write to the commission ask for the marble to be part of the Brexit negotiation . ` ` Brexit negotiator must take into account the need to protect European cultural heritage , ' ' he write . ` ` the Parthenon Marbles be consider as the great symbol of European culture . therefore , reunite the marble would be both a sign of respect and civilised relationship between Great Britain and the EU , and much more [ than ] a legal necessity . ' ' the European Commission tell the Daily Telegraph that it do not believe that article @card@ , @card@ and @card@ of the treaty of the EU mean their negotiate team be legally bind to address the issue .
Washington offer good news for Brexit Body : at last some good , upbeat news about Brexit , courtesy of Donald Trump . he use his favour method of communication , a tweet , to foreshadow a bilateral free-trade agreement with the UK after we leave the EU in @card@ that could be ` ` very big and exciting ' ' for job . the president ' s enthusiasm for a deal with Britain - in stark contrast to his predecessor Barack Obama - be a signal endorsement of the effort of Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , who be currently in Washington for talk . after week during which the Cabinet appear to be at loggerhead over the course Brexit should take , the chance to talk positively about the opportunity should be welcome by all of those who otherwise seek out the most downbeat prognostication possible . while disagreement with the EU over citizenship right , the Irish border and the so-called ` ` exit fee ' ' persist and will not be easy to resolve , look further ahead the augury be good . far from Brexit frighten off investor , BMW have announce that a fully electric version of the Mini will be build at the company ' s Cowley plant near Oxford and not in the Netherlands , which be also in the running . this follow Nissan ' s postreferendum decision to manufacture new version of its Qashqai and X-Trail vehicle in the UK . Toyota , too , have agree to invest in the UK after receive reassurance about post-Brexit arrangement from Greg Clark , the Business Secretary . Dr Fox ' S department have also be pro-active , send out to all US congressional district an analysis of what a trade deal with the UK would mean to them . this be a sensible recognition that any deal will have to be approve by Congress . the same approach should be take in Europe : instead of leave all the run to the Commission , we should remind the region in France , Germany and elsewhere run a trade surplus with Britain what be at stake for them if barrier go up after Brexit . clearly , an agreement with the US , our single big trading partner , will impact on some British sector , not least agriculture . the Treasury may need to continue subsidise marginal farmer if we want to keep the British countryside look as it do . moreover , trade deal can take year to negotiate . but the direction of travel be what matter and it be encouraging that key minister be able to provide an optimistic counterweight to those who see nothing but gloom ahead .
the Norwegians and Swiss offer us realistic alternative to hard Brexit
the sure way to prevent Brexit ever happen be for hardline Eurosceptics to overplay a weak hand . ideological greed will get the good of them . the vote for British independence can be consummate only if do safely , in manageable step , and with broad political consent . it can not be do without secure acquiescence from British youth and the devolve nation . nor be it necessary to force through Brexit in a militant fashion . what leaver seek can largely be achieve with statecraft and patience . it certainly can not it be do if the nation be frighten , and frighten it will be if ultra push through a scorched-earth withdrawal from the EU in an economic downturn . the phoney war and the fool ' s prosperity of the last @card@ month have lull Brexiteers into complacency . from now on we will face a darken picture . the global mini-boom peak late last year and have since roll over . China and the US be both tighten monetary policy . UBS say the global ` ` credit impulse ' ' have fall as sharply over the last eight month as it do before the Lehman crisis . the world be eight year into an economic expansion that be long in the tooth , and lade with debt . for a ` ` high-beta ' ' economy such as Britain , leveraged to the up and down of the global economy , this be a treacherous stage of the cycle . the Bank of England inadvertently stoke a credit bubble with emergency stimulus after the referendum . this have mask the damage below the waterline , and store up fresh problem . while the weak pound have be a prop for the economy and a shot in the arm for exporter , it have not lead to a durable surge in investment . the sugar rush be already fade . what we face now be the sting in the tail . inflation reach 2.9pc last month on the delayed feed-through from high import cost . yet wage be lag . real living standard be be squeeze . when the pound crash from @card@ , the poor be protect . benefit and in-work tax credit rate be index to inflation . now the benefit have be freeze until @card@ . the Institute for Fiscal Studies estimate that the poor 8.3million family will end up lose an average of £470 a year . they be already start to take the brunt as the cost of import food , clothes and fuel grind higher . the government will have to carry out Brexit just as stagflation bite , with ever-louder demand to call off the adventure . Europe ' S leader can already sniff it . Germany ' s finance minister , Wolfgang Schäuble , have speak warmly of ` ` open door ' ' if the British people think again . France ' S President Emmanuel Macron use identical language . the dynamics be change fast yet all we get from Theresa May be a refusal to accept that the election make any difference to Brexit . she be circle the wagon . one can understand why some Tories think the vote shed little light on the coloration of Brexit , whether hard , soft , or clean . Ukip voter return to Labour precisely because Jeremy Corbyn match Mrs May ' S vow to halt free movement . his vow breach Labour ' s other pledge : to preserve unfettered access to EU market . yet Mr Corbyn manage to persuade young voter and Remainers that he would somehow deliver a very soft Brexit . but let us not be distract . Tory MP who lose their seat sense that there be a high dosage of protest against a hard Brexit in the Corbyn vote . the emergence of the Ulster Unionists ( DUP ) and the Scottish conservative as king-makers change the equation in any case . like other , I have float the Norwegian option as a half-way house for five to @card@ year . the European Economic Area ( EEA ) allow Britain to retake farming and fishery , and to remove itself from EU reach into foreign , policy , defence , justice and home affair . it would give Britain access to the EU single market without be a member of the custom union , which we should avoid like the plague . outside the custom union the UK could negotiate trade deal with the US , China , India , Japan and other . to remain inside it - the late medium fashion - be wrong-headed . the beauty of the EEA be that if we wish to withdraw later , we could do so in less traumatic circumstance than withdrawal from the EU today under Article @card@ . it would be easy to break free as trade deal stack up . the EEA option greatly reduce the reach of the European Court ( ECJ ) through the Charter of Fundamental Rights . the ECJ would still have sway ( through the EFTA court ) over market matter but this would be define . it be a compromise on the issue of free movement . certain thing can be do that can not be do in the EU . there be a precedent for Australianstyle quota in Liechtenstein . let us not overstate the attraction of the EEA . Lorand Bartels , a law don at Cambridge , have convince me that the UK would have to join as a new member , subject to veto by other . it would not inherit the right of membership as it step out of the EU . this would make us a supplicant and reduce the appeal of the EEA . there be other way to skin a cat . the Helvetophile Tory MEP Dan Hannan - once of this parish - have be a tireless advocate of the EFTA-based ` ` Swiss ' ' option , deem it the close relationship with the EU that be compatible with sovereignty . call it medium-soft , if you want . what we hear instead be Tory ultra tell us that a soft Brexit be no Brexit . my fear be that the government will bluster its way into the come talk with the wrong priority , with too little public support and against a recessionary backdrop . this will lead to a showdown that can end only one way . such a ` ` Greek ' ' debacle would discredit Brexit beyond repair . the cardinal objective be to escape the expand writ of the ECJ and to regain self-government under the supremacy of Parliament . how this be achieve be secondary . how long it take be immaterial . ten year be nothing in the life of a nation . to those who balk at any compromise need to keep the great middle of British society on side , I can only reply : you risk lose the one chance in over @card@ year to jump off the federal express . ' the beauty of the EEA be that if we wish to withdraw later , we could do so with far less trauma '
fear that UK ' s aerospace industry could hit Brexit turbulence
Britain ' S ranking in the global aerospace industry could come under pressure if the government do not hammer out a favourable deal in the Brexit negotiation , accord to manufacturer . the warning come in a report from manufacturer ' organisation EEF and Santander on the British aerospace industry , which be worth £31bn a year to the UK economy and be the world ' s second large , beat only by the US . Britain ' S @card@ aerospace company be specialist in make engine and complex component for aircraft , which make up 79pc of the sector ' s £28.4bn of annual export . the airliner market be dominate by pan-European Airbus and US-based Boeing and although neither build complete aircraft in Britain , both rely on UK-built part . both manufacturer have record order book , mean that even as they ramp up production rate they have almost a decade ' s worth of work in hand , with a reliance on UK aerospace business to help them meet demand . however , Britain ' s essential role in the global aerospace industry could come under pressure as a consequence of Brexit . for example , Airbus build the wing for its jet in Britain , with the company ' s huge plant in Broughton , North Wales , export them to factory around the world . ` ` the concern around the nature and condition of any Brexit deal raise serious question about the next generation of aircraft and where they will be produce , ' ' the report warn . ` ` Airbus could face grow political pressure to bring job back to France , Germany and Spain as a result of the decision to leave the single market . ` ` Broughton be likely to face competition for wing work from Germany and Spain as it be the most lucrative part of the supply chain and both nation be keen to accelerate their aerospace sector . ' ' if Britain - which be already in the grip of a skill shortage - lose access to talented engineer and technician as a result of freedom of movement control result from Brexit , Germany and Spain will have their position strengthen when bidding for new aircraft model , the report say . concern about protectionist measure , such as custom delay , in the wake of Brexit be also flag as a key risk , although under World Trade Organisation rule , the industry be exempt from tariff . a further worry be that Britain ' s membership of the aerospace-certifying authority , the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) . if Britain create its own regulation regime , then manufacturer will still have to have part authorise by EASA , which would discourage further sector investment . £31bn how much the British aerospace industry be worth to the economy each year . it be second only to America ' S in term of size
the BBC have fail in its duty to provide balanced reporting on Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - it be interesting to read that a substantial number of politician have write to the BBC complain of a lack of balance when Brexit be be discuss ( report , March @card@ ) . I largely agree with this , although Andrew Neil remain an exception . he be a robust interviewer , and harsh when face with evasive answer from politician of whatever persuasion . what be most frustrating be the BBC ' s excessive coverage of any negative aspect of Brexit , particularly from its political and economic correspondent , who rarely have anything positive to say about the prospect of life outside the EU . the BBC should offer us a totally balanced view and report news in an unbiased manner . David Kidd Petersfield , Hampshire sir - how right the MP are . we visit friend in Nova Scotia last September , and the first thing they want to talk about be the ` ` disastrous decision ' ' the British people have make in June and how awfully worry we must be . when ask how they arrive at such a view , it transpire that , as expats , they be regular viewer of BBC World News . after a fortnight , we have manage to reassure them of our optimism - and of how most British people , while recognise the challenge , be look forward to a bright future after our withdrawal from the EU . we now regularly update them . Chris Harland Kingston upon Hull , East Yorkshire sir - I be not so sure that the BBC be negative per se about Brexit . perhaps it be now reflect the level of angst that be , for a change , come from the ` ` other ' ' camp . we have year of anti-EU rhetoric , with the great clamour of Nigel Farage and other . now , have win , these people be no longer make a fuss . instead it be our turn . it be Mr Farage who say that a very narrow victory for Remain would not mean the end of the fight . in the event , Brexit win by a very narrow margin - and the BBC be reflect the fact that those who want to remain have not go away . Stephen Dutton Colchester , Essex sir - I can only assume that these MP never watch Question Time . audience be pack with Brexiteers , and the odd anti-Brexit comment be jeer off the floor . we should be a nation devote to free speech , but I fear this be no longer true . Theresa May have choose her path and everything be now be sacrifice to achieve it . perhaps the BBC can afford to be a little more balanced . Chris Garratt Strassen , Luxembourg sir - Nature , we be tell , abhor a vacuum . be it surprising that the BBC have become the official opposition ? Simon Prendiville Yeovilton , Somerset
Scotland see you in court : Brussel to threaten Britain over £50bn Brexit divorce bill
Britain will be threaten with court action by the European union if it try to walk away without pay a £50billion ` ` divorce bill ' ' , leak paper reveal . a draft copy of the EU ' s negotiate strategy for the forthcoming Brexit talk discuss take Britain to the International Court of Justice in the Hague . it quote an official as say that if Britain refuse to pay , ` ` in that case it be , see you in the Hague ! ' ' . Theresa May have receive advice from Government lawyer that Britain could legally leave without pay . a House of Lords committee come to the same conclusion . however , Sir Tim Barrow , Britain ' s ambassador to the EU , have warn that Brussels have confidence in ` ` other legal option ' ' . the leak document , obtain by the Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant , say the EU strategy will also insist that access to the single market will only be grant if freedom of movement remain . it come as a poll show that Remain voter appear to be warm to the idea of Brexit , with more than half want an end to freedom of movement . a similar proportion also support a ban on welfare payment for EU migrant . but nine in @card@ people want Britain to maintain free trade with the EU after Brexit , regardless of which way they vote in last year ' S referendum . the survey , by Professor John Curtice of the National Centre for Social Research , show that Remain voter and leave voter do not necessarily disagree on key aspect of Brexit . Prof Curtice say : ` ` many a Remain voter would like to see the end of freedom of movement ... the priority that the UK Government appear to place on this issue be not necessarily at odd with the view of those who vote Remain . ' ' in the survey of @card@ people , @card@ per cent of leave voter and @card@ per cent of Remain voter want EU migrant to be treat in the same way as non-EU migrant . among Conservative voter , @card@ per cent back free trade , while @card@ per cent want an end to freedom of movement , mean Tories will be the most disappointed if Mrs May do not manage to achieve the goal . the poll illustrate the difficulty Mrs May face as she negotiate a deal that will satisfy the British public . EU negotiator have make it clear that free trade can only be offer in conjunction with freedom of movement , mean the two top priority for voter be incompatible . Prof Curtice say it present the government ` ` with a considerable challenge . Mrs May could well face a hard task at home keep voter onside . ' ' around seven in @card@ voter want to keep EU regulation on water quality standard at beach , limit to the cost of mobile phone call abroad and compensation for airline passenger who have experience delay . more than two-third think Britain should still contribute to EU-funded project such as important university research .
Scotland @card@ to Brexit , as MP see off amendment to win the day
REMAINERS have hope it would be the night when they finally make a dent in Theresa May ' s Brexit plan with a bewilder array of new clause and amendment to the Article @card@ bill . nine proposal in all , range from the right of EU migrant to the opinion of the Gibraltar Government , be put to the vote and , one by one , all nine proposal be throw out by MP . it be a flawless night for Theresa May , as the EU ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill be pass by @card@ vote to @card@ in its original , unamended form . Eurosceptic MP could barely contain their excitement , with one minister say as he go to vote : ` ` I be about to have the good moment of my life since my wedding night . ' ' Disgruntled SNP member show their defiance by sing to Beethoven ' s Ode to Joy - the anthem of Europe - in the chamber , earn a tick off from Lindsay Hoyle , the Deputy www.Speaker.No second referendum the amendment with most potential for chaos be clause @card@ , table by the Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron , which call for a second public referendum before Brexit finally happen . the Prime Minister have already agree that Parliament will get a vote on the final deal before it go to the European Parliament for ratification , but Mr Farron say a second referendum be vital to stop Britain go ` ` over the cliff ` ` . only @card@ MP agree as it be crush by a @card@ majority . Jeremy Corbyn have the big headache after @card@ Labour MP , include five frontbenchers , defy a three-line whip to back Mr Farron ' S proposal . Mr Corbyn must now decide the fate of shadow police minister Lyn Brown ; Catherine West ( Foreign Office ) ; Daniel Zeichner ( transport ) ; Andy Slaughter ( housing ) ; and Dr Rupa Huq ( Home Office ) , who have all be tell to abstain . EU migrant Amber Rudd , the Home Secretary , head off a potential Tory rebellion over the right of EU migrant already here by write to doubt MP to reassure them ` ` nothing will change ' ' for any EU citizen living in Britain after Brexit without a vote in Parliament . the propose clause @card@ , table by Labour , require a government guarantee on right of EU citizen live in the UK before Article @card@ be trigger . up to a dozen Tory MP be expect to defy the whip and back the amendment but just three rebel - Ken Clarke , Tania Mathias and Andrew Tyrie . the clause be reject by a majority of @card@ . Ed Vaizey , one of the would-be rebel , say he be now convince secure the right of EU national in Britain post-Brexit be a top priority . Caroline Lucas , the Green Party coleader , argue it would be ` ` cruel and immoral ' ' to leave migrant in limbo . the amendment propose that any EU citizen who be lawfully resident in the UK on the day of the referendum last June should be unaffected . but the Prime Minister have refuse to agree the future status of EU national until the right of @card@ million Briton in the EU have also be secure . Gibraltar Labour MP Mike Gapes propose that Gibraltar , which vote overwhelmingly Remain , should be consult before Article @card@ could be trigger . he argue that Brexit could make it hard for the UK to defend the British Overseas Territory against Spanish ` ` funny business ' ' . Spain have long challenge British sovereignty and there be concern about what Brexit could mean for the territory ' S economy , which be reliant on thousand of Spanish people cross the border every day to work . Mr Gapes tell the commons : ` ` while we be in the EU our government can ensure that no silly thing , no funny business , can go on as regard what might come out of some draft document produce somewhere relate to water or environmental issue or maybe flight and trade matter . ` ` as soon as we leave the EU we no longer have the ability to argue that case and block it if a particular government in Madrid decide to up the ante to make life more difficult . ' ' his amendment be reject by @card@ vote to @card@ . Euratom the European Nuclear Research Agency , establish by a @card@ treaty , be a legally distinct body from the European Union , and new clause @card@ call on the government to treat the process of leave the so-called Euratom as ` ` separate to that of leave the European Union ' ' . Paul Blomfield , the shadow Brexit minister , argue that voter in Copeland , the constituency in Cumbria that include the Sellafield nuclear reprocess site , will want to know the position before they vote in the come by-election cause by the resignation of Labour MP Jamie Reed . he say : ` ` the people in this country deserve to know on Euratom . people vote in Copeland in a couple of week ' time will want to know - their job be on the line . ' ' the proposal be defeat by a majority of @card@ vote . the bumpy road to Brexit Bill go up to the House of Lords Today Peers start to table amendment to the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill . Feb @card@ and @card@ Peers debate the bill during its second reading in the House of Lords . MP vote at end of debate . peer expect to vote through legislation . February @card@ Peers debate the bill in the first of two day in committee . numerous attempt to amend the Bill be expect to be make and vote on by peer . March @card@ Peers debate the bill on the second of two day in committee . more amendment can be make and vote on by peer . March @card@ the bill will have its report stage and third reading . if pass without amendment it can receive royal assent . if not , it go back to the commons for MP to agree the change . March @card@ and @card@ Theresa May meet EU leader at the European Council in Brussels when she could formally inform the EU of Britain ' s intention to trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty and leave the EU . March @card@ , @card@ , @card@ the government attempt in the House of Commons to overturn peer ' amendment make in the House of Lords .
time to put aside political squabbling and focus on get the good Brexit deal for Britain ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - I vote to remain in the EU . however , we lose - and it be time to move forward as a country . the case in the Supreme Court , the shout of MP demand a run commentary and the shenanigan of the SNP give the impression of a divide Britain . this will be exploit by the EU . we should accept the result and unite behind the people who will be negotiate for Britain . even though I disagree with the referendum vote , I believe it be sacrosanct . John Hall Malmesbury , Wiltshire Sir - you report ( January @card@ ) that a number of MP be plan to disrupt or thwart the Brexit process . these MP should be remind that we vote them in - and we can just as easily vote them out . Barrie McKay South Cerney , Gloucestershire Sir - Should Jeremy Corbyn , along with Liberal Democrat and SNP ally , obstruct the government ' s Brexit plan , then Theresa May will have no choice but to call a general election . if she do this , the Conservatives and Ukip would gain more seat , while Labour and the Lib Dems would suffer . Mr Corbyn will sabre-rattle but pull back from the brink . he say he want to make Britain more democratic , but he know that the last thing he need be an election . Robin Nonhebel Swanage , Dorset Sir - Kate Hoey ( Comment , January @card@ ) appear to be embrace ` ` alternative fact ' ' . it be simply untrue that liberal Democrats want to block Brexit by ` ` any mean possible ' ' . we will only vote against the invocation of Article @card@ if the government refuse to grant the people a say on its final deal . many Brexiteers say Britain would stay in the single market , but instead we be head for a hard Brexit that City institution estimate could cost Britain up to £200 billion over the next @card@ year . the fact have change , and people deserve a vote on the actual term - not the dodgy promise write on a campaign bus . Tom Brake MP Foreign Affairs Spokesman Liberal Democrats London SW1 Sir - if Remainers be to be true to their principle , they should be advance the view that it be for the EU Commissioner to decide the term of our future relationship , and for Parliament to accept that directive without debate . Michael Hely Banham , Norfolk Sir - Nigel Farage ( Comment , January @card@ ) say the ruling of the Supreme Court ` ` be far from the clear-cut issue that some Remainers have suggest ' ' . the judgment of the Supreme Court be pass by a @card@ per cent majority . what percentage would Mr Farage like to set as a minimum for a decision to be class as clear-cut ? I assume that @card@ per cent would fail to meet his own rather strict requirement . Christian Froggatt Reigate , Surrey Sir - contrary to what Iain Copland imply ( Letters , January @card@ ) , the House of Commons Library briefing paper No @card@ on the European Union Referendum Bill state : ` ` it [ the bill ] do not contain any requirement for the UK Government to implement the result of the referendum . ' ' it go on : ` ` instead , this be a type of referendum know as pre-legislative or consultative , which enable the electorate to voice an opinion which then influence the government in its policy decision . ' ' Mike Sufrin Dundee Sir - I wonder if Nicola Sturgeon secretly have mix feeling about Parliament have to approve a referendum result . Tim Matthews London N6
it ' s time for the Brexit bear to calm down
funny , that . the ` ` expert ' ' be not just a little bit wrong but horrendously , hopelessly so . the Markit/ CIPS Purchasing Managers ' Index ( PMI ) jump to a 10-month high of @card@ in August , after tumble to a three-year low of @card@ in July in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote ; it be the big month-on-month surge in a quarter of a century and one that confound the doom-mongers , yet again . yet not a single one of the well-paid economist poll by Bloomberg even come close to predict the extent of the rebound , drive in part by the low pound : just three forecast any growth at all ( a modest rise to just @card@ , as it happen , which at least get the direction of travel right ) . the forecaster be on another planet from those they be try to understand , consumer as well as business . the vast majority of City economist think that the sky would fall in after the Brexit vote , with some go as far as predict another Lehman Brothers-style financial implosion . many be expect - and some be still actually predict - a technical recession , an eventuality that now look unlikely . even commercial property fund , which be set up in a fragile way and be badly hit in the immediate aftermath of the vote be now recover . the credit market be fine , as be inter-bank lending and all other key indicator of financial stress . gilt yield have fall further . of course , not all be go swimmingly : the economy have be do all right but not brilliantly for a while now , irrespective of the Brexit vote . some part of the economy be continue their longer-term slowdown , include property transaction which be suffer from stamp duty , the tax attack on buy-tolet , an array of tax hike aim at wealthy foreign buyer and an overvalued London market . the manufacturing PMI have be on a downward trend for a while . it be also obviously true that there have be some sort of Brexit shock , and many company be worry . growth will undoubtedly be hit : the figure imply a rebound from excessive , irrational pessimism , not a boom . it be also worth put the UK number into an international context . Britain ' S reading be substantially above the final eurozone manufacturing PMI for the month , which fall a little to @card@ . the UK do far good than France , which fall to @card@ ( yes , be an EU member-state be no economic panacea , for those who may not have notice the economic history of the past @card@ year ) . Britain also do much good than the US , where the ism manufacturing slump to @card@ from @card@ . it ought to be obvious , but for some reason be n't , that one can vote to leave the EU and do much good than country that be choose to remain ( or of course that have little or nothing to do with Europe at all ) . there be two key message from the late figure . first , the new crop of perma-bears in the City need to calm down , and fast : they should n't allow the fact that they do n't want , predict or like Brexit to cloud their judgment when it come to understand what be actually go on in the economy . second , it ' S equally important that people such as myself - who can not wait for Brexit to become a reality - do n't get carry away by this and other positive datum . for a start , there will be lots more datum , and some be bind to be bad . the construction and service number will be worth watching ; and then real , hard figure ( though , of course , those will be revise for year to come ) . I can understand why Brexiteers would be tempt to gloat . they be ridicule , demonise and accuse of have destroy the economy by some Remainers in the ugly , hysterical day immediately after the vote . but the fact that some Remainers behave appallingly be no reason for Brexiteers to do the same . it ' s time to focus instead on what really matter , and that mean get the Brexit negotiation right , not one or other survey or data snapshot . allister.heath @ telegraph.co.uk ' it ought to be obvious that one can vote to leave the EU and do much good than country choose to stay '
Hammond take Tories ' on path to electoral ruin ' ; Politics Chancellor rebuke by May after tell Davos leader that UK ' s relationship with the EU will hardly change
Theresa May rebuke Philip Hammond last night after he prompt a Cabinet row by make a public call for a soft Brexit . the Chancellor use a speech in Davos , Switzerland , to say that there would only be ` ` very modest ' ' change to relation between the EU and the UK after Brexit . he praise a call by the CBI group of business leader for Britain to have the ` ` close possible relationship between the EU and the UK ' ' . he also call for a liberal approach to free movement , say : ` ` we want to maintain the close possible relationship in people to people exchange ' ' . his comment prompt a backlash from Cabinet colleague and backbencher , who say he be put the Tory on the ` ` path to electoral ruin ' ' . Michael Gove , the Environment Secretary , praise an article by Nick Timothy , Theresa May ' s former chief-of-staff , in the Daily Telegraph which accuse the Chancellor of fail to understand why people vote for Brexit . one Cabinet source say : ` ` the party promise in its manifesto to take back control of money , border and law . this be official policy . Hammond be work with official and eurocrats to leave the EU in charge , leave Britain as a submissive rule-taker . this be the path to electoral ruin for the Tories . ' ' another Cabinet source say : ` ` Hammond seem to be fight the referendum all over again , he ' S have the chance to make this case . ` ` it ' s government policy to leave the single market and end free movement and this be directly against that commitment . number @card@ must act . ' ' a Downing Street source say last night : ` ` the government ' S policy be that we be leave the single market and the custom union . whilst we want a deep and special economic partnership with the EU after we leave , these could not be describe as very modest change . ' ' it come after the Prime Minister and other Cabinet minister rebuke Boris Johnson for call for the NHS to receive an extra £100million a week after Britain leave the EU . Mr Hammond later issue a clarification on Twitter in an attempt to defuse the row . however , he do not retract his claim of ` ` very modest change ' ' . Jacob Rees-Mogg , the leader of a group of @card@ eurosceptic Tory MP , last night say that the government ' S tone need to ` ` fundamentally change ' ' . in a speech at Churcher ' s College in Petersfield , Hants , he say : ` ` if [ Brexit ' S opportunity be ] take off the table , then Brexit become only a damage limitation exercise . the British people do not vote for that . they do not vote for the management of decline . they vote for hope and opportunity and politician must now deliver it . ` ` if we do not , if we be timid and cower and terrify of the future , then our child and theirs will judge us in the balance and find us want . ' Mene , Mene , Tekel , Upharsin ' - as the writing on the wall say at the feast of Belshazzar . we have our future and our destiny in our hand . ' ' he add : ` ` there be a great Brexit opportunity and some really obvious benefit that we can get that improve the condition of the people . this be currently at risk . ` ` the negotiation that be about to begin sound as if they aim to keep us in a similar system to the single market and the custom union . ' close alignment ' means de facto the single market , it would make the UK a rule taker like Norway , divest of even the limited influence we currently have . ' ' at Davos , Mr Hammond even make a joke at the expense of Mr Johnson : ` ` as we come into Davos , there be an avalanche warn yet the Foreign Secretary be n't even there . ' ' Andrew Percy , a Tory MP , reply : ` ` put a sock in it Phil . get a bit sick of ' freelance Phil ' mock other Cabinet minister and write his own Brexit policy . ' '
call for cash injection to make City watchdog fit for Brexit
the watchdog charge with police Britain ' s financial system need to be beef up to cope with additional regulatory pressure after Brexit , a report have warn . responsibility for a host of financial rule and regulation will transfer from Brussels after Brexit , with the Bank of England , the Treasury and the Financial Conduct Authority ( FCA ) set to shoulder the burden . all three should be give extra public money to help them adapt , a report by City think-tank the International Regulatory Strategy Group have urge . much more cash will be need if Britain and the EU fail to agree mutual market access , it add . the paper , co-author by law firm Linklaters , also call for an urgent review of the UK ' s post-Brexit mix of financial regulation , argue that resolve regulatory issue be ` ` vital for long-term financial stability ' ' . while it do not argue for ` ` significant change ' ' or a ` ` lower ' ' of standard , the report say the system must be ` ` flexible and adaptive to market need ' ' . the paper also call for the government to consider regulator ' power and how they interact with Parliament , business and the public . power will transfer from a range of EU body to the UK , include the European Parliament , other member state , the European Council and the European supervisory authority . among the power be transfer back to the UK be the supervision of credit rating agency and the handling of regulatory equivalence decision . the report also argue City watchdog will need a much big international presence if they want to influence global standard that will ` ` only increase in importance over the come year ' ' .
May bow to the ' mutineer ' ; Rebels embolden after EU state take legal advice over extension to negotiation
Theresa May be poise to bow to the demand of the Brexit ` ` mutineer ' ' by drop Britain ' s EU exit date from legislation govern the UK ' S withdrawal . David Lidington , the Justice Secretary , say ` ` various constructive suggestion ' ' have be make to the Prime Minister and that the government ` ` will listen ' ' to call for the exit date to be remove from the Bill . another senior Cabinet minister tell the Daily Telegraph the government be consider remove the controversial amendment after a series of tight vote earlier this week signal Mrs May might lose if it be put to the vote . Dominic Grieve , the leader of the Tory rebel , say that as many as @card@ Tory MP be prepare to oppose Mrs May ' S amendment which propose to set a legal date and time for leave the EU . the rebel be embolden last night by the news that EU member state have seek legal advice from the European Commission over a possible extension of the two-year negotiation period set out in Article @card@ . Pro-Brexit minister have warn Mrs May to back down over the plan to enshrine the Brexit date in law after it become clear the government would be defeat if it be put to a vote . at a lunch in the Houses of Parliament , Mr Lidington say : ` ` as the PM say , various constructive suggestion have be make during the committee debate about how the bill might be improve and obviously we will listen to idea come from colleague across the House during the Bill ' S progress . ' ' Reacting to the news that the EU27 have seek legal advice , Tom Tugendhat , one of the Tory now threaten to vote against the amendment , say : ` ` it put control in their hand , not ours , and we have to maintain as much control as possible and flexibility in the negotiation . this be about leave as quickly as possible but on our term . ' ' Mr Grieve tell ` ` Chopper ' s Brexit Podcast ' ' the amendment to enshrine the Brexit date in law be ` ` idiotic ' ' because it do not allow for last minute change . he say that if it be put to a vote ` ` I will vote against it ' ' . a Government source say legal advice to the European Commission be ` ` irrelevant because we will not be extend Article @card@ , we will have leave at the end of March @card@ , and whatever happen , Article @card@ can only be extend with the unanimous agreement of all @card@ member state . ' ' last night David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , warn the EU not to allow its demand for more money from Britain to scupper a deal . at an economic summit in Germany he refer to the £157billion of trade between Britain and Germany as he say : ` ` I know that no one would allow short-term interest to risk those hard-earn gain . ' ' Mr Davis ' s attempt to court German industry appear to backfire as his speech be greet with incredulous laughter . ` ` this old man be destroy Britain ' S future , ' ' say Jürgen Müller , chief executive of Sig , a lead German outsourcing company . another add : ` ` he be be a British gentleman , lie with style . ' ' before Mr Davis ' S speech , Hans-Olaf Henkel , former head of the Federation of German Industries , say Germany expect Mr Davis to offer his ` ` unconditional surrender ' ' to the EU ' S term . it emerge as EU official say Ireland could not stop Britain opening trade talk in a row over the Northern Ireland border . ` ` there ' s a risk of separation talk not make sufficient progress on Ireland , not a risk of Ireland block on its own the advancement of Brexit talk , ' ' a senior EU official say .
penny have finally drop over Brexit port transition
one of the UK ' s large trade association have say minister be only now appreciate the importance of post-Brexit arrangement for the flow of import and export at port , after a wake-up moment during the recess . speak to the Daily Telegraph , James Hookham , deputy chief executive of the Freight Transport Association ( FTA ) , whose member operate nearly half of UK lorry , 90pc of freight move by rail , and 70pc of UK sea and air export , say : ` ` until recently , there be cabinet member who just do n't understand what the [ Brexit ] repercussion could be . ` ` over the summer , they ' ve come to understand what ' S at stake and how soon the consumer would notice good not on the shelf . ' ' Port operator have call for Free Port status for many UK port , include Teesport , to mitigate the effect of post-Brexit custom arrangement by have tax-free zone to attract manufacturer and stimulate export . Tim Waggott , chief executive of Dover ' S port , have also warn of gridlock if new technology and logistic plan be not adopt before the UK leave the EU in March @card@ . Mr Hookham add that while he believe Philip Hammond ' s experience as transport secretary mean the Chancellor appreciate the need for supplychain continuity , other be less engage : ` ` the big conversion be Liam Fox , who at the end of August accept the need for a transitional period , have be the first to suggest leave the Customs Union as early as October last year . ' ' a government spokesman say : ` ` we be seek a time-limited implementation period that will give people and business across the UK time to adjust to the new arrangement in a smooth and orderly way . ' ' 90pc the percentage of good move by rail in the UK that be oversee by member of the Freight Transport Association
Britain ignore EU ' s demand over Brexit bill
the government continue to refuse to show its hand over the so-called ` ` Brexit bill ' ' yesterday as it publish three more paper give detail of its position on nuclear , justice and other matter - but ignore EU demand for clarity on payment . the refusal to publicly address the question of money ahead of next week ' S talk in Brussels have frustrate Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , who this week demand further information from the UK . Senior source in the British negotiating team say the decision reflect the failure of the EU to offer legal clarity on the basis for its demand for a gross financial settlement approach ( Euro ) @card@ billion . ` ` we honestly do n't recognise these number that the EU be throw around , ' ' the source say . the three paper publish yesterday cover the UK ' s membership of Euratom , the EU atomic agency ; the right of EU official in the UK after Brexit ; and what happen to case pend at the European Court of Justice . the paper make clear that the UK will quit Euratom , ignore plea from Tory rebel to retain associate membership of the body and propose an equivalent UK regime .
Hammond set out his plan for soft Brexit to protect job ; Chancellor say ' majority ' of people in Britain want to guarantee employment , growth and prosperity
Philip Hammond be draw up detailed plan for a soft Brexit that will prioritise ` ` protect job ' ' over Britain ' s ability to strike free trade deal after Britain quit the EU . Senior Whitehall source have tell the Daily Telegraph that Mr Hammond be push for a bespoke deal under which Britain would retain associate membership of the EU ' S custom union , but retain the freedom to negotiate separate deal on trade service . as he enter a meeting of EU finance minister in Luxembourg yesterday , the Chancellor make clear that he be not give up his battle to resist a hard Brexit . ` ` my clear view , and I believe the view of the majority of people in Britain , be we should prioritise pro-tecting job , protect economic growth and protect prosperity , ' ' he say , in an apparently open challenge to hardline Brexiteers . British negotiator believe that the EU might ultimately be prepare to accept such a deal because it would mean Europe ' s trade in good with the UK - where the EU run a surplus - would not be disrupt by Brexit . Wolfgang Schäuble , the German finance minister , have not rule out the UK change its mind , say earlier this week it be ` ` up to the British government to take their own decision ' ' follow a post-election telephone conversation with the Chancellor . ` ` the UK would negotiate associate membership of the custom union but keep the freedom to negotiate on service - which be the much more important part of the UK economy , ' ' say a source . however , Alan Winters , the director of the UK Trade Policy Observatory , warn : ` ` it would seem a good halfway house , but it would need a long transitional period because service deal be very complicate to negotiate . ' ' he add that the UK ' s freedom to negotiate deal on service with other non-EU country be likely to be curtail . ` ` we would have define regulatory practice in the EU agreement and in practice we would n't be able to deviate too far from that , ' ' he say . Mr Hammond will press his case for a soft Brexit with an appearance on the Andrew Marr Show on BBC one tomorrow morning , and then his delayed Mansion House speech on Monday . cabinet minister push for a soft Brexit have strengthen their hand on the senior Whitehall committee , chair by Mrs May , that will oversee the talk . Damian Green , the First Secretary and a passionate Remain campaigner , have take a place on the committee , alongside Mr Hammond . Boris Johnson and David Davis , both Brexiteers , also sit on the committee . Charles Moore : page @card@
' special relationship can grow strong than under Obama ' ; Leon Panetta , the former US defence chief , say new president will try to help Britain through Brexit
Donald Trump can build a strong ` ` special relationship ' ' with Britain than Barack Obama have , Leon Panetta , the former CIA chief , have suggest . Mr Panetta , who also serve as President Obama ' s defence secretary , be speak as Theresa May head to Washington to try to negotiate a new bilateral trade deal between Britain and the US . ` ` the fact [ Mr Trump ] have recognise that special relationship speak to its importance . you always hope you can work to strengthen the relationship , ' ' Mr Panetta say . he tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` if there be opportunity to try to help our friend in Great Britain to get through this crisis [ Brexit ] by establish some independent trade deal , then that be a good thing . ` ` it ' s clear you ' re go through some difficult time with what the future hold with Brexit and the economy . it be particularly important that the United States and Britain not only talk but support each other . ' ' Mr Panetta say that Mr Obama be always mindful of the importance of the alliance between Britain and America , and that when he deliver his stark warning that a Brexit vote would send the UK to ` ` the back of the queue ' ' for future trade deal , he have be intend to support David Cameron , the former prime minister . Mr Panetta add that he do not believe the referendum result would mean a breakdown in the UK ' s role as security gobetween for the US and Europe . ` ` I believe that the security relationship be strong enough to withstand challenge , ' ' he say . in his time in office , he say he have find the cooperation between British and American military and security organisation to be ` ` critical ' ' . ` ` I certainly recognise we have a special relationship in my time at the CIA and department of defence in term of our ability to work together on terrorism , Nato and security generally , ' ' he say . ` ` it be critical to be able to know I have the friendship and support of Britain ... I hope Great Britain will remain part of the security blanket with our European ally . ' ' Mr Panetta , who serve as President Bill Clinton ' s chief of staff , say he be ` ` very concerned ' ' by Mr Trump ' s comment on Nato , which the Republican have describe as ` ` obsolete ' ' . Mr Panetta say : ` ` if you want to get anything do in this difficult world , you have to rely on strong alliance with our friend . ' ' when ask why Mr Obama have describe Angela Merkel , the German chancellor , as his close ally , Mr Panetta say the former president be be ` ` pragmatic ' ' . ` ` when it come to deal with the refugee crisis in Europe or Russian aggression in Crimea and Ukraine , the president rely a great deal on Chancellor Merkel and Germany , but I would n't interpret that as diminish the partnership with Great Britain . ' ' Mr Panetta say earlier this week that he think Mr Trump ` ` forget he be president ' ' when he give a speech ` ` whine ' ' about crowd number at Friday ' S inauguration . he say Mr Trump should spend less time ` ` embellish himself ` ` . he also say Mr Obama ' s legacy as a great president be guarantee . ` ` as Mr Obama himself acknowledge , one area of weakness be Syria , ' ' Mr Panetta say , but ` ` he always provide thoughtful and dignified leadership in America and around the world . history will be kind to his legacy . ' ' ' I hope that Great Britain will remain part of the security blanket with our European ally '
No-deal exit would be bad possible outcome , say peer
Theresa May ' S Brexit negotiate stance be unhelpful and could be ` ` economically damaging ' ' , a group of crossbench peer have say . the Prime Minister have draw criticism from her own side - include Baroness Browning , who be once in her ministerial team - for say that no deal would be good than a bad deal . the committee say a tight deadline and lack of progress mean Britain be at risk of leave without a deal , make a border with Ireland impossible to avoid and result in significant financial consequence . the border issue have already delay trade talk between the UK and EU follow the failure of Northern Ireland and the Republic to agree on Mrs May ' S proposition . in a report , the Lords EU committee say : ` ` we will live with the consequence of Brexit for decade to come , so we need to get it right . if buy a bit more time mean that we get a good outcome ... a short extension of EU membership may be a price worth pay . this be not about unpick Brexit , but about deliver the good Brexit possible . ' ' in a damn assessment , the Lords say it would be ` ` difficult , if not impossible , to envisage a bad outcome for the UK ' ' than a no-deal exit . the peer also warn that ` ` enshrine the Article @card@ deadline of @card@ March @card@ in domestic law would not be in the national interest because negotiation may need to continue past this point and set it out in law would restrict the government ' ' . Lord Jay of Ewelme , act chairman , say : ` ` the big risk factor that might lead to a no-deal outcome be time . the clock be tick . while we support David Davis ' s ambition to secure a comprehensive agreement by @card@ March @card@ , almost nobody outside the government think this will be possible . ' '
Johnson call for ' efficient ' exit from custom union after one year
Boris Johnson have say that Britain need to leave the custom union with ` ` speed and efficiency ' ' after Brexit amid a new Cabinet row . the UK have commit to retain membership of a temporary custom union after Brexit to reduce barrier to trade . however , the government have refuse to say how long it will last . the Foreign Secretary indicate in an interview with BBC Radio @card@ ' s today programme that he support end the transition period within a year . he say : ` ` there ' s the custom union transition period , where there ' s a discussion about how long that will go - one , two , three year , how you would run that . my view be that we should get on . what business would want us to achieve be speed and efficiency . ' ' David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , and Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have both suggest that it should last for two year . Mr Johnson also appear to concede that the UK could pay some form of Brexit divorce bill after previously say that the European Commission could ` ` go whistle ' ' for sum as large as £100billion . he say ` ` we be bill-pay people ' ' , add that the UK would meet its ` ` legal obligation ' ' . he add that Donald Trump would make a state visit to the UK next year despite condemn his comment over violence in Charlottesville as ` ` totally wrong ' ' . he say : ` ` I think he get it totally wrong . it be a great shame that he fail to make a clear fast distinction between anti-fascists and Nazi . ' ' it also emerge that the Foreign Secretary tell Libyan politician not to make the same ` ` mistake ' ' as Theresa May by call an early election . Libya be deeply divide with two rival parliament and four government . Mr Johnson be speak after a visit to Libya in which he urge the nation ' s political leader to set aside their difference . he tell Libya ' s UN-backed prime minister Fayez al-Sarraj that the June election , call by Mrs May amid Tory hope of a landslide victory , have not go ` ` entirely to plan ' ' , accord to the BBC . he say the Tories have be give ` ` a bit of a lesson , which be that if you be go to have election , you have get to get ready ' ' . in an interview with the BBC ' s diplomatic correspondent James Landale , Mr Johnson add : ` ` we have be tell [ Libyan politician ] about what it take to fight an election , warn them about the pitfall in call election too soon or whatever , which be one of the risk they face because they have n't get their duck line up properly . ' '
call for ' one million shade of grey ' to plug UK ' S skill gap ; turning to old worker face a wall of ageism can help business seek to fill job amid post-Brexit uncertainty , write Lucy Burton
when Audrey Worsley try to find a full-time secretarial job after a ten-year career break , she be face with an increasingly common problem ; despite have plenty of the required experience , she could n't even get an interview . ` ` I feel there be load of barrier because of my age , ' ' the 63-year old educational support worker say of her time try to get back into the workforce . ` ` I ' ve have a positive experience in education , [ they ] do n't ask my age when I start , but it be a massive issue in other area I try to get into . I do n't think there ' s enough help out there for woman who want to go be not unusual . accord to a recent study by Anglia Ruskin University , old applicant be over four time less likely to be offer an interview despite have more experience on their CV , with almost half of all unemployed people age @card@ to @card@ out of a job for over a year . this be a big problem for the UK . recruiter warn barely a week ago that while the appetite for hiring be on the up , candidate availability be at a 16-month low , with EU national hesitant to apply for role amid Brexit uncertainty . that nervousness sit on top of exist estimate that there will be an extra 14.5m job create in the UK over the next five year - but only seven million young people enter the workforce . likely immigration control post-Brexit will deepen that skill shortage unless employer take the opportunity to tap into the talent of old worker , something Aviva ' s UK boss Andy Briggs - who become the government ' s business champion for old worker last October - be urge British company to do as the retirement age edge further away . ` ` I ca n't see how the government can come out of the Brexit negotiation with anything other than a significant shift in immigration , that be the core of people ' S concern , ' ' he warn . if this be the case , then the skill gap be go to become ever more obvious , Briggs believe . and the only possible fillip will be old worker . with the Recruitment and Employment Confederation last week point to a shortage of suitable candidate for over @card@ different role , range from cleaner to accountant , business might want to listen to Mr Briggs ' s plea for one-million shade of grey . his pitch be simple - if Britain hire an extra one million staff age between @card@ and @card@ in the next five year , GDP could be boost by an extra £88bn . but the insurance veteran be not the only person push for change . Anna Dixon , the chief executive of Ageing Better , say she be call on the next government to support the right of work carers so that old worker do n't have to leave the workforce when care for elderly parent - something that contribute to the fact that only about half of people be in work by the time they reach the state pension age . ` ` even if we could get every young person a job there would still be a [ skill ] gap , ' ' she say , agree that Brexit be likely to exacerbate this problem but also pose an opportunity . ` ` Tighter immigration [ post-Brexit ] could mean even big labour market shortage , [ so ] we do think it ' s essential for the economy that old worker be retain and support for longer . ' ' Age bias be deeply ingrained , however , with Mr Briggs point out that there be misconception that old people will be less resilient and take more sick day . it ' S the young one , he joke , who be go out and get ` ` absolutely hammer ' ' while also be more likely to jump between job . Dr Nick Dydakis , from Anglia Ruskin University , say that business ' belief over the effect of age on productivity and performance be misunderstand - there be nothing to support the stereotype that old worker be less innovative or less emotionally resilient , he argue , add that there be a number of study prove performance rise with age . ` ` social dialogue should be an integral part of the Brexit process of change attitude and establish more inclusive workplace , ' ' he urge , point out that now be a good chance for British business to address bias against old worker . but with the chance of get an interview prove to be four time harder for old worker than it be for young adult , those eager to work be be push towards set up their own business - a move that , while exciting , come with a huge amount of financial risk give that most start-up fold within their first five year . ` ` people shake out of the labour market a decade ago be find it difficult to go back into work , ' ' say Aston University Prof Mark Hart , note that the number of 50-plus entrepreneur be steadily rise . ` ` there ' s all sort of scheme get people into start-up and that message be work - my problem be we have the bad record for start-up break into be a macroenterprise . ' ' that do n't mean grey-haired entrepreneur do n't have an edge , with many bounce back from a change in circumstance to launch successful company later in life . when the financial crisis hit @card@ year-old William Fairclough ' s house building business ` ` unimaginably hard ' ' , he decide to head down a new path by launch industrial strap company Cargo Rack , before overcome significant hurdle to relaunch a house building company some year later . for Stephen Bruh , the 71-year old founder and chief executive of Astro Jet , a London-based company that charter private plane , spend @card@ year work for an upmarket design house mean that when circumstance change at the age of @card@ , he know exactly how to turn his passion for fly into a successful business . ` ` by virtue of connection and good luck , I be able to get contract to manage a number of private aircraft , which involve both provide crew , administration and , of course , fly the plane , ' ' he say of his career switch , note that he spend his first-ever salary from a job in a clothing factory on get a private pilot ' S licence . ` ` so a childhood passion become a business , ' ' he add . ` ` today I look forward to continue to work . ' '
we ' ll pay up if we have to , May admit ; Brexit deliver ; the Prime Minister say Britain be a law-abiding nation and must honour its ' obligation to the EU '
Theresa May have give her clear signal yet that Britain be prepare to pay a Brexit ` ` divorce bill ' ' to leave the European Union . the Prime Minister repeatedly refuse to rule out that Britain would pay an exit fee - estimate by the EU to be as much as £50billion - which must be pay when the UK leave the EU in March @card@ . in an interview with Andrew Neil on BBC one last night , Mrs May say that while the UK would not be ` ` pay to leave ' ' , the country ` ` have to decide what the obligation ' ' be to the EU . she say : ` ` I be very clear about what the people here in the UK expect but I be also clear that we be a law-abiding nation , we will meet the obligation we have . ' ' she add : ` ` there may be some particular programme that we wish to pay to be member of because it be in the national interest - and that will drive us . ' ' Mrs May also suggest that large number of immigrant could still come to the UK after Brexit . she add that ` ` we will see a decrease in the number come in ' ' after Brexit but decline to give a figure . Mrs May stress that Britain would regain control over number of EU migrant come to the UK . on the prospect of a free-trade deal , Mrs May say she be seek a ` ` comprehensive free-trade agreement which give that ability to trade freely into the European single market and for them to trade with us . ` ` it will be a different relationship , but I think it can have the same benefit in term of that free access to trade . ' ' Mrs May also stress that no deal with the EU after two year of negotiation ` ` would be good than a bad deal ' ' . she add : ` ` there be some people in Europe who talk about punish the UK and I do n't want to sign up to an agreement which be base on that . ' ' Earlier , Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , have be accuse of undermine Britain ' s negotiate position by suggest that leave without a deal with the EU would be the ` ` worst-case outcome for everyone ' ' . Mr Hammond also say that leave the EU would have significant ` ` consequence ' ' . a government source criticise Mr Hammond ' S comment : ` ` it ' S like negotiate to buy a house . if you ' re not willing to walk away then they will push you and push you . ' ' in an interview with BBC Radio @card@ ' s today programme , the Chancellor say that Britain would not be able to ` ` cherry pick ' ' what it want from the European union after it leave . he say : ` ` we understand that we ca n't cherry pick , that we ca n't have our cake and eat it , that by decide to leave the European union and negotiate a future relationship with the EU as an independent nation , there will be certain consequence of that . and we accept those . ' ' he say : ` ` what you can assume be that everybody in the EU and UK be go into this negotiation look to protect their own interest . I ' m very confident we will not get an outcome that be a worst-case outcome for everyone . ' '
Scotland Ukip could axe purple and yellow look ; Brexit
the UK Independence ' s purple and yellow colour and its pound sign could be ditch in a major rebrand as the party prepare for a post-Brexit future . only the name , Ukip , be safe because it be worth ` ` million of pound ' ' , Paul Nuttall say . the party ' S leader say that he would unveil a new image of a ` ` post-Brexit Ukip ' ' at the party ' s annual conference in Torquay in September . Mr Nuttall say : ` ` we be go to rebrand the post-Brexit Ukip and it will all be launch at the annual conference in Torquay in September . ' ' the party ' s pound sign logo might disappear as well as its familiar yellow and purple colour , Mr Nuttall say , add : ` ` Everything be up for debate . ' ' plan for the overhaul be due to be discuss at a meeting of the party ' S National Executive Committee yesterday afternoon . Mr Nuttall say the name of the party be ` ` the one thing that be off the agenda but everything else we will talk about ' ' he say : ` ` Ukip ' S brand be worth a lot of money . it be one of the most recognise brand . ` ` it be worth million back in @card@ when we look at the cost of rebranding and it come into the million . ` ` I think it need modernise - we need a different feel to the party as we move into the post-Brexit age . ' ' Mr Nuttall - who be wear a yellow and purple tie - say Ukip have orig-inally settle on purple and yellow brand ` ` because there be no other colours available ' ' . he shrug off any concern that he be have to lead Ukip in the shadow of his predecessor Nigel Farage , who attend the speech in a London hotel . Mr Nuttall say : ` ` I want him to be on the telly and radio sell Ukip ' s message because he be one of the good communicator in British politics today . ' ' Mr Nuttall also brush off the resignation of the party ' s sole MP , Douglas Carswell , say that the Ukip do not need any representation in the House of Commons to influence Britain ' s exit from the European Union . Mr Nuttall warn Theresa May the Eurosceptics would be the ` ` guard dog ' ' of Brexit .
Berlin back London as key financial centre ; German finance minister say it would be in EU ' s interest for City to remain a strong base
Germany ' S influential finance minister have mount an unexpected defence of the City of London , as rival city seek to supplant it as Europe ' s financial capital in the wake of Brexit . Wolfgang Schaeuble say it be in the European Union ' s interest for the Square Mile to remain a major financial centre . the comment from Europe ' s most powerful finance minister will be see as reassure amid grow concern that the EU could use Brexit negotiation to attempt to lure business and job away from London . Paris , Dublin and Frankfurt be all lobby major bank to transfer their European operation . but Mr Schaeuble tell an international finance conference in Frankfurt it would create too much ` ` upheaval ' ' to move all the City ' s financial operation elsewhere at once . ` ` I be convince that for Europe as a whole - and I ' m not sure this will be very beloved in Paris - it ' S in our own interest to have a strong financial centre in London , ' ' he say . Germany want to negotiate a Brexit deal that will preserve a key financial role for London , Mr Schaeuble say . but he add that it be not always easy ` ` brainstorming ' ' with his British counterpart . and comment by Mr Schaeuble that he also want to promote Frankfurt as an alternative European base for international bank will cause concern in the city that he be offer London a partial deal . it will take time for the EU to develop its own financial service sector , he tell the conference , and it be in the bloc ' s interest to make sure London be not compromise in the meantime . Mr Schaeuble ' S intervention come amid grow concern that Brexit be already affect financial hiring in the City . he be speak alongside Axel Weber , the chairman of UBS , who say his bank would not wait for the outcome of Brexit negotiation , but would go ahead with plan to move @card@ job to an alternative base in the EU . the number of vacant financial service job in London fall by 23pc in a month in February , accord to recruiter Morgan McKinley . ` ` Brexit have push institution into two camp , ' ' Hakan Enver of Morgan McKinley say . ` ` on one side we ' ve get the ' business as usual ' team and , on the other , we have the institution that be tire of the government ' S hem and haw , and have already begin to move job to other EU country . ` ` it ' S the latter group that ' S contribute to the quarter drop in job available . for many , it ' S simply prove easy to get ahead of the worst-case scenario and get out of London now . ' ' Paris have mount a campaign in recent week to persuade international bank to move from London . Dublin and Frankfurt be also pitch to international bank .
peer must not try to thwart Brexit Bill ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : Afew month ago , it seem inconceivable that a Bill to trigger Article @card@ and begin the process of the UK ' s withdrawal from the EU would get through the Commons unscathed . one reason why Remain campaigner take the government to court argue that Parliament must have a say be that they hope that Brexit might be stop by MP . after all , there be a majority in the Commons to stay and the referendum outcome be close . but it be also decisive ; and have agree to stage the referendum , it would have be undemocratic for Parliament to have gainsay the wish of an electorate the MP entrust with make the decision . the logic of that position have not be lose on most Remainers in the Commons , who have accept that Brexit must proceed . apart from the SNP , the Lib Dems and the recalcitrant on the Tory and Labour side , a majority of MP have accept the timetable for Brexit set out by Theresa May last October , which mean give notice to leave before the end of next month . Jeremy Corbyn have commit his party to support departure from the EU , although the revolt on the opposition bench against his three-line whip suggest he may soon be face another leadership crisis , with rumour of a coup against him rife at Westminster . moreover , while the Bill may be through the commons , it now go to the House of Lords where , for the first time in history , a Conservative government do not command a majority . it be possible that a coalition of more than @card@ Lib Dems and Labour peer back by crossbenchers could block or frustrate the legislation . but since the wish of the Commons be now clear , the Lords must not stand in the way of this Bill . peer have the right to improve it but must uphold the fundamental decision take by the commons - that the government have the authority to move forward with Brexit next month . to spring an ambush or pass a wreck amendment would be an abuse of its position and would trigger a constitutional stand-off similar to that of @card@ , when the Parliament Act be pass to reassert the right of the elect House . Senior peer , include Lord Fowler , the Lords Speaker , be adamant that the Upper House must not stand in the way of Brexit . any peer still consider way to thwart the decision of the Commons should heed the wise counsel of their colleague .
lord call for banking sector to receive special Brexit protection
it be vital to fight for the City in the Brexit negotiation , and the government should not be ashamed to stand up for Britain ' s banking expertise , a committee of Lords have announce . Senior financier have tell the Daily Telegraph that minister have warn that they can not be see to prioritise the city over other sector , as banker be perceive as unpopular figure . but the Lords ' EU Financial Affairs Sub-Committee believe finance firm be too important to miss out on special treatment . ` ` despite the poor public perception of the sector since the financial crisis of @card@ , financial service be vital to the prosperity of the whole of the United Kingdom , and therefore should be an important element in the forthcoming negotiation on Brexit , ' ' say the report . ` ` Ensuring a smooth and orderly transition to a new relationship with the EU will be a critical consideration . ' ' bank need at least two year to adapt to Brexit once they know the government ' s plan for leave the EU - but that be not yet clear , so the committee say it be important to have a transitional arrangement that give finance firm the time they need . that should avoid a ` ` cliff edge ' ' , and so stop bank from panick . the report say : ` ` the danger be that , in the absence of clarity , firm will restructure or relocate on the basis of a ' bad case ' scenario . we call for an early commitment from both side in the negotiation that there will be a transition period . ' ' more than a million people be directly employ in finance and another million work in related professional service , and the Lords fear ten of thousand or even more could be lose if the EU actively cut off chunk of the city from business across the Channel . one possibility be that the European Central Bank will try to force the clearing of euro and euro derivative trade to take place within the EU , remove an important market from London . it be also important to have access to skilled European worker , the committee say . around @card@ non-UK EU national work in British finance , as well as @card@ non-EU worker . ` ` the ability to continue to [ have ] access to highly qualify staff and the ability to transfer them between the UK and the EU be a key issue for the financial service industry , ' ' say the committee . ` ` Maintaining appropriate labour market flexibility will be critical to the UK ' s long-term prosperity . ' '
Scotland Independence vote a bad economic threat than Brexit , warn report
Nicola Sturgeon ' S threat of a second independence referendum be inflict more damage than Brexit on business demand for office , factory and shop space in Scotland , chartered surveyor warn today . a major report by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors ( RICS ) find that Scotland experience the large drop in demand for commercial property in the UK in the three month follow the EU referendum vote . a series of Scottish surveyor blame the slump on Ms Sturgeon ' s threat of a second independence referendum . one say this be ` ` have a more detrimental effect ' ' on the market than Brexit itself , another complain that the SNP have add to the uncertainty and a third say the ` ` big problem ' ' be a possible independence vote . demand for premise rise across the whole of the UK between July and September , but in Scotland @card@ per cent more surveyor report a drop in demand than say there have be an increase . Central London and Scotland be the only two area of the country where rent be not expect to increase because of demand level . foreign investment inquiry be down for a second successive quarter north of the border . the report further undermine the First Minister ' s claim that call a second referendum would be justify if Scotland do not retain access to the EU single market . Mike Russell , her Brexit minister , yesterday repeatedly dodge question about why this be more important than the UK single market , which be worth more than four time more to Scottish company . he also deny the referendum threat be add to uncertainty . but the RICS survey quote Niall Burns , a partner with Edinburgh-based Burns and Shaw property consultant , say : ` ` the threat of a second referendum be have a more detrimental effect on commercial property in Scotland than Brexit . ' ' Gavin Anderson , partner in the retail and leisure division of Glasgow-based Montagu Evans , say the threat of another independence referendum ` ` be the last thing the country need ' ' . Mike Dillon , a director of Kames Property in Glasgow , warn : ` ` Market condition [ be ] poor , with SNP add to political uncertainty . ' ' the warning be in contrast to some surveyor in the north of England , who report ` ` an increase level of activity ' ' or ` ` business as usual ' ' . Ruth Davidson , the Scottish Conservative leader , say : ` ` this report make it clear that Nicola Sturgeon have cast a cloud of uncertainty over Scotland which be now cause deep and lasting damage to our prosperity and to Scotland ' S reputation . ' ' Labour ' S Anas Sarwar be one of several opposition MSPs to take Mr Russell to task at Holyrood yesterday over his assertion that the SNP be act in Scotland ' s good interest . he say : ` ` we ' ve hear today again about the hard Brexit cliff . why be this government so relax about the hard independence cliff ? ' ' a Scottish government spokesman say : ` ` it be Brexit which be far and away the big threat to Scotland ' S economy , job and long-term prosperity . ' '
EU ' must stand firm against UK demand '
the European Union must be ` ` intransigent ' ' in deny British firm free access to the single market if the UK do not accept free movement of people , Jean-Claude Juncker say yesterday . the intervention by the European Commission president cap a week of strong word from Europe follow Theresa May ' s announcement that she would take back control of UK border while retain access for British good and service to the single market . ` ` you ca n't have one foot in and one foot out , ' ' Mr Juncker say during a speech in Paris . ` ` on this point we need to be intransigent . I see the manoeuvre . ` ` it should be obvious that if the United Kingdom want to have free access to the internal market all the rule and all the liberty ... need to be fully respect . ' ' since the Prime Minister ' s speech at the Conservative Party conference outline broad plan for Brexit , Europe - lead by Angela Merkel , the German Chancellor and François Hollande , the French president - have vociferously restate its ` ` red line ' ' over Brexit . British official be frustrate at European intransigence , particularly the refusal to agree to any informal talk that would help Britain arrive at a negotiate position before trigger Article @card@ and formal exit talk early next year . this week ' s Franco-German rhetoric defend free movement be ` ` miss the point ' ' , a senior UK official close to the Brexit talk preparation say , give that Britain be not seek a deal to remain inside the EU but want a bespoke deal negotiate from outside . European leader be signal that however Britain seek to frame the negotiation , it be determine to defend the internal cohesion of the EU and ensure that Britain be worse off outside the ` ` club ' ' than it be when a member . yesterday , Mr Hollande say Britain must be see to pay a heavy price for Brexit in order that other country be not embolden to follow suit . ` ` there must be a threat , there must be a risk , there must be a price , otherwise we will be in negotiation that will not end well and , inevitably , will have economic and human consequence , ' ' he say , deepen turmoil on the sterling currency market . his remark , which come a day after Mrs Merkel tell German industry chief that they would not be allow to lobby for a sweetheart Brexit deal for Britain , reflect a general souring of the mood towards the UK across Europe . Mr Juncker ' s mention of ` ` manoeuvre ' ' be understand to refer to British attempt to sound out other nation on post-Brexit trade deal and lobby industry group in France and Germany to pressure their government into a soft response . Mrs May plan to make firm draw up list of foreign worker have also go down badly , particularly in part of the continent that have benefit from the free movement of people . Bohuslav Sobotka , the Czech prime minister , say the ` ` unpleasant face of British nationalism ' ' which be ` ` strongly boost by the Brexit result ' ' , should be a warning as to how Europe might look if the EU fall apart . ` ` this indicate how Europe might look like if we , God forbid , do not manage to keep the EU together . national animosity and hatred would start split us , ' ' he tell the Czech News Agency .
Pharma offer some balm as banking go into a tailspin
Pharma stock become a relative safe port in the post-Brexit storm yesterday , as the FTSE @card@ surrender £140bn in just two trading session . a bullish note from Credit Suisse celebrate the pharma sector as one of its most ` ` favour ' ' industry in the Brexit aftermath give its high proportion of dollar earnings compare with EU cost . the investment bank also highlight payer , especially government , have a ` ` very limited ability to reduce payment for pharmaceuticals in any short-term horizon , whatever happen to local economy . ' ' its research show that GlaxoSmithKline be the ` ` big benefactor ' ' of Britain ' s vote to withdraw from the EU , as it lead to an 8pc increase in its core earnings per share next year . in its wake , share in AstraZeneca jump 2.3pc to £41.26 and Glaxo climb 0.4pc to £14.88 . meanwhile , share in drug developer GW Pharmaceuticals leap 12pc to a nine-month high of 566.5p after say a late-stage trial of its epilepsy drug meet its main goal . the safe-haven status of gold ensure precious metal miner prove popular . the precious metal surge by as much as 1.5pc to $ @card@ an ounce as investor shun risky asset amid heightened political and economic uncertainty after the Brexit referendum outcome . Fresnillo surge to a three-year high , up 7pc to £14.83 and Randgold Resources make gain of 9pc to £80.35 . on the mid-cap index , Acacia Mining leap 10pc to 440p and Centamin jump 8.1pc to 130.1p , as trader in the City say ` ` further strength be likely ' ' . as investor scramble to safehaven stock , Brexit shock wave reverberate throughout the wide market . the FTSE @card@ fall @card@ point , or 2.55pc , to @card@ , take its two-day loss to 5.7pc . however , it be the FTSE @card@ index , which be consider a close barometer of the UK economy , that bear the brunt of the Brexit-inspired sell-off . the midcap index nosedive 6.96pc closing at a two-year low of @card@ yesterday , bring its loss since Thursday to 14.2pc ; that ' s its bad two-day drop since Black Monday in @card@ . such be the extent of the nasty Brexit hangover that trading on @card@ stock be temporarily halt due to volatility . those suspend and enter into a temporary auction period include : Barclays , Royal Bank of Scotland , Taylor Wimpey , Virgin Money , easyJet , Crest Nicholson , Barratt Developments , Legal & General , Berkeley Group and Persimmon . market be send into a tailspin as banking stock plunge to a sevenyear low follow a raft of rating revision and recession warning . however , Goldman Sachs attempt to assuage fear : ` ` we do not expect a political uncertainty shock as large as that of Lehman or with the same global consequence . ' ' nevertheless , the investment bank warn it now expect the UK to enter a technical recession in the first half of @card@ . UBS warn of ` ` tough ' ' fundamental across the board for banking stock , point to two UK rate cut in the wake of the referendum outcome . meanwhile , analyst at Jefferies warn : ` ` a postreferendum world make Barclays management ' S job even hard ' ' , as the investment bank be already ` ` overly prone to downside risk ' ' . the European banking sector post its big two-day loss on record . Barclays plummet 17.4pc to 127.2p , Lloyds tank 10.3pc to 51.2p , Royal Bank of Scotland plunge 15.1pc to 174.3p , HSBC lose 2.2pc to 438p and Standard Chartered drop 6.3pc to 528p . on the mid-cap index , OneSavings fall 33.1pc to 176.2p , Shawbrook shed 30pc to 163.1p and Virgin Money tumble 25.5pc to 205.2p . Housebuilders also fall sharply with Barratt Development down 19.4pc to 354.4p , Taylor Wimpey off by 14.9pc at 115.8p , Persimmon 13.8pc low at £13.10 and Galliford try down 17.5pc to 858.5p . London-based estate agency Foxtons be nurse a hefty 22.6pc loss by close after it warn on profit . it say upturn it be expect in London property sale in the second half of the year be now unlikely to materialise in the wake of the Brexit vote . analyst at Numis say the warning will raise question over the group ' s branch expansion strategy and the associate increase in underlie cost . the airline sector also suffer a bout of Brexit-inspired turbulence . budget airline easyJet become the big FTSE @card@ faller , slump 22.3pc to £10.20 , after it issue a warning on third-quarter profit . the British carrier say the vote would create uncertainty in the economy and low revenue by some 5pc . despite increase uncertainty , Credit Suisse see the prospect of the UK join the European Common Aviation Area . recruitment company be also feel the pain . Paul Checketts , of Barclays , caution : ` ` the vote to leave be likely to stifle recruitment activity in the UK , which should put Hays ' earnings under pressure . ' ' in its wake , share in PageGroup slip 14.9pc to 264.9p and Hays shed 15.2pc to close at 95p . on the other side , Plus500 enjoy a Brexit boost , rise 2.3pc to 613p , after it confirm no adverse impact from bad debt or market position last week . it also expect trading to be ` ` inline with expectation ' ' . finally , on Aim , Omega Diagnostics climb 3.2pc to 16p after full-year result come in ahead of market expectation .
Scotland Sturgeon want independence plan post-Brexit
Nicola Sturgeon have order official to draw up contingency plan for a second independence referendum if the UK leave the EU against the will of a majority of Scot , it emerge yesterday . the First Minister tell MSPs ` ` all option to protect our relationship with Europe and the European Union will require to be consider ' ' if Scotland leave the EU against the wish of most voter . her official spokesman later confirm she be refer to plan for a second referendum rather than any potential legal or parliamentary mechanism to block or delay Brexit . Ms Sturgeon ' S intervention be a marked change in tone from her rhetoric during the past few week when she have go quiet about Brexit trigger another independence referendum . opinion poll have suggest the nationalist would lose again , follow warning that an independent Scotland in the EU could not be expect to adopt sterling . however , David Cameron and Sir John Major both warn last week that Brexit could spell the end of the Union . speak at yesterday ' S First Minister ' S question , Ms Sturgeon say plan be be make to counter the ` ` economic shock ' ' of leave the EU . she tell MSPs : ` ` let me be very clear . as First Minister , my duty be to seek to protect Scotland ' s interest in all circumstance and , therefore , I be ensure that appropriate planning for all eventuality be be undertake by the Scottish government . ` ` let me also say - I have say this many time before - that , if Scotland face the prospect of be take out of the European union against our democratically express will , all option to protect our relationship with Europe and the European Union will require to be consider . ' ' Ms Sturgeon ' S spokesman later say contingency plan be ` ` more in the political than the legal sphere ' ' and refer to the SNP manifesto , which argue that the UK leave the EU against Scotland ' S will could trigger a second referendum . he say : ` ` it be a very , very specific reference to exactly this scenario which be spell out in black and white . that proviso be in the manifesto . that would influence think . ' '
Germany will not allow UK bank to set up ' shell ' hub
Germany ' S financial watchdog have say it will not let UK-based bank set up shell hub in the country because of Brexit , add that it will deal with request on a first come , first serve , basis as a ` ` cliff-edge situation ' ' loom . Frankfurt be one of the lead contender to lure bank and financial service company from London if there be a hard Brexit . BaFin president , Felix Hufeld , say regulator now have to assume this will occur , give that ` ` negotiator have not make sufficient progress on the designate key separation issue ' ' . he add : ` ` for the time be , we therefore have to assume that the UK will not be member of the common market or anything close to it follow Brexit . there be only @card@ month to go before that happen , possibly lead to a so-called cliff-edge situation . ' ' speaking in London yesterday , day after Goldman Sachs ' chairman Lloyd Blankfein hint the City of London could lose out to Frankfurt in the wake of Brexit , Mr Hufeld say the regulator have no limit on the number of relocation it can cope with and could see up to @card@ more firm move their EU hub to the German city . ` ` one thing that we will not accept under any circumstance be empty shell or what we call letterbox model , ' ' he add , echo a message send out by the European Securities and Markets Authority earlier this year . ` ` bank that be plan a comprehensive division of work between office in London and the EU need to transplant and split up their entire ecosystem establish over the year - that mean it infrastructure , knowledge , process and people . ' ' @card@ the number of additional firm that could move to Frankfurt , accord to Lloyd Blankfein , chairman of Goldman Sachs
divert from Dover and avoid crisis , say ABP
the UK shipping industry could avoid a post-Brexit ` ` Armageddon scenario ' ' by divert sea cargo from Dover to eastern port such as Felixstowe , the UK ' s large port operator have say . in a policy paper hand to the government this week , Associated British Ports ( ABP ) call for the UK to reduce its dependency on Dover and instead invest in port on the Thames , East Anglia and the Humber . the operator say this would reduce disruption to trade by remove the risk of a ` ` bottleneck ' ' of traffic in Dover , which currently receive up to @card@ truck a day . it come after Tim Waggott , the head of the port of Dover , warn it be face a possible ` ` Armageddon scenario ' ' of delay and traffic congestion due to tough custom check after Brexit . ABP also urge the government to consider establish ` ` free port ' ' on the east coast , which would abolish duty on import raw material or component use in manufacture export . ` ` port and maritime represent a major global opportunity for the UK economy ; an opportunity for Britain to increase its trade with country throughout the world , ' ' say James Cooper , ABP ' s chief executive . ` ` to deliver on that potential , we want to see an industrial strategy that be capable of be genuinely transformative . ' ' in its 10-point plan , ABP say this could be achieve by set up a ` ` UK Ports and Logistics Brexit Task Force ' ' . Rishi Sunak , the Conservative MP , say : ` ` free port be an exciting post-Brexit policy idea that can turbo-charge economic growth in our region , boost manufacturing and drive export . ' ' however , Charlie Elphicke , the MP for Dover , say : ` ` Everyone know that the fast , most efficient and well route for trade to the continent be through Dover - and we ' re work tirelessly to see that it stay that way . ' '
' a United States of Europe ' ; Juncker lay out his vision for future of the EU - lead by a European president - and warn UK it will regret Brexit
JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker yesterday call for an ever-more powerful European Union and warn that Britain would ` ` regret Brexit ' ' , in a defiant speech that be brand a blueprint for a United States of Europe . the plan push for ` ` ever-closer union ' ' on defence , asylum and foreign policy in a big , more powerful bloc under a new , directly elect EU president . a eurozone finance minister would be appoint , with every country to adopt the euro . Mr Juncker call for a special summit of the @card@ remain member state the day after Brexit in March @card@ , in the Romanian city of Sibiu , to map out the future of the EU . he insist the ` ` wind be back in Europe ' s sail ' ' despite deep division on eurozone reform , migration quota and democratic value . ` ` I have live the European project my whole life , ' ' Mr Juncker declare as he outline his federalist vision of common EU policy . ` ` I have fight for it through good time and bad time . ' ' after almost one hour of his state of the Union speech in the European Parliament in Strasbourg , Mr Juncker , the European Commission president , mention Brexit for the first and only time . ` ` we will always regret this , ' ' say Mr Juncker , before round on Ukip MEPs , who have begin to heckle him . ` ` I think you will regret it as well , ' ' he tell Nigel Farage , the former party leader . ` ` we will move on . Brexit be not everything . it be not the future of Europe , ' ' he say to applause in the chamber . ` ` it be not the be all and end all . ' ' Mr Juncker say the role of European Commission president and European Council president should be merge . ` ` the European landscape would be clear and more understandable if the European ship be steer by a single captain , ' ' he say . the passport-free Schengen zone should extend to Bulgaria , Romania and Croatia , he add , and measure should be take to allow Western Balkan country to join the bloc . he demand that every EU country adopt the euro and submit to EU banking supervision . ` ` the euro be destine to be the common currency of the entire union , ' ' Mr Juncker say . national government should give up their veto over tax and foreign policy , he add . speak afterwards , Syed Kamall , the senior Conservative MEP , say : ` ` Mr Juncker say the EU have the wind in its sail . anyone that hear his speech now know what direction he be sail it in - towards a United States of Europe . ' ' Mr Farage describe the speech as ` ` the most open , honest and truly worry speech I have ever hear in my long year in this place ' ' . Mr Juncker praise Italy for bear the brunt of the migration crisis but scold Hungary and Poland for defy Brussel over asylum-seeker quota . he hail step toward EU cooperation on defence . ` ` by @card@ we need a fully fledge European Defence Union . we need it . and Nato want it , ' ' he say . last year , Mr Juncker concede , Europe be ` ` batter and bruise by a year that shake our foundation ' ' but employment have rise , the EU economy be grow and the migration crisis have be bring under control . ` ` let us make the most of the momentum and catch the wind in our sail , ' ' he say . Mark Rutte , the Dutch prime minister , praise the speech , but there be ` ` longer-term , institutional thing I be less keen on ' ' . he say : ` ` Juncker be a romantic . I be a politician , not a romantic . ' ' report : page @card@ editorial comment : page @card@ @card@ the date by when Jean-Claude Juncker say Europe need a ' fully fledge European Defence Union '
big business must take some blame for Brexit ; firm have use cheap foreign labour as a lazy substitute for investment in training and productivity
how naive can you get ? Downing Street ' s attempt to strong arm big business into sign a letter of support for the nation ' S still confuse Brexit strategy be almost bind to backfire , and so it have . large number of corporate boss have angrily refuse to sign , and many have express astonishment that they be even ask in the first place . have no-one at Number @card@ notice that global business be vehemently oppose to Brexit , and indeed continue to regard it as a historic mistake , for which Britain will pay a high economic cost ? still bruise and resentful over the electorate ' S decision , global CEO be in no mood to cheerlead the endeavour . they might nevertheless try a little self reflection . in no small measure , it be their own behaviour that lead directly to today ' s state of affair . I say this as someone who be both generally sympathetic to the interest of business and the City , and who support Remain ; if the vote for Brexit be , at least in part , a backlash against globalisation and mass immigration , then these lobby have much to answer for . company have be only too happy to avail themselves of the benefit of cheap foreign labour and good . in so do , many of them have shamefully neglect their wide social responsibility . why recruit and train locally when it be possible to hire the necessary skill at a fraction of the cost from overseas ? one answer to this question , I suppose , be that with the economy begin to run up against acute labour shortage , we need the migrant supplement . despite the surge in European migrant , unemployment be close to a record low and the number of job at a record high . as a percentage of the unemployed , vacancy have also never be high . even with mass migration , and even with the displacement effect of automation and artificial intelligence , it ' s prove hard to get the staff . yet despite these shortage , the labour market be not behave as it should . though technology be probably the great cause of this malfunction , mass migration have undoubtedly play some part . too often , firm have use cheap foreign worker as a lazy substitute for investment in training and productivity . the effect have be distinctly unhealthy . for almost a decade now , growth per capita have be at a virtual standstill . real wage growth have be similarly non-existent . as I say , this can not all be blame on immigration . lack of significant wage inflation be common to nearly all advanced economy , even those without much immigration . take Japan , which have a shrink workforce , little immigration to speak of , exceptionally low unemployment , and a prime minister who routinely urge his business leader to pay their worker more . yet still it have virtually no nominal wage growth . in any case , the traditional yardstick by which government judge their economic success - low unemployment and sustained growth in overall gross domestic product - do n't mean a lot if people do n't feel any well off . Brexit supporter would not be have their ` ` independence day ' ' but for these wide social frustration . but business leader would not be face the challenge of Brexit have they be a little more responsive to the socially unsettling downsides of globalisation and mass migration . whether displace by a migrant or a machine , worker need help in adapt and reskilling for alternative , higher-paid work . the good company offer that progression ; too many do n't . one of the first rule of business be that you try not to kill the goose that lay the golden egg . by embrace free movement and borderless trade so enthusiastically , many firm have do precisely that , and thereby bring Brexit on themselves . few issue speak more loudly to the contradiction at the heart of Brexit than free movement . both Liam Fox and David Davis come over all misty eye when extol the suppose benefit of free trade ; their ambition , once unchain from the EU , be for a global , free-trading Britain . yet the intellectual justification for free trade be almost exactly the same as for the repudiate free movement . both rest on the idea of ` ` comparative advantage ' ' - that if a country or individual can supply something more cheaply than we can , it be economically more advantageous to buy from them , keep the saving and focus on what we do well . a virtuous circle of economic enhancement be thereby establish . in some respect , free movement be an extension of the same principle . yet it be pointless tell people that immigration be good for them if they can not feel it in their pocket . assume effective border control be eventually introduce , we face an interesting economic experiment . will restriction on immigration make us poor , as some company believe ? or will they act much like the Black death in the 14th century , create an extreme shortage of labour that kickstarts decent level of wage inflation . if the latter , many will think it a pretty good outcome . follow Jeremy Warner on Twitter @ JEREMYWARNERUK ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion
Scotland Juncker ' s monster of Brussels set his sight on Theresa May
his fearsome reputation be sum up by his many nickname : Darth Vader , Rasputin and the Monster . as Jean-Claude Juncker ' s chief of staff , Martin Selmayr be regard as the power behind the throne in the Brexit negotiation to come , and the bad news for Theresa May be that he be an EU zealot determine to ` ` punish ' ' Britain for leave the bloc . Mr Selmayr , the German widely suspect of leak a damaging account of Mrs May ' s No10 dinner , be also close to senior figure in Angela Merkel ' S party , raise question about Germany ' s role in briefing against Mrs May . tellingly , Mrs Merkel make a late addition to a speech she give the day after Mr Juncker meet Mrs May , to include a pointed reference to people in Britain have ` ` illusion ' ' about the Brexit deal . the man who have inform Mrs Merkel on the phone that Mrs May be ` ` delude ' ' be Mr Juncker , president of the European Commission , and critic of the former Luxembourg prime minister believe his string be be pull by Mr Selmayr . minister be particularly concern about his link to the high echelon of the German government . he be a member of Mrs Merkel ' s Christian Democratic Union party , and be close to Peter Altmaier , her chief of staff . Mr Selmayr , @card@ , be not a personal friend of Mrs Merkel - she be understand to have oppose his appointment - but Iain Duncan Smith , the former Conservative leader , believe he be try to manipulate the German Chancellor into take a tough line on Brexit . he say : ` ` they [ Mr Selmayr and Mr Juncker ] want to box Mrs Merkel in to a hard-line . they do n't care if negotiation succeed , they be obsess with the idea of the European Union - it ' S where their money , job and power come from . ' ' a Whitehall source who have have frequent dealings with Mr Selmayr tell the Daily Telegraph : ` ` he be incredibly clever , he be unbelievably hard-working , he be a consummate operator . he be also a true believer in the European project and have take Brexit very personally . he have always feel the UK be get in the way of great European integration and be clear that if you choose to leave there be a cost to do so . his mindset be that of a lawyer , whose world view be about rule and not political judgment . ' ' last year Mr Selmayr say his ` ` horror scenario ' ' for @card@ would be Boris Johnson as Prime Minister , Donald Trump as US president and Marine Le Pen as French leader . he have since be credit with some of the EU ' s most hardline negotiate position , include its demand that Britain must pay a £50billion Brexit divorce bill . when the detail of Mrs May ' S meeting be leak , Mr Juncker be portray as the strong man in the face of Mrs May ' s Brexit demand , say that he tell her on leave Downing Street that he be ` ` @card@ time more sceptical ' ' about the success of the Brexit talk than before the meeting . Mr Selmayr have spend much of his career surround by the bureaucracy of Brussels . he start as a lobbyist before work under Elmar Brok , a German MEP , then in @card@ become a spokesman for Viviane Reding , a former commissioner . he have rise to become the most high-profile chief of staff in the history of Brussels . he tell the Financial Times : ` ` Juncker be the good guy and I ' m the bad guy . that ' S how it be . ' ' ask about his ` ` monster ' ' nickname , which even Mr Juncker have take to use , Mr Selmayr say : ` ` if you look into the history of Rasputin , that can be both flatter and not . Lenin can be flatter or not . ` ` if it mean there be an efficient manager , somebody who be not a wimp , I ' m OK with that . you ca n't run the European commission like a Montessori school . ' '
Davis admit he have no plan for Brexit without an EU deal
the EU be not ` ` intimidate ' ' by the threat of no deal with the UK , Donald Tusk have warn , as the Brexit Secretary admit that the government have not plan for walk away without a settlement . Mr Tusk , president of the European Council , say the outcome would be bad for Britain and the EU if an agreement for trade after Brexit be not reach . it come as David Davis tell a committee of MP yesterday that minister have not assess the implication of leave the union without a deal . a Number @card@ source be force to stress that there be ` ` rigorous work go on across government about the implication ' ' . Mr Davis tell the Brexit select committee that it would not make sense to forecast such an outcome because minister believe some agreement could be reach , even in the event of there be no overall deal . he confirm that leave under World Trade Organisation rule would mean tariff of @card@ per cent on agricultural export and @card@ per cent on car , the loss of European health insurance card for traveller and passporting right for financial sector firm , as well as departure from the EU-US Open Skies arrangement for air transport . but he say any formal planning for a no deal situation would be undertake in about a year ' S time , after Article @card@ have be trigger . Mr Davis say : ` ` any forecast you make depend on the mitigation you make , and therefore it would be rather otiose to do that forecast before we have conclude what mitigation be possible . ' ' ask whether he think leave without a deal would be bad for the UK , Mr Davis tell the committee : ` ` I think it be not as good an outcome as a free trade , friction-free , open agreement , which be why we be try for that . ' ' Mr Davis have previously warn the Cabinet of the need for contingency planning if the UK do not secure a deal . question have be raise about whether politician and negotiator in Brussels will allow the UK to agree a trade deal during the two-year exit process or whether such an agreement will have to come after the formal exit from the union . over the weekend , Mrs May ' S senior Brexit minister offer differ view on what no deal would mean for the UK . Liam Fox first suggest no deal ` ` would n't be end of the world ' ' before later state that it would be ` ` bad ' ' for the country . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , say such an outcome would be ` ` perfectly OK ' ' . the Prime Minister have repeatedly warn that ` ` no deal would be good for the UK than a bad deal ' ' . however , her stance have anger Brussels diplomat , who see the claim as a threat . explain Mrs May ' S warning , Mr Davis say : ` ` she say that because in the emotional aftermath of the referendum , there be lot of threat of punishment deal . ' ' in a statement to the European Parliament yesterday , Mr Tusk tell MEPs : ` ` A ' no deal scenario ' would be bad for everyone , but above all for the UK . ' '
Clean Brexit ahead as Tory fall into line to reject both Lords amendment ; Brexit : Parliament
Theresa May last night quash a rebellion by pro-European Conservative MP as the government overturn attempt by the House of Lords to frustrate her plan for a clean Brexit . MP vote overwhelming to reject two House of Lords amendment that aim to guarantee the right of EU migrant and give Parliament a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final deal with Brussels . up to a dozen Conservative MP have threaten to rebel and back the ` ` meaningful vote ' ' amendment . however , Mrs May enjoy a significant boost after not a single Conservative MP vote against the government on the issue and just @card@ abstain . the government defeat the meaningful vote amendment by @card@ to @card@ and the migrant right amendment by @card@ to @card@ . it come after David Davis , the Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union , warn MP that commit to a meaningful vote would hinder the government ' s ability to ` ` walk away ' ' from a deal that seek to ` ` punish ' ' the UK . he say that some of those backing the Lords amendment be in fact seek to overturn the result of the EU referendum . he say : ` ` the European Union member state and European Union institution read the proceeding of this House very closely , and they ' d have read that and it will have raise their interest because that ' s precisely what they would like to see happen . ` ` whilst this have be badged as a meaningful vote , the reality be there be some who would seek to use this to overturn the result of the referendum . ' ' he say that the government would not block a parliamentary vote on Brexit if the UK leave without a deal . however , his comment be not enough to persuade Tory rebel . Dominic Grieve , the former Attorney General , say that try to stop Parliament from have a vote on leave the EU without a deal would be ` ` derange ' ' . he say it be ` ` inevitable ' ' that the government would have to present its Brexit deal to Parliament , add that he find the refusal to commit to a vote ` ` a bit odd ' ' . he say : ` ` I ' m afraid I ' m not prepare to follow process which appear to me to be , frankly , derange . there be a clear way of do thing and , if we follow them , we will come up with the right decision . ' ' Anna Soubry , another Tory rebel , say that the refusal to commit to a vote if there be no deal be ` ` perverse ' ' . she say : ` ` they [ the European Union ] know how divided our nation be . they know about the deliberation in this place and in the other place and they also know that , of those who vote , it be only @card@ per cent that vote for us to leave the European Union . I would urge the government to allow parliamentary sovereignty to reign in the event of no deal . ' ' Sir Oliver Letwin , who serve as a Cabinet minister under David Cameron , warn that the Lords amendment on a meaningful vote would provide a ` ` massive incentive ' ' for the EU to offer the UK a bad deal . he also warn that amend the bill would be likely to result in a legal challenge . he say : ` ` I think the situation be bad than [ Mr Davis ] describe , far bad , because this operative subclause be deeply deficient as a matter of law . ' ' Mike Wood , a Conservative MP who be recover from sepsis , come to Parliament to support the government . he say : ` ` I be determine to make sure that the decision take in last June ' S referendum be implement . ' ' both Labour and the Liberal Democrats support the amendment . Sir Keir Starmer , the shadow Brexit secretary , say : ` ` the government be about to embark on the most complex undertaking of any British government since the Second World War . it be essential that Government do not take the country down the wrong path . ' '
the road out of the European Union Will Britain meet its Brexit target of @card@ ? body : Dec @card@ Parliament vote on motion challenge Commons to ` ` respect the wish ' ' of UK voter , trigger Article @card@ by March @card@ . Dec @card@ Closing argument in Supreme Court , which will rule whether PM have power to trigger Article @card@ use royal prerogative Jan @card@ Supreme Court expect to deliver its ruling on whether the process to start Brexit require an Act of Parliament March @card@ Deadline Mrs May have set for invoke Article @card@ by notify the European Council of Britain ' s intention to leave EU Sept @card@ date by which EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , Michel Barnier , want to wrap up deal on Britain ' s exit from the Union March @card@ date by which Theresa May want her minister for Brexit to complete negotiation with the European Union May @card@ ? Britain formally exit the EU , follow ratification of Brexit by all other member state
Telegraph Festival of Business Invitation Body : ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' say Theresa May , shortly after enter @card@ Downing Street for the first time as Prime Minister . but although the UK ' s pend exit from the European Union be not in doubt , what be less clear be on what term we will leave and when . the vote to leave the bloc raise a series of question . how quickly will Article @card@ be trigger , and when will the UK leave the European Union ? once it have , what do our trading relationship look like with Europe and the rest of the world ? for business , certainty be often cite as the most important factor for investment decision . the Telegraph Festival of Business @card@ aim to enlighten business leader about the good way forward . by bring together some of the best-known name in British business , along with lead politician and thought leader , this one-day conference aim to help those who attend understand what Brexit will mean for them . now in its sixth year , the Telegraph Festival of Business be a one-day celebration of the good of British commerce , and be to be hold this year on Tuesday @card@ November in central London . speaker will include Sir Andrew Witty , chief executive of GlaxoSmithKline , and Michael Spencer , founder and chief executive of the financial service leader ICAP . they will be join by some of the bright business personality the UK have to offer . although heavily focus on Brexit , the Festival will not lose sight of its commitment to deliver practical solution to issue that delegate be face . through a series of interactive panel , focus on export , talent , marketing and technology , speaker will deliver real-life example of how they be move forward . together , our aim be to help British business to map out its route through the Brexit landscape , and make sure that the UK economy benefit as a result . James Quinn , Group Business Editor , the Telegraph to apply to attend , call @card@ @card@ @card@ or go online to www.telegraph.co.uk/fob
pound lose out to euro ahead of economic datum
sterling skid to a three-year low against the euro as investor prepare to digest the first full round of hard economic datum post-Brexit . the pound slump 0.7pc to ( Euro ) @card@ against the euro , surpass its post- Brexit low , to its low level since August @card@ . meanwhile , it also tumble against the dollar , sink below $ @card@ for the first time in a month , just half a cent off the 31-year low to which it plunge in the wake of the Brexit vote . since the Bank of England unveil its stimulus package and cut interest rate for the first time in seven year just over two week ago , the pound have remain under pressure as talk shift to further stimulus from the central bank before the end of the year . heightened expectation of additional stimulus measure cause 10-year gilt yield to hit another record low . the first official reading of inflation , job and wage datum and retail sale for July will all be release this week . last Friday , weak construction output datum prompt a further slide in the pound and , against a negative economic backdrop , Michael Hewson , of CMC Markets , say : ` ` this week ' s economic datum will take on great importance than normal , give it will give market another snapshot of how the UK economy perform in the aftermath of the Brexit vote . ' '
civil service Brexit forecast ' always wrong ' , warn minister ; Hammond accuse over gloomy report say UK will do badly outside EU with or without trade deal
a BREXIT forecast by senior official make ` ` astrology look respectable ' ' , a senior minister say yesterday , as Philip Hammond and mandarin be accuse of orchestrate the gloomy analysis . the official report , which find that Britain would be bad off outside the EU in every scenario model , be leak yesterday , prompt a backlash from Eurosceptic MP and minister . it conclude that economic growth would fall by @card@ per cent over the next @card@ year if the UK leave with a free-trade agreement and @card@ per cent if the UK leave without a deal . in an extraordinary appearance in the Commons , Steve Baker , a Brexit minister , say that government forecast be ` ` always wrong ' ' and say the leak be ` ` an attempt to undermine our exit from the EU ' ' . Mr Baker say : ` ` it be not yet anywhere near be approve by minister . even the ministerial team in my department have only just be consult on this paper in recent day . we have make it clear it require significant further work . ` ` it ' S not a forecast for our preferred outcome of negotiation . it do not take account of the opportunity of leave the EU . I would agitate for a healthy scepticism about the use of mathematical economics . ' ' he say that David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , only read the assessment on Monday night , while he have read it only yesterday morning . Philip Davies , a Eurosceptic Tory MP , blame civil servant . he say : ` ` we have here some London-centric Remoaners in the civil service who do n't want us to leave the EU in the first place and put together some dodgy figure to back up their case , who still do n't want us to leave the EU and be regurgitate some dodgy figure . ' ' the Daily Telegraph understand that Sir Jeremy Heywood , the Cabinet secretary , organise a series of one-toone briefing on the report with Cabinet minister which begin this week . Oliver Robbins , Britain ' s most senior Brexit official who run a unit at the Cabinet Office , be also say to have be heavily involve in the work . while it be be present as a cross-Government report , official say that it be heavily influence by Treasury model . Mr Hammond be understand to have make the case in Cabinet that the debate over the future of the EU should be inform by an analysis of the economic impact . a Cabinet source say : ` ` it ' S Project Fear Mark II , but this time the Treasury be hide behind a cross-Government review . they ' re try to box Boris and Michael into a corner but it ' S backfire spectacularly . ' ' however , there be suggestion last night that the report have be commission by a cross-Whitehall steering group lead by Philip Rycroft , permanent secretary at the Department for Exiting the European Union . Jacob Rees-Mogg , leader of a group of Eurosceptic Tory MP , say : ` ` it ' S the thin gruel of Project Fear reheat and serve back to the British people . we would n't eat it for breakfast and now we ' re get it for lunch . the Chancellor be continue to freelance and be a more successful opponent of government policy than Jeremy Corbyn . ' ' it come as Theresa May be warn that her dither and ` ` meaningless waffle ' ' over Brexit risk leave Britain in a precarious place . Lord Bridges , a former trade minister , tell the Lords : ` ` four month on and there be still no clear answer to these basic , critical question . my fear be that we will get meaningless waffle in the political declaration in October . the implementation period will not be a bridge to a clear destination , it will be a gang plank into thin air . ' ' Tory MP be today expect to rebel against the government and vote for the forecast to be publish . countdown to leave the EU the progress towards Brexit June @card@ @card@ Britain vote to leave the European Union March @card@ @card@ Theresa May submit Article @card@ letter June @card@ @card@ General Election . Mrs May lose her majority . Brexit negotiation formally begin on June @card@ . Sept @card@ @card@ Mrs May make Florence speech - offer concession on Brexit bill and role of European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) . Dec @card@ @card@ interim deal agree that commit the UK to ` ` maintain full alignment with those rule of the internal market and the custom union ' ' if other solution to Irish border question can not be agree . Jan @card@ @card@ EU release negotiate guideline on a 21-month transition period . warn UK must accept ` ` all ' ' EU rule and regulation . March @card@ @card@ European Council www.Summit.UK hope to sign ` ` transition deal ' ' . Europe could produce guideline on negotiate a future EU-UK trade deal . June @card@ European Council Summit . trade discussion likely to begin in earnest . Oct @card@ @card@ European Council Summit : EU deadline for agree an outline deal on EU-UK future relationship . if negotiation run on - as David Davis have hint they might - period up until December will be critical . Oct @card@ -March @card@ Westminster and European parliament need to ratify the deal . it must also be agree by a qualified majority vote of the remain @card@ member of the European Council . March @card@ @card@ Britain leave the EU and enter transition period with EU . trade negotiation begin formally with other country . Dec @card@ @card@ EU say transition period will end although UK government say it currently believe it will run ` ` for about two year ' ' . June @card@ last possible date for next general election .
we must push for agreement with a plus body : for all the apparent vagueness surround Brexit , the government ' S policy have actually be remarkably consistent . last November an aide be photograph in Downing St carry paper for a ministerial discussion which outline some of the option for Brexit . foremost among them be something call ` ` Canada-plus ' ' . this translate as a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement ( Ceta ) as hammer out between the EU and Canada , with bit add - principally , financial service . on the Andrew Marr Show on the BBC yesterday David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , reaffirm that this be indeed the government ' S aim , though it be now ` ` Ceta-plus-plus-plus ' ' . this would take the UK out of the single market and the custom union , as Theresa May have promise , while retain as much frictionless trade , both in good and service , as be realistically possible . Mr Davis say he do not recognise suggestion among hard-line Brexiteers - and the Labour Party - that the deal strike on Friday to move on to the next stage of talk imply a so-called ` ` soft ' ' Brexit in which the UK effectively stay in or mirror the single market . that impression have arise largely because of the ambiguity in the document surround the future of the Irish border and the need to ensure that Northern Ireland remain an integral part both of the UK and of a free trade area with the Republic of Ireland . Mr Davis say the section on regulatory alignment be more of a statement of intent than a binding protocol , which cause some surprise in Dublin . a Canada-plus trade agreement would help square the circle . however , what we do not know yet be whether the EU will be happy to give the UK such a www.deal.No non-EU member state have ever negotiate trade term with the EU that extend to service , particularly financial service . but Mr Davis signal that the government be prepare to leverage the UK ' s position under which it have agree to give the EU some £39billion net as a farewell payment . he say this would only be forthcoming if we get a trade deal , confound suggestion by Philip Hammond , the Chancellor , that it would be pay come what may . there will be obligation that will have to be meet , even without a deal . but , as Mr Davis say , the chance of get one have now improve , so we should not be shy to use the financial promise we have make to persuade the EU that it would be in their interest to agree .
EU citizen may be able to bring family in post-Brexit
EU Citizens living in Britain could be give a window of time during which their family would be allow to move into the UK after Brexit , David Davis have suggest . the Brexit Secretary hint that the government be look at offer fresh concession on citizen ' right to get negotiation move on a trade deal with the EU . he raise the possibility that EU national could enjoy the same family reunion right as they do now for a limited period of time after Brexit in March @card@ . concern have be raise that Theresa May ' s offer to give three million EU national in Britain ` ` settled status ' ' , subject to certain test , water down their right to family reunion . but in an interview with European newspaper , Mr Davis say : ` ` the issue be that in order to give perpetuity on family right it would give to three million people in the UK right that British citizen themselves do n't have . ` ` I be try to think of a way , maybe a short-term way , of sort this , a certain window whatever . ' ' ask if the window could be five or @card@ year , Mr Davis reply : ` ` whatever that might be , might be a bit short than that . we have n't engage on that negotiation properly , it ' s next on the agenda . we will talk about that . ' ' Mr Davis ' S comment mark a significant shift from his remark earlier this month at the end of the fifth round of Brexit negotiation , when he say that the right to bring in family member be one of the issue ` ` on which we have not yet arrive at a solution ' ' . family member be generally accept as dependent child , spouse and parent , but could also possibly include cousin . it come after Theresa May post a message on Facebook which state : ` ` we want family to stay together ' ' . Mr Davis say a ` ` no deal ' ' outcome be ` ` a very distant possibility ' ' and that preparation for no deal be an ` ` insurance policy ' ' . he say : ` ` it be no part of our negotiate strategy , and no plan of our planning for the future in term of what we intend . ' ' he call on EU leader to allow Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , more ` ` leeway ' ' in his mandate so that he can begin talk about the transition period now . he say : ` ` also we ' d like him at least to prepare for the future relationship . some people say progress be slow . by EU standard this negotiation have be lightning fast . ' ' Mr Davis say that on the issue of European Court of Justice oversight of migrant ' right , the EU should trust British court and accept that they be not ` ` patsy ' ' to the government , as they have be overturn government decision for century . he add : ` ` Europeans in America do n't have protection of the ECJ , Americans in the UK have no protection from the Supreme Court . there be a point at which we have to say this be a good judicial system , one of the good in the world . ' ' Mr Davis be also ask if his military training in the Territorial Army ' S @card@ SAS Regiment have help with his negotiate skill . he reply : ` ` well , I never kill anyone ... ' '
I can not imagine a no-deal Brexit scenario , say IMF ' s Lagarde
Christine Lagarde , manage director of the International Monetary Fund , have say that she ` ` can not imagine ' ' a no-deal Brexit scenario . the movement of people and aviation logistic be not cover by the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rule that would come into force should a deal not be agree by March @card@ @card@ , Ms Lagarde say , as she explain that such a scenario be unthinkable . ` ` [ @card@ ] can not imagine that would happen , ' ' say the leader of the world ' s lender of last resort , speak at the IMF ' s annual meeting in Washington DC . ` ` for the people themselves , what do that mean ? WTO do not provide for those , ' ' the former French finance minister add . as she highlight the human factor in the Brexit decision making , Ms Lagarde say that the EU and the UK should prioritise the matter of people - those EU national live in the UK and vice versa - above all else . ` ` [ it ' s a ] situation of people first [ and ] business second , ' ' she say . Ms Lagarde ' S comment come on the same day that Brexit talk between the UK and the EU appear be deadlock , raise the possibility that Britain could crash out of the union with no new trade deal in place . her remark follow a speech earlier this week by Carolyn Fairbairn , head of the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) , in which she accuse Britain ' s leader of play ` ` human poker ' ' with EU migrant . a clear timetable and plan for UK negotiation with Brussels be essential , Ms Lagarde argue , add that ` ` our [ the IMF ' s ] hope be that it be conduct promptly ' ' . the IMF head also address the furore that emerge follow the publication of the fund ' s bi-annual ` ` Fiscal Monitor ' ' , which call for high taxation on top earner in advanced economy in order to generate more inclusive growth . it provoke significant backlash from leader in the US who consider the IMF to be oppose to their plan to cut tax for high earner and claim that the fund want to see them fail . Ms Lagarde also point to the importance for all economy of ` ` increase participation ' ' of woman in the workforce . she call on policymaker and central banker to work hard to ` ` close the gender gap between man and woman ' ' by address matter such as equal pay .
Sturgeon ' s gamble stake all on Scotland ' s opposition to Brexit ; Brexit : Scotland The SNP leader hope to offer Scot a clear choice over whether their future lie with Britain or Europe
Nicola Sturgeon have say she want Scot to vote on whether to leave the United Kingdom within two year . here we examine what she say and what she mean . ` ` the UK Government be clear in @card@ that an independence referendum should be , in their word , ' make in Scotland , by the people of Scotland ' . that be a principle that should be respect today . ' ' Ms Sturgeon want to give the impression that Scot can control their own fate , and vote on whether to leave the UK when they like . but this be not the case . the Scottish Government have to request the right to hold a referendum ; and the UK Government have to agree . Theresa May have a difficult path to tread , state that now be not the time for a referendum , rather than rule one out altogether . ` ` next week I will seek the approval of the Scottish Parliament to agree with the UK Government the detail of a Section @card@ order - the procedure that will enable the Scottish Parliament to legislate for an independence referendum . ' ' Scotland can hold a referendum as long as Holyrood and Westminster agree to trigger Section @card@ of the @card@ Scotland Act to transfer the power to hold the referendum to Edinburgh . it be think that the Prime Minister will accept the principle but refuse to transfer the power until after Brexit , argue that only then will Scot know the choice they face . ` ` if Scotland be to have a real choice - when the term of Brexit be know , but before it be too late to choose our own course - then that choice must be offer between the autumn of next year , @card@ , and the spring of @card@ . ' ' Ms Sturgeon want Scot to vote before Brexit happen , which be likely to be at the end of March @card@ . this would help the nationalist capitalise on uncertainty cause by Brexit and make voting to leave the UK and rejoin the EU more attractive . ` ` we will be frank about the challenge we face and clear about the opportunity independence will give us to secure our relationship with Europe , build a strong and more sustainable economy and create a fair society . ' ' the First Minister believe Scotland have a good future inside the EU but outside the UK , justify by the fact that a majority of Scot vote to remain in the EU at last June ' S referendum . but the EU do not see it this way , not least because it could spark potential nationalist uprising in other member state , like Catalonia in Spain . the European Commission have suggest an independent Scotland would join the back of the queue of other country hope for EU membership . ` ` there be across these island a common travel area . there be absolutely no reason why that would or should change if Scotland become an independent country . ' ' Ms Sturgeon will be worry that a ` ` hard ' ' Scottish border after Brexit would be devastating for Scottish company that ` ` export ' ' into England . she envisage a common travel area will exist within the island of Great Britain cite the likely post-Brexit solution on the island of Ireland . ` ` have Scotland ' s referendum at a time when the term of Brexit be know will give the Scottish people a choice about the kind of change we want . and it must be a choice for all of us . ' ' Ms Sturgeon be careful not to say she will win any vote . what she want be to give Scots a ` ` choice ' ' about their www.future.No wonder - the late polling publish hour before Ms Sturgeon speak suggest that Scot would vote @card@ in favour of remain in the UK . however a big worry for Mrs May will be that the nationalist start the last referendum campaign at just @card@ per cent in early @card@ and rise to @card@ per cent by September @card@ . with the poll on a knife-edge , Ms Sturgeon be gamble a considerable amount on www.winning.No wonder that less than @card@ hour after Ms Sturgeon have speak nearly £100,000 have be raise for the nationalist ' cause . last time lead political figure like David Cameron and Ed Miliband could argue that Scotland be good together with the UK and in the EU . but this time such argument by their successor will be hard to make because Britain be leave the EU and face a far more uncertain future . ` ` I can see no reason why it ca n't be the same question as last time , but I do n't want to get ahead of ourselves , we have a process to go through . ' ' in @card@ Scot be ask a simple question : ` ` Should Scotland be an independent country ? ' ' Ms Sturgeon want to ask it all over again . David Cameron be criticise for allow the nationalist to campaign for a positive ` ` Yes ' ' vote . Mrs May be likely to opt for a question that will elicit a more neutral ` ` Remain/Leave ' ' answer . ` ` it will be decide by the people of Scotland . it will be Scotland ' S choice . ' ' Ms Sturgeon be clear that be up to Scot to decide their future . but this ignore the question of whether people live in England should be allow a say . in the @card@ referendum , all EU citizen age over @card@ who be resident in Scotland be able to vote . Scottish independence polling since the Brexit vote question : if there be a referendum tomorrow with the question Should Scotland be an independent country ? , how would you vote ? yes no @card@ % @card@ @card@ @card@ @card@ @card@ @card@ @card@ Jul ( @card@ ) Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan ( @card@ ) Feb Mar Source : what Scotland SAYS Nationalists in the last referendum campaign start at +13 % @card@ % in early @card@ and rise to @card@ % cent by September @card@
campaigner fight to ' block will of people ' ; Brexit fallout ; Attorney General criticise attempt to force commons vote on Brexit as try to subvert referendum result
a wealthy City investor and anti-Brexit campaignerhas be accuse by the Attorney General of attempt to subvert the democratic will of the British people . remain supporter yesterday begin court action against Theresa May to prevent her use executive power under the royal prerogative to start the process of leave the European Union . Jeremy Wright , the Attorney General , say the legal move launch yesterday by Gina Miller to stop the Prime Minister trigger Article @card@ be a ` ` backdoor ' ' attempt to bypass the Brexit vote . in what have be describe as one of the most important constitutional case in generation , Ms Miller and her fellow anti-Brexit campaigner in the group people ' s Challenge argue that the Prime Minister have no power to trigger Article @card@ without the prior authorisation of Parliament . but Ms Miller ' S bid produce a wither response from the government . Mr Wright say : ` ` the country vote to leave the EU in a referendum approve by Act of Parliament . there must be no attempt to remain inside the EU , no attempt to rejoin it through the back door , and no second referendum . the result should be respect and the government intend to do just that . ' ' the government ' S lawyer tell the High Court that if the legal challenge mount by Ms Miller and her supporter succeed , the government ` ` could not give effect to the will and decision of the people , as clearly express in the referendum , to withdraw from the EU without further primary legislation ' ' . Mrs Miller , @card@ , originally train as a lawyer , but make her name campaigning on behalf of fellow investor against hidden fee and charge levy by investment fund . it be reveal in court that she have receive a stream of ` ` abuse , threat and insult ' ' from angry Brexit supporter since the case be launch . the court be tell that if Article @card@ be trigger , Ms Miller and other would be deprive of important constitutional right , such as the right to free movement , free movement of good , and freedom of service across Europe . Lord Pannick tell the three judge - Lord Chief Justice Lord Thomas , Master of the Rolls Sir Terence Etherton and Lord Justice sale : ` ` the issue in this case be not whether this country should remain a member of the EU , or leave the EU . ` ` the question be whether the government may take action unilaterally to notify , or whether it need parliamentary approval to do so . ' ' People ' S Challenge have raise more than £160,000 to fund its legal cost since it be launch in the wake of the referendum . it be set up by Grahame Pigney , a British expat who now live in Carcassonne , France , and Paul Cartwright , @card@ , a Gibraltarian national who run the Brex-IN campaign and work as an environmental officer for the British territory ' S government . Mr Pigney , @card@ , originally from Fareham , Hants , be semi-retired and have live in the wine-growing region of Carcassonne for @card@ year , which leave him unable to vote in the referendum . defend the legal challenge , he say : ` ` I happen to live in France , but that be inconsequential in the context of the constitutional crisis we be face . ` ` what ' S at stake be nothing less than parliamentary sovereignty . ` ` we need to make sure we do not hand the sovereignty of the UK to a self-appointed government . ' ' foreign legion Anti-Brexit campaigner base abroad although Gina Miller , picture leave , a trust fund manager , be the public face of a campaign to prevent the government from trigger Article @card@ , it can be reveal that many of those behind the action be British expats who live abroad . a legal challenge be be bring by a group call itself people ' S Challenge , set up by Grahame Pigney , a British expat who now live in France , and Paul Cartwright , @card@ , a Gibraltarian national . also back the legal action be the Fair Deal for Expats group , which include dozen of Briton live abroad . these include a British company director who live in Limoges , France ; a businessman who run a holiday rental business in Italy ; and an English language teacher in Hamburg , Germany . the presence of so many expats among those backing the legal action against the trigger of Article @card@ have prompt accusation they be interfere with Britain ' s future from the comfort of their home in the EU . Conservative MP Bernard Jenkin say : ` ` among those involve in the court case be a great many people who want to frustrate the UK from leave the European union or maintain a half in , half out solution . ` ` they want to protract the agony and uncertainty when in fact what business want be certainty and a clear direction . ' ' Dominic Raab MP say : ` ` this be a pretty naked attempt to steal the referendum by the back door . ' '
EasyJet could shift legal HQ overseas as airline push ahead with post-Brexit plan
budget airline easyJet be press ahead with plan to set up a new company in Europe to avoid the fallout from Brexit , a move that could involve switch its legal headquarters abroad . the FTSE @card@ airline have start the process to acquire a so-called air operator certificate ( AOC ) in a European country as a contingency in case the UK lose its right to fly freely across the continent after Brexit . gain a certifi-cate may result in easyJet legally register its HQ in an EU country , although it insist yesterday that the 1,000-plus staff at its Luton Airport head office would be unaffected . the AOC would ensure the airline have unfetter access to the European Common Aviation Area ( ECAA ) , allow the short-haul carrier to fly to destination across the continent . depend on the outcome of talk with European aviation regulator , the holding company will either be a subsidiary of easyJet or , more likely , become its legal headquarters . there be fear Brexit could obstruct UK airline ' access to the ECAA and it be understand a number of carrier be consider purchasing AOCs . the Telegraph reveal before the referendum that easyJet be look into the certificate . the airline be at pain to stress yesterday that even if its HQ switch abroad , it would only need a skeleton staff at the new legal entity . it would , however , mean that easyJet ' s annual general meeting and board meeting would be hold in Europe , rather than the UK . Brexit could also mean Irish carrier Ryanair would need an AOC in the UK . FTSE @card@ giant International Airlines Group , which own British Airways , Spain ' s Iberia and Ireland ' S Aer Lingus , already have AOCs in all three country . despite be list on the London Stock Exchange , IAG be legally a Spanish company .
Scotland Sturgeon accuse of ' weaponising ' Brexit to retain single market
Nicola Sturgeon yesterday demand that Scotland be allow to ` ` effectively ' ' stay in the EU single market after the UK Government move towards a special Brexit deal for Northern Ireland . the First Minister insist there be ` ` no good practical reason ' ' why one part of the UK should be allow to align its regulation with the EU and ` ` other can not do the same ' ' . she argue that deny Scotland a ` ` similar solution ' ' would put it at a ` ` double disadvantage ' ' in compete with Northern Ireland for job and investment . although the DUP prevent Theresa May and Jean-Claude Juncker from reach an agreement yesterday , Ms Sturgeaon also argue that the Prime Minister ' s aborted offer demonstrate the Irish government ' S influence and ` ` the importance of be independent ' ' . but the Tories accuse her of make a renewed push to ` ` weaponise Brexit ' ' for Scottish independence , and warn that create different regulatory regime north and south of the Scottish border would create trade barrier with England . this would be much more damaging to trade than Brexit , they say , as trade with the rest of the UK be worth four time as much for Scottish company as that with the EU . the row break out after it be report that the government be ready to allow be ` ` regulatory alignment ' ' between the north and south of Ireland so there be no hard border between the two . Ms Sturgeon publish a plan last December for Scotland to remain in the single market after the rest of the UK come out . it involve her government get some control over a range of issue from immigration and business regulation to international trade negotiation . the blueprint say this would allow Scotland to continue to mirror the business regime in the EU single market after Brexit . it be reject as unworkable by the UK government amid warning that it would create trade barrier with England . academic have also warn against use Ireland as a precedent , point to the fact that Northern Ireland , unlike Scotland , will share a post-Brexit border with an EU nation state . Ms Sturgeon yesterday welcome that there be an ` ` outline of an agreement ' ' that there should be no hard border in Ireland and acknowledge that the situation be ` ` distinct and separate ' ' from Scotland ' S . but she say : ` ` today ' S development show very clearly that if one part of the UK can retain regulatory alignment with the EU and effectively stay in the single market , there be no good practical reason why other can not do the same . indeed , any special status for Northern Ireland would make a similar solution for Scotland even more vital . for Scotland to find itself outside the single market , while Northern Ireland effectively stay in would place us at a double disadvantage when it come to job and investment . ' ' John Lamont , the Tory MP for Berwickshire , Roxburgh and Selkirk , say : ` ` it be disappointing - but not surprising - that Nicola Sturgeon have once again try to weaponise Brexit to further her obsession with independence . ' '
we need a new vision to fight the religion of European integration
my attempt last week to shoot down ten canard about Brexit leave a major question unanswered . why do so many intelligent and well-meaning people wish to stay in the EU ? some do so because they believe one or more of the fallacious argument that I attack last week . I hope my duck shoot give them food for thought . and there be a few more canard flap across the landscape . one of the juicy be the idea that the improvement in the UK economy that have take place since we join the EU in @card@ have happen because of our membership . accordingly , some people associate Brexit with a return to the condition that exist prior to our entry , include dreadful coffee and ubiquitous all-day breakfast . in practice , of course , nearly all country in the world have enjoy the benefit of economic growth over this period . another argument , although not quite a canard , concern the reaction of foreigner to Brexit . there be a widespread fear that foreign-own firm will fail to invest in the UK and/ or withdraw or scale down their operation here . this fear encompass the auto sector , Japanese investment in all sort of manufacturing and investment from all around the world in the City of London . in practice , this argument involve a good deal of circularity for if Brexit really be n't that bad for the UK economy , and indeed may actually be beneficial then , give very low tariff , foreign firm be unlikely to scale down or withdraw their operation in the UK . there be also a fear that the EU will punish the UK , include through the operation of various non-tariff barrier . this be not daft . but it would be against the EU ' s own economic interest . and whatever the Commission ' S inclination , not many European firm or consumer would favour this approach . so its scope will be limit . more tellingly , it be widely believe that , although the eurozone have have its fair share of travail , nevertheless there be potentially major economic advantage to be have from size and integration . accordingly , by cut ourselves off , the UK will be settle for an inferior economic out-turn . this may not be obvious at first but the cost and disadvantage will build up over time . similarly , there be a legitimate argument that although it be perfectly possible for the UK to choose policy after Brexit that will bring a net economic benefit - zero tariff on all import , for instance - in practice , a combination of economic ignorance and political pressure will mean that we do not adopt such policy . consequently , Brexit will lead to fall in trade , with a consequent hit to productivity and investment . more generally , leave to its own device , the UK be likely to make bad economic decision on tax , government spending , regulation and the environment . Remainers be , of course , welcome to this belief but the evidence surely scream the opposite . the cost of EU membership be set to increase sharply as it integrate and control more , and its decision-making and policy choice be likely to be bad than those that we would make in pursuit of our own interest . many opponent of Brexit be particularly concern about reduce immigration - ostensibly for economic reason . they associate the number of immigrant , regardless of their skill , with wealth creation . they be confuse the overall size of GDP with GDP per capita . it be true that , other thing equal , the few people we admit then the small our overall economy will be . but so what ? no one eat aggregate GDP statistic . on the opposite tack , some opponent of Brexit openly downplay GDP against consideration of war and peace . they believe that the European Union be responsible for continued peace in Europe since @card@ . this argument be not to be lightly dismiss . peace and the preservation of human life surely trump mere economics . but most Eurosceptics do not believe that the EU be the source of peace in post-war Europe . this have rather be due to the combination of Nato , nuclear weapon and a change set of attitude on the part of ordinary European people that have nothing to do with the EU . more generally , a large part of the opposition to Brexit be political and people use economic argument , include the various canard that I have bring down , as cover for their political view . they value the development of a common European identity and they associate this with the EU . equally , they be suspicious of a purely national identity , and perhaps especially of a British national identity . some actively dislike Britain and Britishness . for such people , economic argument may cut little ice . their Europeanism be close to be a religion . feeling , or want to feel , ` ` European ' ' be understandable . I feel European myself . but European identity be not the same as belong to a common European political entity . there be Europe well before the EU . and there can be Europe outside the EU , or even well after it . counter the religion of European political integration may require the adoption of a new vision . it should surely concentrate on the concept of global Britain . admittedly , there be Brexiteers who nurse a nostalgic , warm beer and village cricket , view of Britain outside the EU . this often feature in the caricature that Remainers like to attack . but most of the lead light behind Brexit be not like this . they see the EU as an inwardlooking , protectionist bloc that be fade in relative importance at just the time that the rest of the world be open up and develop . Britain ' S future can readily involve a close relationship and deep friendship with the country of the EU while simultaneously set our sight over the horizon , economically , politically and culturally . the vision of the future that the government should actively promote be of an outward-facing but proudly independent Britain , play a full part on the world stage . that be a future well worth strive for - and vote for . Roger Bootle be chairman of Capital Economics roger.bootle @ capitaleconomics.com ' I feel European myself . but European identity be not the same as belong to a common European political entity '
Scotland Key policy the SNP manifesto Body : independence Reinforce Scottish Parliament ' s right to decide on timing of a second independence referendum ; Scotland should have another referendum at the end of the Brexit process . the SNP win a majority of Scottish seat would create a ` ` triple lock ' ' for another referendum after the party win the most seat at last year ' s Holyrood election and the Scottish Parliament vote for talk over get the power for an independence vote . Scotland should be an EU member state if independent but the process by which this would be achieve would only be set out before a referendum . immigration Devolve immigration to allow Scotland to have its own policy after Brexit . Press UK Government to ensure border check be as seamless as possible after the UK leave the EU . BREXIT push for the Scottish government to be give a seat at the Brexit negotiating table . push for the SNP plan to keep Scotland in the EU single market when the rest of the UK leave to be include in the UK ' s negotiate stance . this would require the devolution of power in nearly every area except defence to Scotland could meet the regulatory and administrative requirement of single market membership . call for the UK Government to guarantee EU national ' right to remain in the UK . oppose any attempt by the UK Government to ` ` sell out ' ' the fishing industry during talk . devolve all power repatriate from Brussel that relate to devolve area such as fishery and agriculture . defence scrap the renewal of Trident . support its Faslane home on the Clyde be turn into a conventional naval base . halt the closure of a series of old base tax increase the top rate of income tax from 45p to 50p across the rest of the UK in @card@ . the Scottish Government would implement the same change north of the Border . introduce a tax on banker ' bonus . freeze VAT and examine reduction for tourism industry after Brexit . review alcohol taxation to reflect alcohol content . ` ` targeted incentive ' ' to develop ` ` small pool discovery ' ' in the North Sea oil and gas sector and to help ` ` late life ' ' field . spending & deficit end austerity with an extra £120 billion of spending across the UK over the next parliament . balance the UK budget by the end of the parliament in @card@ . health increase English NHS spending by £11 billion , or seven per cent , so it be the same per head as in Scotland . this will produce more than £1 billion extra spending for Scotland via the Barnett formula . an NHS Reinstatement Billl to reverse the suppose privatisation of the health service in England . abandon ` ` unsustainable ' ' pay cap for NHS worker in Scotland . education Protect ' free ' university tuition for Scottish student . call for the full reinstatement of the Post-Study Work Visa scheme , which allow foreign student to stay in the UK after graduation . welfare give Scotland full control over welfare power . introduce UK-wide target to end child poverty . End Work Capability Assessment and review personal independence payment . oppose cap that restrict child tax credit to two child and the so-called ' rape clause ' provide an exemption for woman whose third or subsequent child be the product of rape . abolish the Bedroom Tax in Scotland . scrap the current benefit sanction regime . complete halt to Universal Credit . reinstate the work allowance for all benefit claimant . payment of a real live Wage to all adult age @card@ and over pension Oppose increase in the state pension age . maintain the triple lock on the state pension . stand up for woman short-change by the accelerate timetable for increase in the state pension age Justice Appeal to the UK Government to refund £140 million of VAT payment make by Police Scotland . oppose any relaxation of the law on fox hunting Transport Call for the devolution of Network Rail . connect Scotland with HS2 . democracy call for the abolition of the House of Lords . change the General Election voting system to the single transferable vote form of proportional representation . lower the voting age in Westminster election to @card@ .
Brexit talk will start just @card@ day after the election , warn PM ; Election @card@ ; Theresa May will reveal negotiation ' start date today , tell voter ' weak ' Corbyn will not be ready
Britain have ` ` no time to waste ' ' in Brexit talk , Theresa May will warn today as she say formal negotiation about leave the European Union will start just @card@ day after the election . the Prime Minister will tell supporter in Wales , which vote overwhelmingly to leave the European union at the referendum , not to risk let Jeremy Corbyn lead these talk . on her first visit to Wales of the official election campaign , Mrs May will stress that she will not take support from Welsh voter ` ` for grant ' ' as she seek to win a Tory landslide on June @card@ . Mrs May will say : ` ` there be just @card@ day to go until this crucial general election . just @card@ day after that , the European Union want the Brexit negotiation to begin . ` ` the UK ' s seat at the negotiate table will be fill by me or Jeremy Corbyn . the deal we seek will be negotiate by me or Jeremy Corbyn . ` ` there will be no time to waste and no time for a new government to find its way . so the stake in this election be high . ' ' she will claim the UK will have a ` ` weak hand ' ' should Mr Corbyn secure power with the help of the Liberal Democrat , Plaid Cymru and Scottish National Party MP as these party ` ` do n't want Brexit to succeed ' ' . the Prime Minister and Conservative leader be expect to say she be ` ` @card@ per cent commit to the cause ' ' while suggest Mr Corbyn be ` ` uncertain or unsure ' ' when it come to deliver on Brexit . Mrs May be expect to say the UK ' s future prosperity depend on ` ` get the next five year right ' ' , add : ` ` that be why we need someone represent Britain who be @card@ per cent commit to the cause . ` ` not someone who be uncertain or unsure , but someone utterly determine to deliver the democratic will of the British people . ` ` because if we do n't get this right , the consequence for the United Kingdom and for the economic security of ordinary working people will be dire . if we do , the opportunity ahead be great . ' ' Mrs May be travel to Wales today to launch the party ' s Welsh manifesto . poll have raise the possibility of significant gain at next month ' S General Election . insider believe the party could win nine more seat , give it @card@ out of the @card@ seat in the principality , and make the conservative the large party . one insider say : ` ` there have be this assumption that Labour ' S support be always there . it be certainly not the case . ' ' Mrs May will use the trip to make a bold plea for support from Welsh voter who feel Labour have take them for grant . she will say : ` ` I ' m back those that want a more secure and full life . I ' m back those whose only wish be that their child will do good than themselves . ` ` and to those that look to their government and their politician for a little help and support , I ' m back you too . ` ` because too often in the past , ordinary working people have find the help and support they need just be n't there . ` ` and I know that sense of disenchantment be particularly acute here in Wales . ` ` we see that when people here in Wrexham and across Wales choose to ignore the hysterical warning of Labour , Plaid Cymru and Liberal Democrat politician in Cardiff Bay , and vote to leave the EU . ` ` we see it now in the way those same politician refuse to respect that vote as they try to find new way to put obstacle in our way . ` ` and the cause of that emerge gulf be clear . it be because the Labour Party have take people in Wales for grant for decade - just as it have in other community across Britain . ' ' in the Conservative national manifesto , which be publish last week , Mrs May pledge to invest in ` ` improve infrastructure ' ' to help Welsh company . she also promise a new North Wales Growth Deal ` ` connect North Wales with northern England ' ' and which would ` ` encourage further cross-border working ' ' . the Tories also say they would ` ` protect the interest of Welsh farmer ' ' and ` ` ensure the strength of the Welsh brand be maintain ' ' . Boris Johnson , the Foreign Secretary , also raise concern about the possibility of Mr Corbyn try to negotiate Britain ' s exit from the EU with other EU leader . he tell ITV ' s Peston on Sunday : ` ` they ' re go to look at him , and they ' re go to have him for breakfast . and I think it would be deeply damaging to the interest of this country . ' '
Britain would be perfectly OK with no Brexit deal , say Boris ; Foreign Secretary reject ' apocalyptic ' warning by MP ' committee that UK may be seriously damage
Britain will be ` ` perfectly OK ' ' without a deal on Brexit and should be prepare to walk away from the EU talk likely to start formally this week , Boris Johnson have say . the Foreign Secretary reject warning from an influential committee of MP about ` ` mutually assure damage ' ' in the event of no deal , say the consequence would not be ` ` apocalyptic ' ' . his comment expose a Cabinet split , with Liam Fox , the International Trade Secretary , say it would ` ` of course be bad ' ' if no deal be reach . meanwhile , David Davis , the Brexit Secretary , say he be ` ` confident I ' ll get a good outcome ' ' from talk with the @card@ member state . their comment come ahead of a crucial Commons vote today that be expect to clear the way for Theresa May to trigger Article @card@ - begin the two-year process of exit the EU - as early as tomorrow . a Tory rebellion aim at give Parliament a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the Brexit deal , which would hold up the Bill ' S passage , be expect to falter , with whip confident the rebel do not have the number to overturn the government ' S majority . the government have offer Parliament a take it or leave it vote on the deal once the negotiation be complete , but some Tory , include Nicky Morgan , the former education secretary , want a pledge that MP will be able to debate the deal and demand change if they be not satisfy . they have ask Mr Davis to bring the vote forward to Oct @card@ - six month before the Brexit deadline - to allow time for minister to go back to the EU and hold further talk . there be grow concern in Whitehall that EU negotiator could offer a bad deal to punish the UK for leave , even if that mean acting against their own good economic interest . the Commons foreign affair committee warn in a report over the weekend that there be a very real possibility the talk could end with no deal which would be ` ` very destructive ' ' for both Britain and the EU . the committee say that a failure to put a back-up plan in place would be a ` ` serious dereliction of duty ' ' . Anna Soubry , a former minister , make an even more gloomy prediction by suggest yesterday that talk could col-lapse within six month , leave Britain fall off a cliff edge . she describe Mr Johnson ' s comment as ` ` irresponsible nonsense ' ' . appear on ITV ' s Peston on Sunday , Mr Johnson insist a deal be a ` ` very likely ' ' outcome , stress that the UK have a ` ` robust ' ' economy and a confident negotiating team . ` ` Our partner and friend around the EU desperately want this thing to work , ' ' he say . ask if the government be draw up contingency plan in case there be no deal , Mr Johnson say : ` ` I think that actually , as it happen , we would be perfectly OK if we be n't able to get an agreement , but I ' m sure that we will , for the reason that I give . ` ` I do n't think that the consequence of no deal be by any mean as apocalyptic as some people like to protest . ' ' Appearing on BBC Radio @card@ Live , Dr Fox initially agree with his fellow Cabinet minister , say : ` ` certainly it would n't be the end of the world if we have no deal . ' ' he perform a U-turn on Sky News later in the morning , say : ` ` not have a deal of course would be bad , not just bad for the UK but for Europe as a whole . ' ' a spokesman for Dr Fox say he be ` ` clear that no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' . a report today warn it be ` ` inevitable ' ' that more money will need to be spend in government department set to see an increase workload after Brexit , such as the Home Office and the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs . some ministry be already recruit more civil servant , which show ` ` they must have be give indication that they will not be hold to the administrative saving agree in the pre-Brexit spending review , ' ' the report by the Institute for Government and the UK in a change Europe project say . Oxford University be call on MP to guarantee the right of EU citizen to stay in the UK after Brexit in order to protect academic staff . Research would ` ` suffer enormous damage ' ' if European worker have to leave , accord to the university ' S vice-chancellor , Louise Richardson , and the head of all but three of its constituent college , in a letter to the Times . deal or no deal ? Boris Johnson : ` ` we would be perfectly OK if we be n't able to get an agreement , but I ' m sure that we will ... I do n't think that the consequence of no deal be by any mean as apocalyptic as some people like to protest . ' ' Liam Fox : ` ` not have a deal would be bad . but it ' S not just bad for the UK , it ' s bad for Europe . ' ' David Davis : ` ` I ' m confident I ' ll get a good outcome . one of the reason we do n't talk about the contingency plan too much be that we do n't want people to think it [ pull out with no deal ] be what we be try to do . ' ' @card@ article @card@ be pass without a hitch government ' s good scenario . MP would debate , then pass the bill , reject the amendment and send it back to the Lords , where peer also allow it to pass in its unamended form . if this happen , the Withdrawal from the European Union ( Article @card@ ) Bill will receive Royal Assent quickly and Article @card@ can be trigger immediately . the Bill will have pass all stage in both house and will become law in exactly the same form as it be first propose by the government . 2 the House of Lords fight MP over amendment if the bill pass the Commons stage today , then go back to the Lords where it be amend again , this become a problem . peer could trigger a process know as ` ` ping pong ' ' where a bill be send back and forth between the two chamber because nobody can agree if it should be change or not . the two issue on which the government have be defeat in the Lords be on ` ` a meaningful vote ' ' for MP on the final EU deal and protection for EU citizen who be already resident here . Theresa May do n't want either to be part of this Bill because they could face legal delay and she be worry about be tie to promise she may not be able to keep . so far , it look as though the Lords will not try to send it back a second time if the commons pass the bill to the Lords unamended . however , there will be some who be keen to trigger the ping-pong process which could draw out the Bill ' S passage and force minister to make concession in order to meet their deadline for trigger the process by the end of March . 3 the House of Commons back the Lords ' amendment if MP decide to back the two change make by the House of Lords when the Bill return to the commons later today , then that spell big problem for the government . it be unlikely , but with such a slim majority it be possible that Mrs May could be defeat and be force to include either one or both of the Lords ' amendment in the legislation . there will be wrangle between Tory MP and whip today in a bid to prevent this from happen . should the whip fail , the House of Lords , have propose the change in the first place , would be highly likely to support them a second time and there would be very little the government could do . @card@ hour the time it will take the EU to respond to an Article @card@ notification , accord to council president Donald Tusk
the House of Lords have no right to block Brexit ; Letters to the Editor Body : sir - Theresa May may have problem get the great repeal bill through the Commons but it surely can not be block by the House of Lords , notwithstanding the majority of peer say to be oppose . page @card@ of the Conservatives ' @card@ election manifesto contain a clear commitment to hold a referendum on our future membership of the EU . such a commitment imply an obligation to honour the result , and the Bill be the instrument to achieve this . against this background , the Lords may delay the passing of the Bill - but under the Salisbury convention in relation to manifesto commitment , which would surely be honour by the court , it can not block it . Patrick Balfour London W12 Sir - Those parliamentarian and other who seem intent on hinder Brexit , and specifically the enactment of Article @card@ , should remember that David Cameron promise to enact it the day after the referendum in the event of a Brexit vote . any delay tactic be an insult to the electorate . Steve Proud Swansea Sir - the term of negotiation for Brexit be not , in the first instance , a matter for Parliament . negotiation with foreign power , include the making and amendment of treaty or action necessary under them , have always be a matter within the royal prerogative . if Parliament be unhappy with the exercise of prerogative power , it have its remedy - a vote of no confidence in her Majesty ' S minister . that be the way our system work . Brian Watkins Chepstow , Monmouthshire Sir - Those who be support the High Court challenge to the Prime Minister to exercise her right to invoke Article @card@ should take note of the following in Article @card@ of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaim by the United Nations in @card@ : ` ` the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government ; this will shall be express in periodic and genuine election which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be hold by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedure . ' ' Andrew Cave London NW3
the EU be fatally divide on Brexit , and that be our great opportunity ; Europe be make the most of our disunity , so we must adopt a similar strategy of divide and conquer
there be two strategy that a country can adopt during moment of national emergency . the bold be for Left and Right to come together in a unity government , put aside their difference to fight for a common purpose . this reduce the space for democratic dissent , and risk enshrine groupthink , but it can be a vital way forward in extreme circumstance . it allow the government to speak on behalf of the vast majority , rather than merely one party , which be especially useful in time of war . Herbert Henry Asquith forge a coalition with Labour and the Conservatives between May @card@ and December @card@ , which continue follow his replacement by David Lloyd George . it be triumphantly re-elect after the war and the UK retain a government of national unity until @card@ , allow it to navigate Ireland ' S independence . our most famous government of national unity be Winston Churchill ' s all-party coalition from @card@ until @card@ : it would have be impossible to defeat the Nazis without it . we have also have unity government , albeit less successfully , in time of intense economic crisis . start in @card@ , there be a succession of National Governments , lead by Ramsay MacDonald , Stanley Baldwin and then Neville Chamberlain . coalition fray over time but the basic idea - that the challenge be too great , the ideological division within rather than between party too intractable - continue to guide how administration be put together . we end up with a cut-down version in @card@ in the shape of the Tory-Lib Dem coalition , task with slash the deficit at a time when there be real doubt about the UK ' S solvency . for good or bad , our politician have embrace the other , more traditional approach since the Brexit vote : they have keep fight among themselves , while swathe of the establishment want to cancel the great democratic uprising of @card@ . only the Remainers be work in cross-party fashion , with close contact between Blairites , Remainer Tories and Lib Dems . Theresa May ' S strategy , as well as Jeremy Corbyn ' S , have be to pretend to normalise the extraordinary : Brexit be merely one policy among many , subject to the usual Westminster game , rather than an all-consuming issue that require intense cross-party cooperation . the result have be to present an amateurish , uncertain picture to the world , with damage short-term consequence . the Cabinet be a war coalition involve the whole spectrum of Brexiteers and Remainers : it have no agree view of what the ideal end-state should look like , as the negotiator in Brussels understand too well . when one add the fact that we do n't have a strong , charismatic Prime Minister capable of lead the nation or sell her way forward to the country , it be hardly surprising that it have take so long for the government to achieve so little , culminate in a financial offer that could have be make nine month ago . but while we remain hopelessly divided , little attention have be devote to the fact that the EU be in an even great mess . we do n't know what we want , but neither do they , and that be our great opportunity . forget Left-Right cleavage : European politics have take on a matrix-like structure . some government want much more European integration and a superstate ; other want less or the same as now . some believe that Brexit will help achieve their vision ( regardless of whether that be more or less EU ) ; other that it will hinder it . the question , to the integrationist , be whether the EU can ever fulfil its imperial , continental potential if we leave , or whether it can possibly fulfil it if we do n't . our departure would represent a crippling blow , the loss of a central economic , financial , military and cultural power ; yet the referendum suggest that Charles de Gaulle be right and that we be never go to fit into the EU , seek to delay and block its gradual mutation from economic market to full-on technocratic Euro-state . to Eurosceptics in the EU , Brexit be either good news ( a great precedent ) or a disaster ( the loss of a principal ally ) . most EU government believe that keep the well possible relation with the UK when we leave make sense ; other seem up for a fight , however suicidal . opposition party often disagree , and government themselves be rive with split . part of the difficulty be that similar tactic can signify opposite end-goals . threaten the UK with a trade war may be see as a ploy to frighten us into stay put , or as a mean to enrage us into the clean of Brexits . emotion be run high : we often confuse spite and anger from Europeans who feel jilt with a calculated attempt at ` ` punish ' ' us . take France : what do Emmanuel Macron really think of Brexit ? my own suspicion , inform in part from his autobiography , be that he would like us to leave . some eastern European country do n't want us to go . other , such as the Dutch and Danes , will be willing to work with us if we do . the German view , if there be one these day , be unclear . Ireland be pursue a high-stakes game of brinkmanship but clearly would prefer us not to leave . as the second phase of the talk loom , the Foreign Office should focus on determine which European leader believe that a liberal Brexit would be in their own country ' interest , and try to work with them to facilitate the smooth possible departure . anything could happen , especially if the talk break down : Brexit be an event of such magnitude that our political party be unlikely to survive it unscathed . if , heaven forbid , a second referendum be hold , and we be to vote , once again , to leave , as I hope and expect , it would be hard to see how Britain would be able to avoid a government of national unity and the complete reconfiguration of our party . in the meantime , the EU be make the most of our disunity , so we must do the same with their own irreconcilable position . the next phase of the negotiation will be very different , so now be the time to divide and conquer , or at least to seek to build a new national coalition that support a genuine , open Brexit . follow Allister Heath on Twitter @ AllisterHeath ; read more at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion
Carney : boom in economy be be stifle by Brexit
Britain ' S economy would be ` ` booming ' ' if not for Brexit , the governor of the Bank of England have claim . Mark Carney say business be wait for the outcome of Theresa May ' s negotiation with the EU before make investment decision , which be slow down economic growth . he say the Bank ' s prediction for foreign investment in Britain be @card@ per cent low than before the referendum . speak on ITV ' s Peston on Sunday , he say : ` ` since the referendum , what we ' re see be that business investment have pick up , but it have n't pick up to any of the extent that one would have expect give how strong the world be , how easy financial condition be , how high profitability be and how little spare capacity they have . ' ' acknowledge the strength of the economy , Mr Carney warn : ` ` it should really be booming , but it ' S just grow . I think we know why that ' s the case , because they ' re wait to see the nature of the deal with the European Union . it ' S the most important investment destination and [ business ] need to know transition and end state . everybody know this , the government know it and be work on it , UK business know it and the Europeans know it . ' ' ask if the economy would take a hit if the UK leave the EU without a Brexit deal , he say : ` ` in the short term , without question . if we have materially less access [ to the EU ' s single market ] than we have now , this economy be go to need to reorient , and during that period of time it will weigh on growth . ' ' he add that in the event of a bad Brexit deal , the Bank would not be able to cut future interest rate because of inflationary pressure . Damien Moore , the Conservative MP , respond : ` ` Carney and other be say the economy would suffer until the Brexit vote and quite the contrary have happen . ' ' George Freeman : page @card@
the overlook Brexit bargain that allow low-risk trust to eye an 8pc yield ; QuestorTrust Bargains Richard Evans the big bank do n't want to lend on commercial property , so this trust can earn 8pc on its mortgage
the Brexit vote cause chaos in London ' s commercial property market but it also give rise to some intriguing opportunity for clever fund manager . while those who run Britain ' s ` ` open-ended ' ' property fund - which allow investor to get their money out on a daily basis - be force to suspend trading , their counterpart in the investment trust world be free to go hunting for bargain . the opportunity have not be restrict to buy actual real estate : a handful of investment company put their money into property-related debt - effectively mortgage or bond . the one we feature today , Real Estate Credit Investments ( RECI ) , have speak of a ` ` unique opportunity ' ' to make handsome return by lending to ` ` opportunistic buyer look at UK property at this attractive entry point ' ' - reduce price bring about by Brexit . lender such as RECI can charge high interest rate on relatively low-risk loan because traditional lender have largely abandon this specialist market as they seek to shrink their balance sheet . ` ` the retrenchment of traditional lender in the UK real estate lending sphere have , in our view , accelerate during the last year , ' ' Cheyne Capital Management , which run the trust , write in the annual report in March . ` ` this be due to increase regulatory pressure on bank and the impact of Brexit . ` ` if anything , we note a growth in the number of opportunistic buyer look at UK property at this attractive entry point . this have leave established lender , such as RECI , with a unique opportunity to significantly increase [ their ] presence in the market without compromise on risk or return . ' ' the firm add : ` ` indeed , in the current climate , RECI have the opportunity to seek a lower-risk profile for its deal , while maintain , if not improve on , the economic return and the structural term of its deal . ` ` we believe that the opportunity set available to RECI today , for the UK market , may be as compelling as that present in @card@ and @card@ in the immediate aftermath of the global financial crisis . ' ' the fund manager give the example of one £20m loan in April . it be for just 40pc of the property value , with the owner and other lender ranking behind RECI in the event of default - but the return be expect to be 8pc a year . this kind of figure be normally associate with highly risky asset , not secure lending on London property when other party have to lose 60pc of the asset ' s value before any impact be feel . across the £113m loan portfolio as a whole , RECI have lend about 69pc of the value of the property concern . the trust also own about £50m in bond back by residential or commercial property . some be buy below par value , which offer some limited scope for capital growth . the trust currently yield a highly attractive 6.6pc but there be good reason to expect that figure to rise to about 8pc or perhaps even more , say James Burns , who hold it in multimanager portfolio he run for Smith & Williamson . ` ` the trust use to have some expensive preference share in issue , but they be redeem last month , ' ' he say . ` ` these prefs cost 8pc a year but the fund manager expect to refinance at less than 2pc . ` ` the other change be that the management fee will in future be calculate as a percentage of net asset , not the high gross asset figure . take together , these two development could see the yield rise by between @card@ and two percentage point , so it could reach 8pc or more at the current share price . ' ' he say this would amount to ` ` equity-like return for non-equity asset ' ' and add that the portfolio should hold up well in any sell-off thanks to the conservative lending . unusually for this column , the trust currently trade at a small premium . but the premium can be expect to rise if the dividend be increase as expect . questor say : buy Ticker : RECI Share price at close : 169.25p Investment trust news Temple Bar be to borrow £25m for @card@ year at 2.99pc , replace a £25m 9.875pc debenture . merchant will borrow £35m over @card@ year at 2.96pc . other thing be equal , cheap refinancing can be expect to improve return . Electra have announce the result of a strategic review . Key number market value : £215.1m year of listing : @card@ discount : 2.9pc premium Ave discount over past year : 1.1pc premium yield : 6.6pc most recent year ' S dividend : 11.1p annual charge : 2.24pc not actual loan have last Management , trust , write Real Estate Credit Investments buy opportunistic property buyer need credit - and will pay for it Dyson Portfolio Dyson
Scotland All EU citizen in Britain to get full right ; @card@ million EU citizen will be able to stay
Britain plan to grant the right to remain in the UK to nearly a million EU citizen who have not achieve the five-year residency qualification as part of plan to kick-start Brexit negotiation within day , the Daily Telegraph can reveal . the proposal will be part of a ` ` generous ' ' package of measure that will offer to guarantee the right of all 3million European Union citizen in the UK . cabinet minister be expect to debate the measure next week ahead of talk in Brussels where the fate of British and EU expats on both side of the Channel will be top of the agenda . official source add that the UK will offer to grant EU citizen ` ` full equivalence ' ' with the right of UK citizen after Brexit , at the end of March @card@ . in a third olive branch to Brussels , the UK be prepare to create a ` ` light touch ' ' approach to establish whether EU citizen be eligible to remain . EU citizen have raise concern over an 85-page residency form , but official source say this have already be ` ` radically simplify ' ' so applicant could automatically skip section not relevant to their circumstance . to make thing even easy for EU migrant , source say that a new system will rely on HMRC tax database to establish simply if someone have be resident . this would go a long way to meet the EU demand that its migrant in Britain should be give residence after Brexit even if they do not actually have document ` ` evidence that right ' ' . the Telegraph also understand - subject to a decision to be take by the new government - that Britain be prepare to compromise over the so-called ` ` cut-off date ' ' when EU citizen will be eligible for full right . hardliner have argue that anyone who arrive after the Brexit vote on June @card@ last continue on Page @card@ continue from Page @card@ year should have know the rule would change , but British negotiator be expect to take a soft approach , perhaps with the cut-off date be the day Article @card@ be trigger in March . ` ` it would be reasonable to argue anyone who arrive after that date could reasonably have foresee that the rule be go to change , ' ' a second source with knowledge of the Brexit preparation say . the EU side be demand that any EU citizen who arrive in Britain up until Brexit day should be grant full right , but Britain fear this could provoke a last-minute rush . even so , official say that the UK ` ` have not rule out ' ' concede this as a goodwill gesture . figure from the Oxford-based Migration Observatory estimate that there be some @card@ EU migrant in the UK who have not meet the five-year residency test . this group will be allow to remain under the plan . Britain will , however , stick to several red line most notably refuse to submit to EU demand that the European Court of Justice should be the ultimate arbiter of any Article @card@ agreement . the UK will also balk at any attempt by the EU to create a ` ` special class ' ' of EU citizen after Brexit who would enjoy good right than UK citizen in a way source describe as ` ` clearly not fair ' ' . this be expect to include remove the right of EU migrant to claim child benefit for child who be not live in Britain , and the automatic right to bring non-EU spouse into Britain .
Scotland Viscount arrest over ' racist threat ' to Brexit campaigner
an ARISTOCRAT have be charge with send racially aggravate message direct at the anti-Brexit court campaigner Gina Miller . Rhodri Colwyn Philipps , the 4th Viscount St Davids , be charge yesterday with send malicious communication with racially aggravate factor , the Metropolitan Police say . Lord St Davids , @card@ , of Knightsbridge , London , who also hold the title Lord Strange of Knockin , Lord Hungerford , and Lord de Moleyns , be know as a keen polo player . he once own a sprawling property in West Sussex know as strange place . Ms Miller , @card@ , complain of receive a series of racist message after her decision to spearhead the legal challenge to the EU referendum vote , which result in an historic Supreme Court defeat for the government over Brexit in January . a Guyana-born mother of three , she become the face of the first successful legal battle against Brexit , but say in a radio interview that it have result in her become ` ` apparently the most hate woman in Britain ' ' . Lord St Davids , whose family motto be Ducit Amor Patriae , ` ` patriotism be my motive ' ' , be arrest by officer from the Met ' S Operation Falcon on January @card@ after a complaint be receive concern alleged threat make online against a 51-year-old woman . he be a member of one of the old aristocratic family in Wales , which date back to the Norman . member of the family have serve as MP and sit in the Lords . Ms Miller have previously say that she have have to spend £60,000 on security after receive threat , but they do not deter her from pursue the Brexit case . she argue that the UK would be deprive of important , constitutional right if Article @card@ be trigger , such as the right to free movement , free movement of good , and the right to freedom of service across Europe . Lord St Davids have be bail to appear at Westminster Magistrates ' Court on April @card@ .
Britain take charge of its border ; ESTABLISHED @card@ body : for a long time we have the phrase ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . it be powerful in its simplicity , but become disconcert in its lack of detail . then Theresa May , both in a long speech and in Parliament , provide that detail , flesh out the substantive element of Britain ' s departure from the European Union . a slavish devotion to neither the single market nor the custom union would stand between this country and full sovereign control of its own border and law . now we be see the first practical implementation of that policy . take back control of British border inevitably mean new EU migrant no longer have automatic right to remain permanently in this country . but from when ? much sooner than expect , it seem . not at the end of the two-year negotiation period that will follow the trigger of Article @card@ next month , but at the very moment it be trigger , in little more than a fortnight perhaps . this be both legal - as the implementation of the new control will only take effect after Brexit - and sensible , as wait two year might encourage a large number of immigrant from poor part of the EU . for those who once hint darkly that the government under Mrs May , who vote to Remain , be dither , or that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' be a formulation that disguise a vacuum , it be a significant turnaround . instead of deplore her hesitancy , they must celebrate her decisiveness about one of the principal driver of discontent with our membership of the EU . but there be also question . be British border force up to the task of monitoring and recording who arrive before - and after - the cut-off date ? will we see an influx in the come day ? and what other difference , such as limited access to benefit , will there be for those who arrive afterwards ? how will those who ` ` overstay ' ' be remove ? Mrs May have rightly say that she want exit negotiation with the EU to be as harmonious and mutually beneficial as possible . yet in this development there be ample scope for bad blood to accrue . give that more than one million Briton be resident in EU nation , Mrs May must now display the same deft talent for calm agitate EU leader as she have in reassure Brexiteers concern that she might not prosecute their cause with the necessary diligence . it be tempting to think that Article @card@ would be the end of the drama . in fact , the hard work be about to begin .
sterling effort or pound down ? analyst split over currency path
currency expert at Bank of America believe the pound ' s post-referendum plunge will be short-lived and no doubt some company boss , include Ryanair chief Michael O'Leary , will be hope they be right . while exporter have be help by the pound ' S weakness , Europe ' s big airline yesterday join a host of other firm , include rival easyJet and British Airways ' owner International Airlines Group , as well as retailer Sports Direct and cake maker Premier Foods , that have be hurt by a sell-off that have see sterling plumb 31-year low against the US dollar . give the carnage sterling ' S fall have cause some company , Bank of America ' s bullish assessment of the currency ' S prospect will have come as a welcome relief . accord to the bank ' S strategist Athanasios Vamvakidis and Kamal Sharma , the pound - which be trade at about $ @card@ against the greenback - will hit a low of $ @card@ before rally sharply to $ @card@ or even $ @card@ if London secure a smooth Brexit . in the long run , the Bank of America expert say they ` ` doubt that the market will be in a perpetual state of panic over every Brexit -related headline ' ' . however , Kit Juckes , of Societe Generale , say that the pound be ` ` still on track to spend much of @card@ in the $ @card@ to $ @card@ range ' ' . last week , Deutsche Bank analyst also advise client to ` ` stay short the pound ' ' . while they agree with Bank of America that ` ` clarity on a transitional arrangement between the UK and EU ' ' would be a ` ` key stabiliser ' ' , they believe such a deal ` ` seem unlikely ' ' . leave the EU ' s single market , in a so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , will also be bad for sterling , they say . ` ` there be no fallback option for hard Brexit , ' ' analyst warn . ` ` Negotiating multiple free trade deal in parallel with EU talk over a two-year time frame be neither realistic nor good policy . ' ' meanwhile , Credit Agricole analyst caution yesterday that the likelihood the Bank of England will keep interest rate at record low for the foreseeable future , combine with the loom EU exit negotiation , will also keep a lid on sterling . ` ` with Brexit-related uncertainty unlikely to fall with actual exit negotiation from the EU drawing closer and as the Bank of England be unlikely to make a case of high rate expectation any time soon , we believe GBP downside remain at risk , ' ' they say .
a define challenge for Mrs May ; ESTABLISHED @card@ Body : Theresa May open the Tory conference tomorrow - a conference that present her first real chance to define her premiership and detail her admirably radical agenda . first , however , she have some prior business to take care of . Mrs May probably do not want to be define solely by Brexit , but she do need to give significant indication as to how she see Britain ' s future relationship with Europe when it come to trade and immigration . make that clear at the start of the conference and she can then focus attention on her personal philosophy - and how it relate to tackle Britain ' s many domestic challenge . some nonsense be be speak about the EU negotiation , particularly the suggestion that there be a diametric choice to be make between a hard or soft Brexit . what be sometimes call soft be barely Brexit at all ; what be sometimes call hard be a mix of proposal that be either logical or so radical that they be not even on the table . but say that Brexit will mean Brexit be clearly not good enough . enigma wo n't satisfy the public ; business need to know what it have to look forward to . Nissan , for instance , have suspend new investment in Sunderland while it await the outcome of Brexit talk - and warn against allow tariff to be place on its product . so Mrs May will have to use her opening address on Sunday afternoon to lay out goal even if she can not go into specific . those goal be interrelate . many leave voter expect immigration to be control , which mean end free movement . if free movement go then it be highly likely that membership of the single market will be challenge by other EU member . membership of the custom union must surely be reject by the UK . and if Britain be to decouple from the EU then it must be ready to go straight out into the world and negotiate new free trade arrangement . this the country be well place to do . several nation have indicate that they want to strike deal ; some have even offer to lend Britain the negotiator it lack after decade of Brussels be in charge . if Mrs May can offer a positive vision for Brexit , then the rest of conference can consider her personal priority for legislation . her proposal have be splendid . grammar and faith school will be give the go ahead - a popular move because they happen to get very good result . local people will receive financial reward for back fracking , which will hopefully promote the shale revolution . Foxhunting will get a second shot at legalisation , overturn the absurd and prejudiced ban . and the Prime Minister have show that she be sensitive to the challenge throw down by her predecessor to make Toryism relevant to the work class . Mrs May have repeatedly say that too many feel lock out of power and opportunity . too few voter be save money for their retirement . too few be get on the housing ladder . both problem can be address with change to tax and regulation that encourage investment . as for housing , supply have to be increase in a way that protect our beautiful landscape and provide the variety of high quality yet affordable new build that people actually want . one prime minister after another have promise action on this and fail to deliver . the problem in the past be partly a preference for style over substance - for win short-term poll bounce rather than dedicate oneself to the spade work . Mrs May , however , seem to be a different kind of politician . she keep her own counsel , which some find frustrating , but tend to get thing do . on Wednesday , she will give her final , keynote address to the conference and she would do well to link her personal biography to her determination to help other flourish . Brexit be a chance to liberate and expand British business . give a sense of direction on that , the country can digest her other plan to expand opportunity and give people a stake in the democratic capitalist system . a system that have help elevate a vicar ' s daughter to leader of a major world power .
Scotland New leader promise to protect ' precious bond ' with Scotland
Theresa May pledge to defend the union in her first speech as Prime Minister yesterday as Nicola Sturgeon warn her claim that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' do not apply in Scotland because it vote to remain in the EU . Mrs May promise to lead a ` ` one nation ' ' government and acknowledge the task she face in keep the UK intact as she arrive in Downing Street . speak outside no @card@ , she say : ` ` not everybody know this but the full title of my party be the Conservative and Unionist Party and that word ' Unionist ' be very important to me . ` ` it mean we believe in the Union , the precious , precious bond between England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , but it mean something else that be just as important . ` ` it mean we believe in a union not just between the nation of the United Kingdom but between all of our citizen - every one of us - whoever we be and wherever we ' re from . ' ' Ms Sturgeon say she would seek talk with Mrs May in the next few day and would demand a central role in negotiation with Europe . she also repeat her warning that a second independence referendum may be the good way forward for Scotland , despite a warning from a lead economist that it be ` ` far from certain ' ' an independent Scotland in the EU be even an ` ` achievable aim ' ' . respond to the Prime Minister ' s claim that Brexit mean Brexit , she add : ` ` well , she have a mandate for that as far as England and Wales be concern , but not for Scotland , not for Northern Ireland and not for Gibraltar . from my point of view , from the Scottish perspective , Remain mean Remain . ' ' the SNP leader , who earlier meet Mark Carney , the governor of the Bank of England , say she believe it be possible Scotland could remain in the Europe as part of the UK . but she add : ` ` if Scotland conclude that independence be the good way forward , once the UK government trigger Article @card@ , we will have a referendum within that two year process . ' ' meanwhile , a prominent economist say in a new paper that the most desirable outcome of Brexit would be achieve Norwegian status , by join the European Economic Area , which would also mean accept freedom of movement . Prof Jim Gallagher , of Oxford University ' S Nuffield College , also warn of the major difficulty that would face an independent Scotland , include a hard border with England , and uncertainty over currency and even membership of the EU . he say it be a ` ` fantasy ' ' to imagine the UK could negotiate its own , bebespoke , free trade agreement with the EU in any reasonable timescale . he add that North Sea oil revenue be now virtually zero while Scotland ' s fiscal deficit be huge and proportionately twice as large as the UK ' s ` ` the Scottish Government ' s single most important priority should be to press the UK as hard as possible to take the Norway option , or something very close to it , ' ' Prof Gallagher say . ` ` if it can not achieve , Scotland face the choice of a hard border at a European airport ( if in the UK ) or a hard border at a new Hadrian ' s Wall . ' ' he conclude : ` ` no responsible Scottish government could promote independence without be sure of Scotland ' s position in the EU and without know the likely position of the rest of the United Kingdom in relation to free movement and trade and without a practicable economic plan for public spending and the currency . ' ' SNP ' scaremongering ' claim : page @card@ ' the Scottish Government ' s most important priority should be to press the UK to take the Norway option '
Republicans call for AusExit from Britain
Australia ' S republican movement say membership have surge in the wake of the Brexit vote , as Australian question the benefit of be part of ` ` little Britain ' ' . an ` ` AusExit ' ' campaign , include call to remove the Union Jack from the flag and replace the Queen as head of state , have gain momentum in recent day . Peter Fitzsimons , the chairman of the Australian Republican Movement , say the country have belong to the British empire , but historic tie between the nation have become less relevant because ` ` Great Britain barely exist any more ' ' . ` ` it ' S one thing for the monarchist to say ' we should be stay so very closely align to Great Britain ' ... but how do you feel about stay so closely align to little Britain ? ' ' he tell ABC Radio . ` ` from the moment that Brexit come through , social medium come alive , with people say ' this be ridiculous , let us be our own people , let us get away from this ' . ' ' Mr Fitzsimons say if Australia abandon the British monarchy it would be a unifying moment of national pride rather than a ` ` divisive and horrible campaign as be Brexit ' ' . ` ` [ we ' re ] not look to Brexit as the model at all , ' ' he say . ` ` we ' re just say that it ' s ludicrous in the 21st century to say that Australia can not do well than find our head of state from one family of English aristocrat live in a palace in London . ' ' however , the monarchist movement say Britain ' S vote ` ` have nothing whatsoever to do with change from a constitutional monarchy to a republic ' ' . ` ` for the republican to say that it give an excuse to become a republic be total , apparent nonsense , ' ' say Philip Benwell , the chairman of the Australian monarchist League .
