back May for BREXIT ; Hunt ' S Warning To MP ; Tories ' must unite or risk U-turn on exit ' Tory MP have be warn to back the PM over Brexit - or risk our departure be overturn . Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt hit out as exministers and industry chief issue red line she should not cross . Mr Hunt tell them : ` ` the choice we face be n't between this Brexit and that Brexit . ` ` if we do n't back Theresa May we will have no Brexit . ` ` she ' S do a challenging job amazingly well . ' ' more than @card@ pro-Brexit Tory , business leader and economist demand talk on a trade deal as well as an end to free movement the day we leave in @card@ . they also want to stop Euro judge overrule UK law in the post-Brexit transition period . unless the EU agree , they want the PM to refuse pay our divorce bill . in a separate warning , former Appeal Court judge Sir Richard Aikens urge her not to let Euro judge keep control over EU citizen as it would stop us control border . however , Mrs May ' S plan be for the status quo to continue during a transition period until @card@ . the PM go to Brussels today to pitch her Brexit plan to EU boss . she and Brexit Secretary David Davis will meet EC boss Jean-Claude Juncker and his Brexit chief Michel Barnier . she will also see EU Council head Donald Tusk . he set a deadline of today for Britain to decide what will happen over custom check on the Irish border . London and Brussels have ten day to reach a deal on our divorce bill , the border and EU citizen ' right . in 1½ week ' time , EU leader meet to decide whether enough progress have be make on those issue - so talk can start on a post-Brexit trade deal . but a No10 source play down prospect of progress today , say : ` ` if you expect a massive breakthrough , you ' ll be disappoint . ' '
lick it up Yer Jumper ! ; Royal Mail REJECT BREXIT STAMPS..SO WE ' VE made SOME the Sun GIVE BREXIT Stamp of APPROVAL BREXIT frontman Michael Gove be back the Sun ' s campaign for a stamp to mark Britain leave the EU . we want Royal Mail boss to think again after they refuse to put out a stamp to commemorate Brexit on @card@ March @card@ - even though they issue one when we sign up in @card@ . Environment Secretary Michael Gove support our demand , say : ` ` Royal Mail mark Britain ' s entry into the EU and it ' S only right they mark the British people ' S choice to leave . ` ` I ' d welcome them commission Brexit stamp to celebrate this important moment in history . ' ' Fury at Royal Mail ' s Brexit snub be inflame when they announce on Tuesday the first commemorative stamp of @card@ will feature character from US TV series game of Thrones . Ukip MEP Ray Finch say : ` ` it ' s a disgrace the Royal Mail be produce advertis-ing for a commercial product like Game of Thrones but ignore something of real importance to the nation like Brexit . ' ' Tory Brexiteer Nigel Evans say : ` ` they be not recognise the fact the Brexit vote be the large democratic vote this country have ever see . they have get time to change their mind . I hope they will . ' ' the Sun have today produce four mock-up Brexit stamp to show how they could look . in @card@ our entry into the then EEC be mark with stamp show a Union Jack jigsaw piece slot into a European puzzle . in @card@ another stamp be issue for the birth of the Single European Market . Royal Mail say yesterday : ` ` Royal Mail do not intend to issue a stamp to mark the UK ' s EU exit . we have nothing further to add . ' '
lRuth : PM must talk to rival party Ruth Davidson have risk infuriate party chief by demand Theresa may join force with Labour to deliver Brexit . draw out her battle line , she declare Britain ' s exit from the EU be no long a ` ` Tory Brexit ' ' and must ` ` involve the whole country ' ' . the Scots Tory boss - embolden by her election gain last week - have earlier call on colleague to look again at their ` ` hard ' ' Brexit strategy . but she go further on arrive in London yesterday , say : ` ` we need to work with other . ' ' insist the party must learn from last week ' s election result , she add : ` ` a majority Conservative government be put forward a vision , and we ' re no longer a majority government . it teach us the country want us to be in government , but they do not want us to have a majority . ` ` it mean we have to work with other on the big issue of the day . and that , for me , include Brexit . ' this be not just go to be a Tory Brexit ' ` ` there ' s a lot to discuss , a lot to dissect , but we do have to make sure that we invite other people in . ` ` this be not just go to be a Tory Brexit , this be go to have to involve the whole country . ' ' Ms Davidson have call for an ` ` open ' ' Brexit , put the economy and trade ahead of cut immigration . she add : ` ` we be go to have to work with other . ` ` that mean that we be go to have to invite people in and try and take more people with us , I think that can be a positive step . ' ' she speak out as a fresh civil war threaten to explode within the Cabinet over Brexit . former Remain backer - lead by Chancellor Philip Hammond and Home Secretary Amber Rudd - be also demand the reel PM soften her negotiate term . the pair also want Mrs May to dump her hard line on immigration to prioritise a trade deal and job during exit talk next week . insider say the minister want a ` ` pragmatic Brexit ' ' instead of her ` ` ideologically-driven ' ' one , with ` ` few thing be rule out ' ' . but they will line up against Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson , Liam Fox and Priti Patel who want no change to the plan . the PM ' S spokesman be force to admit yesterday her position may change , say : ` ` obviously there will be discussion in Cabinet . ' ' but the spokesman add : ` ` the government be commit to deliver the Brexit the British people vote for . that be , we take control of our border and law . ' ' some Conservative MP welcome Ms Davidson ' S comment last night , say it be time to dump the ` ` hard ' ' Brexit stance . George Freeman say : ` ` this be a moment for Cabinet to drop the hard Brexit message and return to that messianic message of hope on the step of no @card@ last summer . ' ' but arch-Eurosceptic Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` I do n't see any reason why the government should in any way change its position . ` ` its position be very clear and the Labour party ' S position be now essentially the same . ` ` you have the two main party ' manifesto say we ' re out of the single market and take back control of border and our law . ' ' Ms Davidson ' S call come hour after Scottish Secretary David Mundell say the Tory would have to build a consensus on Brexit with other party . he say : ` ` I do n't want to see the Brexit deal go through the House of Commons with a majority of one . ` ` I want to see it go through the commons with support across the party . ' ' Labour ' S Yvette Cooper also back an ` ` alternative cross-party ' ' way to conduct Brexit negotiation . she say : ` ` it be the big issue for our country for a generation . if the deal be go to be sustainable it need cross-party support . ' ' the new make-up of the commons mean ` ` soft Brexit ' ' have a 44-vote majority , say Sun analysis . an estimated @card@ MP support Mrs May ' S current Brexit plan , while @card@ back a soft version .
right Dog ' S BREXFAST ; Minority Report FALLOUT Spells TROUBLE for TALKS WITH EU Tories brace for civil war on Brexit Minister urge a pact with Labour Brussels threat to delay for whole year a Fresh Tory civil war be erupt over Brexit as Remainers seek to exploit chaos in the wake of the election . Pro-EU figure be try to take advantage of the PM ' s weakened position to push their own agenda . some senior Tory be even urge Theresa May to invite Labour to help get Brexit matter over the line . they see a cross-party Brexit war cabinet as the only way of secure a good , lasting EU deal follow Mrs May ' s election gamble disaster . in a private note , one senior minister ask the PM to invite in the opposition to help pass a series of Brexit law and make sure the final Brexit deal get through Parliament . talk on the UK ' s departure from the EU be due to start in just seven day time . but last night it be claim that the EU will delay the negotiation by a year if Mrs May insist on discuss a new free trade deal at the same time as thrash out the term of the UK ' S divorce . it be the first sign of Brussels cash in on the election outcome to pile more pressure on the PM . the EU have repeatedly insist the UK must agree to a divorce bill with chief negotiator Michel Barnier before they will discuss the term of a new trade deal . a senior EU diplomat say : ` ` d : he we a eor ` ` if they do n't accept the phase negotiation then will take a year to draw up new set of negotiate guideline for Barnier . ' ' Europhiles lead by Chancellor Philip Hammond mountedhuge push to water down Mrs May ' s EU exit blueprint soon as the scale of her election disaster become clear . half a dozen fellow senior Tory join the onslaught - take to the airwaves demand a soft Brexit . analysis by the Sun have find that the new make-up the commons give ` ` soft Brexit ' ' a 44-vote majority . Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson say the election mean the government should ` ` look again at issue like Brexit ' ' . Nicky Morgan , Anna Soubry and Alistair Burt - three rsM ex-ministers sack by Mrs May last year - say the PM must now ` ` compromise ' ' on her Brexit plan . Europhile Lord Heseltine go a step further - describe the commitment to a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' as a ` ` cancer gnawing at the heart ' ' of the Conservative party . a gloat George Osborne - the architect of the doomed ` ` Project Fear ' ' Remain campaign , who be also sack by the PM - declare : ` ` I do n't think there be a majority now in the House of Commons for hard Brexit . ' ' the former Chancellor claim any deal with Northern Ireland ' S DUP would require Mrs May to abandon her ` ` no deal be well thanbad Brexit deal ' ' approach . Labour ' S Emily Thornberry jump at the suggestion join the government ' s Brexit negotiating team . the White Van Manhating Shadow Foreign Secretary say : ` ` in good faith of course we would go into it . ' ' Inviting Labour ' s fierce Europhile figure into the negotiate team would infuriate backbench Tory Brexiteers . they would regard the move as a betrayal of their cause and one which would deepen the party ' s civil war . Senior ` ` Vote leave ' ' campaigner Dominic Raab remind all Conservative MP that they be elect on a manifesto promise to deliver Mrs May ' S blueprint , so there should be no shirk . defence Secretary Sir Michael Fallon insist : ` ` Our view of Brexit I do n't think have change . ' ' there be also sign of division in the Labour party over Brexit . ask if Labour would seek tk Bit i i E ' to keep Britain in Europe ' s single market , Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell say : ` ` I do n't think it ' s feasible . ' ' but lead Remainer Alistair Campbell warn that Labour would lose vote if it keep that position . he say : ` ` I suspect some of the young people vote Labour and vote for the first time be hope for something a bit less Brextremist . ' ' former foreign minister Alistair Burt urge the PM to adopt ` ` a much more consel h ' ' t B it consensual approach ' ' to Brexit . and ex-Education Secretary Nicky Morgan call for Mrs May to ` ` build a consensus across the Commons ' ' . in a phone conversation with German Chancellor Angela Merkel , Mrs May insist that Brexit negotiation will go ahead as plan .
block Brexit be total betrayal of democracy in June the British people go to the poll to decide on stay or leave the EU . the majority vote leave . Parliament be there to represent the will of the people not ignore them . there be no need for the circus that be go on at the minute . article @card@ should be invoke ... now . Arthur Smart Hyde , Cheshire LISTEN here , Prime Minister . Brexit mean Brexit and we vote to be totally out of the EU - end of . the single market be not in my name nor other Brexit voter ' S . if you persist in ignore the will of the people then expect a riot . remember MP , you work for the people . Eddie Marris Doncaster , South York SHOULD the @card@ Supreme Court judge decide that MP can have a say on plan for Brexit , they should also remind them that we vote to leave . the government should be allow to get on with Brexit . Brian Smart Newhaven , East Sussex when the government be elect to represent the citizen of this country we place our trust in them . why be those , who feel that the referendum go against them , be allow to attempt to overturn a democratic vote ? Brian Pendleton St Asaph , Denbigh MP vote in large number to give the power that they hold to the public on the vote on Europe . the public have vote in favour of Brexit by about four per cent , in the big vote the country have have . as we have be give the power back , no MP have any right to slow , hinder or block Brexit . neither do member of the House of Lords , judge or even the head of state . bob Grant Castle Gresley , Derby the people of the UK vote leave . Anti-Brexit campaigner Gina Miller have no right to intervene - and neither do the judge . can n't these people see or read what ' s happen in the rest of Europe ? in Italy , France and Germany the people be tell their leader they have have enough of the EU . Eugene Austin Coventry now the Italian people have speak maybe the European Union will finally take notice . ordinary people across the continent be feed up with their hard-earn money slip down the European drain one way and another . if this infernal mess with immigration and currency be n't sort out I fear that thing will only get a lot worse . Christina Brooks Shanklin , Isle of Wight it be time prison sentence be a more effective punishment . a prisoner give a seven-year sentence , for example , serve considerably less with good behaviour . instead , why not give them the option of a short spell behind bar without any perk or privilege or they can keep their cushy lifestyle , but must serve the full period . it would be their choice , but at least we would know they have not have an easy ride if they be release early . peter Fletcher Connahs Quay , Flintshire what be wrong with our prison ? we have killer play video game and taunt family of their victim . they be in prison as punishment for crime they have commit - not to pass the time be entertain . Mick Wilton Loughborough , Leics TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply when a referendum result could be overturn by a vociferous minority we take a step toward tyranny . les Griffiths , Pontefract , West York if a Sun photographer can find @card@ lorry and van driver use their mobile phone while on the road in just three hour , why ca n't the police ? Skippy Just be to the garage . slight hint of oil increase and fuel be up in price . Govt , do something about profiteer . PB , West Mids Trucker Keith Mees should have be jail for life for kill two . use a mobile while driving be lethal . June Re Monday ' s story on Harvey lose a sofa at sea . they ' ve be use this excuse for year . use it on us in @card@ . J Gould email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
may fight to keep Euro exit on track the battle for Brexit be on last night as Theresa May ' S rival claim she have lose any mandate to take Britain out of the EU single market . Pro-EU campaigner say the PM would have to soften her stance when Brexit talk begin in nine day . they say it be clear the Tory leader have lose any majority for a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit in the Commons . Ex-chancellor George Osborne say : ` ` Hard Brexit go in the bin tonight and that ' ll mean a big rethink . ' ' Scots Tory chief Ruth Davidson also urge her party to pursue an ` ` open Brexit , not a closed one ' ' . former Labour leader contender David Miliband tweet : ` ` so good Labour strong . so good Brutal Brexit reject . ' ' the row come as EU official mock Mrs May and warn the clock be tick on the March @card@ departure . in Brussels , European Council President Donald Tusk say : ` ` we do n't know when Brexit talk start . we know when they must end . ` ` do your good to avoid a ' no deal ' as a result of ' no negotiation ' . ' ' Hard Brexit will need a big rethink -GEORGE Osborne do your good to avoid a ' no deal ' -DONALD TUSK
catch BETWEEN A Crock & a Hard BREXIT ; Minority Report May FACES FIGHT To Keep EU EXIT ON TRACK ; lRIVALS Want Delay lPM Fears REVOLT lTUSK PUTS Boot in the battle for Brexit be on last night as Theresa May ' S rival claim she have lose any mandate to take Britain out of the EU single market . as the election result send shock wave across the continent , pro-EU campaigner say the PM would have to soften her stance when Brexit talk begin on June @card@ . they say it be clear the humiliate Tory leader have lose any majority for a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit - or clean break from the EU bloc without a deal - in the Commons . former Chancellor George Osborne say : ` ` Hard Brexit go into the rubbish bin tonight . ' ' he tell the BBC : ` ` I do n't think hard Brexit have a majority in the House of Commons any more and that will mean a big rethink . ' ' Scottish Tory party leader Ruth Davidson also urge the government to pursue an ` ` open Brexit , not a closed one ' ' . but furious Eurosceptics warn Mrs may she would face a leadership challenge if she water down her Brexit demand . and they blast Brexit Secretary David Davis who have suggest it would be difficult to leave the single market and custom union if the Tories fail to win a majority . ' May be toast , it ' S just a matter of time ' the bitter row come as EU official mock Mrs May and warn the clock be tick on Britain ' s departure in March @card@ . in Brussels , European Council President Donald Tusk say : ` ` we do n't know when Brexit talk start . we know when they must end . ` ` do your good to avoid a ' no deal ' as a result of ' no negotiation ' . ' ' Yesterday Lib Dem chief Tim Farron demand the PM delay the start of negotiation until the government ` ` reassess its priority ' ' and tell the public . and he say the case for a second referendum on the final Brexit deal ` ` will only get strong ' ' . former Labour leadership contender David Miliband tweet : ` ` so good Labour strong . so good Brutal Brexit reject . ' ' City expert slash the odd of a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit , say it would suit the DUP because of fear over Northern Ireland ' S economy . they add that with a work majority of just two in the commons , it would take a rebellion by only a handful of Tory MP to block Mrs May in Westminster . the Centre for European Reform say the Tory could seek a ` ` cross party consensus ' ' with Labour . but they say it could force them to water down demand on immigration and stay under the European Court of Justice ' S jurisdiction . across Europe , leader have little sympathy for the PM . Ex-Belgian premier Guy Verhofstadt call the result ` ` another own goal ' ' . German conservative Markus Ferber say the British political system be ` ` in total disarray ' ' . he say : ` ` instead of strong and stable leadership we witness chaos and uncertainty . ' ' and the EU ' S Budget Commissioner Gunther Oettinger say : ` ` we need a government that can act . with a weak negotiating partner , there ' s a danger the negotiation will turn out badly . ' ' meanwhile the Leave.EU campaign say Mrs may ` ` arrogantly gamble with our Brexit and blow it ' ' and call for fresh leadership . and former Ukip leader Nigel Farage say : ` ` whatever happen Theresa May be toast , it be just a matter of time . ' ' but former Tory leader and Brexit champion Iain Duncan Smith urge Mrs May to sit down and ` ` get on with it ' ' .
the Sun SAYS for Brexit sake the anger feel by some Tories towards Theresa May be understandable . she play a bad hand during the election - and have rightly cop more flak since the Grenfell Tower disaster . but as Brexit talk begin today , the Tories must put aside their difference , rally around the PM and make it a success . sniping from the sideline wo n't force her into a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' - it ' ll weaken the government and potentially give Jeremy Corbyn the key to No10 . and Labour ' s Brexit position be farcically confuse . their Shadow Brexit Secretary Keir Starmer yesterday claim we ' d remain in the custom union - directly contradict Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell . Mrs May need to insist , as she have all along , that we must leave the single market and custom union . former Brexit minister David Jones hit the nail on the head yesterday when he warn backtrack on Brexit would be a betrayal that ' ll damage his party and trust in politics . Remainer Tories stir up trouble must remember more than @card@ per cent of voter go for party that pledge to leave the EU . hopefully they ' ll realise this soon enough , before irreparable damage be do to Brexit and our future success .
handbrake Hammond ; ' DIVISIVE Strike ' ON PM ; Phil call for 3-year Brexit limbo the Chancellor incensed Brexit backer yesterday by demand a ` ` standstill ' ' transition deal with the EU . Philip Hammond declare that ` ` literally nobody ' ' want to see a dramatic fall in migration immediately after Brexit in March @card@ . and , while Theresa May holiday in Italy and top leaver be out the country , he say Britain would seek a three-year transition deal keep our relationship with Brussels ` ` very similar ' ' to now . Mr Hammond , leave , tell the BBC : ` ` what people will want to know be the day after we leave they can still go to the supermarket and that French and Spanish produce will be on the shelf . ` ` they will want to know that if they want to go on holiday they will be able to get on a plane to their destination . ` ` the government have to ensure the economy function normally . ' ' Eurosceptic Tory fear one transition phase could be follow by another . MP Andrew Rosindell say : ` ` the appearance will be that Brexit will not actually mean Brexit . ' ' a senior Tory tell the Sun it be a divisive strike against the PM ' S authority , with her plan a big Brexit speech when Parliament return in September . but Mr Hammond be back by pro-EU Labour bigwig Chuka Umunna and Sir Keir Starmer .
ruth To SCOTCH A Hard BREXIT ; Minority Report Davidson LAYS Down DEMANDS To May Wants pact with Labour Call to rethink EU plan SCOTS Tory boss Ruth Davidson risk infuriate party chief yesterday by demand Theresa may join force with Labour to deliver Brexit . draw out her battle line , she declare exit from the EU be no long a ` ` Tory Brexit ' ' and must ` ` involve the whole country ' ' . the Scottish Conservative leader - embolden by her historic election gain last week - have earlier call on colleague to look again at their ` ` hard ' ' Brexit strategy . but she go further on arrive in London yesterday , say : ` ` we need to work with other ' ' , spark fear of a watered-down deal . insist the party must learn from last week ' s election result , she add : ` ` a majority Conservative government be put forward a vision , and we ' re no longer a majority Conservative government . ` ` it teach us the country want us to be in government , but they do not want us to have a majority . ` ` it mean we have to work with other on the big issue of the day . and that , for me , include Brexit . ` ` there ' s a lot to discuss , a lot to dissect , but we do have to make sure that we invite other people in now . this be not just go to be a Tory Brexit , this be go to have to involve the whole country . ' ' Ms Davidson have call for an ` ` open ' ' Brexit , put the economy and trade ahead of cut immigration . she add : ` ` we be go to have to work with other . ` ` that mean that we be go to have to invite people in and try and take more people with us . I think that can be a positive step . ' ' she speak out as a fresh civil war threaten to explode within the Cabinet over Brexit . former Remain backer - lead by Chancellor Philip Hammond and Home Secretary Amber Rudd - be also demand the reel PM soften her negotiate term . the pair also want Mrs May to dump her hard line on immigration to prioritise a trade deal and job during exit talk next week . insider say the minister want a ` ` pragmatic Brexit ' ' instead of her ` ` ideologically-driven ' ' one , with ` ` few thing be rule out ' ' . but they will line up against Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson , Liam Fox and Priti Patel who want no change to the plan lay out by Mrs May in January . the PM ' S spokesman be force to admit yesterday her position may change , say : ` ` obviously there will be discussion in Cabinet . ' ' but the spokesman add : ` ` the government be commit to deliver the Brexit the British people vote for . that be , we take control of our border and law . ' ' Brexit Secretary David Davis also fuel the row by suggest the PM ' S stance could change if other have ` ` good idea ' ' . in remark design to build a Commons consensus , he say he be keen to hear from his Labour opposite number . he say : ` ` if Keir Starmer , or anybody in the Commons , come to me and say , ' how about this as a good idea ' ? - and it look a good idea - I ' ll take it on board . ` ` my view have always be as far as possible we take as many people as possible . we ' re try to get a deal that be good for everybody . ' ' but Mr Davis insist stay in the single market be not up for debate , add : ` ` not leave the single market will be see a l m not leave the European union . ' ' and he admit the government be ` ` still working ' ' on what it would do under the PM ' s ` ` no deal ' ' scenario . some Conservative MP welcome Ms Davidson ' S comment last night , say it be time to dump the ` ` hard ' ' Brexit stance . George Freeman say : ` ` this be a moment for Cabinet to drop the hard Brexit message and return to that messianic message of hope on the step of no @card@ last summer . ' ' but arch-Eurosceptic Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` I see no reason why the government should in any way change its position . its position be very clear and Labour ' S position be now essentially the same . ` ` you have the two main party ' manifesto say we ' re out of the single market and take back control of border and our law . ' ' Ms Davidson ' S call come hour after Scottish Secretary David Mundell say the Tory would have to build a consensus on Brexit with other party . he say : ` ` I do n't want to see the Brexit deal go through the House of Commons with a majority of one . ` ` I want to see it go through the commons with support across the party and that be what should be look to acI think we achieve . ' ' Labour ' S Yvette Cooper also back an ` ` alternative cross-party ' ' way to conduct Brexit negotiation . she say : ` ` it be the big issue for our country for a generation . if the deal be go to be sustainable it need cross-party support and a broad consensus behind it . ' ' the new make-up of the commons give ` ` soft Brexit ' ' a 44-vote majority , accord to Sun analysis . an estimated @card@ MP support Mrs May ' S current Brexit plan , while @card@ back a soft version .
the Great BREXCAPE ; Theresa ' S BREXIT Army @card@ official need to quit EU Theresa May be recruit an 8,000-strong army of official to deliver on Brexit - deal or no deal . it be reveal @card@ new post in Whitehall department have already be create to tackle it . Customs boss have also be order to hire up to @card@ more staff to police new checkpoint when the UK leave the EU on March @card@ , @card@ . a total of £662million be now be put into Brexit preparation , which have ` ` see a significant acceleration in recent month ' ' , no @card@ say . Brexit Secretary David Davis reveal detail of the 300-plus work programme , each mapping out a plan of action in case no deal be reach . Mr Davis tell the Cabinet yesterday : ` ` it be crucial that we be put our own domestic preparation in place so that we be ready at the point that we leave the EU . ' ' the PM ' s official spokesman add : ` ` we will be ready for all scenario . ' ' Mrs may also yesterday set up a special new Cabinet committee - chair by First Secretary Damian Green - to oversee Brexit preparation . one in ten of the newly-hired Whitehall staff - @card@ - be lawyer due to Brexit ' s legal complexity . meanwhile , Labour will mount a fresh challenge to the PM today . it be put its demand for the government to publish @card@ study of Brexit ' s impact on the economy to a Commons vote . minister be refuse to publish the document as they insist they will harm Britain ' s negotiate stand . it also emerge yesterday the proportion of Britain ' s trade with the EU be increase - with UK good export rise by nearly £12billion last year . Pro-EU Labour MP Chris Leslie attack the government for ` ` spending £500million planning for an extreme , no-deal Brexit that would be a disaster for this country ' ' . the EU have refuse Britain ' s bid for roll Brexit talk and will not restart negotiation until November @card@ , David Davis say .
spend the Brexit cash on UK need ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think you have to wonder where all this extra Brexit cash be come from . we be told there be no spare money even though our school , health service and emergency service be struggle . but , somehow , we can offer the EU billion more at the drop of a hat . Kevin Walker Dundee Let us see an itemise list of the Brexit bill so we can see clearly where our money be go . it be our right and if it be not give , the so-called increase in ` ` government transparency ' ' be cloud even more . Andrew Mccluskey by email HOW can anyone believe this government again ? we have have over a decade of continuous austerity and be tell there be no money available to help NHS , public service and all other service , then this PM find £1billion to prop her up overseas aid and another £40billion for Brexit . this hypocrisy have to end and we hold another election . Hugh Campbell Coatbridge , Lanarkshire I be disgust by Theresa May David Davis and Boris Johnson in the Brexit negotiation . where be the ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' ? where be the ` ` they can go whistle ' ' ? this be a betrayal of the British people who vote to leave the EU . it be indefensible to throw taxpayer ' money away like this . they will regret this at the next election . Gary Britain Address supply if this letter make me sound angry , I be ! have our Prime Minister go completely crazy ? she decide to give her master in the EU £40billion of taxpayer money so we can leave the EU . when will we hear the truth ? roll on the next General Election so we can finally get rid of these traitorous Tory . Michael Hastie Glasgow SURELY former Scottish Labour Party leader Kezia Dugdale will not receive her MSP ' s salary while in the I ' m a celebrity jungle . after all , the government tell ordinary people receive unemployment benefit that if they be not available for work then they do n't get any money . it ' S the same old story - one rule for them and another rule for us . Jan Griffiths by Email Paul Hollywood , picture , want to be careful saying ` ` old generation ' ' do n't understand how the TV remote work . we know where the Off button be . pat PAIGE by email it be refresh to see the photo of the Queen and Prince Philip , picture , celebrate their 100th wedding www.anniversary.No matter your view on royalty their stable marriage have endear the couple to many throughout the world . Hamish Leishman Kilsyth , Lanarkshire
wary May TRIES To Rein in BREXIT Boris Few thing make Downing Street more nervous than Boris Johnson talk about Brexit . so it be predictable that No10 try to distance itself from the Brexit timetable Boris speak about on Thursday . but their rather Ott response to his remark do reveal how worried about him they be . what be striking about Boris ' S comment be that he have be play it very safe as Foreign Secretary . but there be concern in No10 when Boris , right , be ask to be a patron of Change Britain - a new pro-Brexit group dominate by those involve in the Vote leave campaign . after discussion with Downing Street , Boris do not become a patron . however , after some toing and froing , No10 do allow him to record a video message for the group ' S launch . interestingly , Boris ' S message go further than Theresa May ' s simple ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' formulation , lay down some marker as to what he want to see in the deal . May ' s strategy on Brexit be to give nothing away . her team think this be both the good negotiating strategy and the good way to keep the Tory Party from argue endlessly about the issue . but several of the minister involve in the Brexit preparation think this line ca n't hold for much long . they feel , at some point soon , they be go to have to give business and other country - as well as the British people - a sense of the deal they be try to strike . one complicate factor be that those who the UK be negotiate with will keep change due to the election in Europe . who win the Italian referendum and the French and German election will have a big impact on the deal the UK get . Brexit Secretary David Davis have tell Cabinet colleague he think the deal will be do very late in the day for this reason . but whatever deal Mrs May strike , she ' ll be watch Boris closely as she do it .
Nic get call right over Brexit move ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think S2
job axe ' be down to Brexit ' More than @card@ job will be axe by drink giant Diageo because of concern over Brexit , a union claim . the firm say @card@ post will go at its plant in Leven , Fife , with another @card@ be cut at Shieldhall , near Glasgow . some spirit production will be move to plant in Italy and the US . the GMB union say it warn Scottish Secretary David Mundell earlier this year that special measure be need to protect the drink industry from Brexit fear . SNP MSP Jenny Gilruth , who represent Leven , say : ` ` it be concern this appear to be down to Brexit . ' ' Scottish Liberal Democrat leader Willie Rennie add : ` ` this be the cold sober reality of a hard Conservative Brexit . this be a huge employer in part of Fife and Glasgow that need the job . ' ' ask if the move be link to Brexit , a Diageo spokesman say : ` ` no . it ' s a business decision . ' '
No10 ' S Lord A LEAPIN ' ; Adonis RESIGNATION Peer ' s Brexit tirade Calls PM ' extremist ' a Labour peer quit as a top government adviser with an astonishing anti-Brexit rant . Lord Andrew Adonis spark outrage with his blast at ` ` extremist ' ' Theresa May . he describe Brexit as a ` ` dangerous populist and national spasm worthy of Donald Trump ' ' . Lord Adonis tell the PM his opposition to her ` ` destructive ' ' Brexit make it impossible for him to remain as infrastructure tsar . but last night a Government source say : ` ` he ' S now walk through the door before he be push . ' ' in a letter see by the Sun , the peer vow to relentlessly oppose the government ' S EU Withdrawal Bill in the House of Lords . he claim the PM have no popular mandate for leave the single market and describe her as the voice of Ukip . he condemn Mrs May for choose to become the ` ` extreme nationalist rightwing ' ' of the Tory party and lead the UK to a ` ` splendid isolation ' ' that threaten the security of Europe and could trigger the ` ` wanton destruction ' ' of Britain . one senior Tory say the attack on the PM defy belief - call it ` ` the primal scream of the out of touch liberal elite ' ' . Mrs May ' s ex-chief of staff Nick Timothy point out the peer accept the role in April when Brexit policy be well establish . Lord Adonis have already anger Brexit-backing Tory MP with a series of toxic anti-Brexit blast since the General Election in June . the Government source add : ` ` He ' s be move closer towards the exit door with each new onslaught . ' ' the peer be appoint as head of the National Infrastructure Commission by former Chancellor George Osborne in @card@ to ` ` speed up ' ' construction of road , rail , air and housing project . Tory MP Iain Duncan Smith , leave , say : ` ` it ' s a bit rich for him to pontificate on what he call populism , but most would refer to as democracy , when he himself have never be elect . ' ' Lord Adonis , @card@ , accuse No10 of dirty trick over the release of his letter . No10 decline to comment .
judge dread ; Europe still rule us in Labour Brexit Exclusive by David Wooding Sunday Political Editor Britain would be rule by Euro judge even after leave the EU under ` ` soft ' ' Brexit plan draw up by Labour . change ' ' firm face when we leave . Pro-Brexit MP loathe the court for block attempt to ban terror suspect , deport foreign criminal and cut tax on booze and energy . the party want the European Court of Justice to continue to hold sway . Ex-Justice Minister Dominic Raab brand Labour ' S plan ` ` outrageous ' ' . he say : ` ` they be take the public for fool . ' ' Shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer reveal the plan , claim the government be out to scrap ` ` seemingly anything with Europe in its name ' ' . yesterday Shadow Home Secretary Diane Abbott say Britain should also continue to accept uncontrolled EU migration . he say the UK need to stem ` ` impediment and regulatory the Sun on Sunday say - Page @card@ Britain would be rule by Euro judge even after leave the EU under ` ` soft ' ' Brexit plan draw up by Labour . the party want the European Court of Justice to continue to hold sway . Shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer reveal the plan , claim the government be out to scrap ` ` seemingly anything with Europe in its name ' ' . he say the UK need to stem ` ` impediment and regulatory change ' ' firm face when we leave . Pro-Brexit MP loathe the court for block attempt to ban terror suspect , deport foreign criminal and cut tax on booze and energy . Ex-Justice Minister Dominic Raab brand Labour ' S plan ` ` outrageous ' ' . he say : ` ` they be take the public for fool . ' ' Yesterday Shadow Home Secretary Diane Abbott say Britain should also continue to accept uncontrolled EU migration . the Sun on Sunday say - Page @card@ what THEY ' VE ALREADY @card@ outlawed reduction in beer duty , lead to 2p a pint increase @card@ Cancelled right to opt out of social right charter @card@ refuse to stop global ban on British beef export WHATA ALREADYD @card@ Over-ruled decision to block terrorist ' s UK entry @card@ Ruled in favour of terrorist try to enter Britain @card@ Outlawed reduce VAT rate on energy-save material
sack Tory @card@ TURN up Heat ON BREXIT ; THERE ' S No GOVE-ING Back MP to keep watch Three Tories who lose their job in the Cabinet reshuffle aim to take over powerful committee scrutinise Brexit . former Justice Secretary Michael Gove , ex-Culture Secretary John Whittingdale and former justice minister Dominic Raab plan to ensure Britain ' s EU pullout go ahead . all three campaign to leave and be either sack by PM Theresa May or walk out after be pass over for promotion . now two Commons select committee be be set up to scrutinise the Brexit Ministry and the newly-create Department for International Trade . last night a source close to the trio say : ` ` it would be the perfect way to hold the government ' S foot to the fire and ensure Brexit really mean Brexit ' ' . it come amid Eurosceptics ' grow fear that Ministers could water down demand to Brussels - and even give in to call for a second referendum . by standing for election to the committee , the trio would still be involve in Brexit . and it follow fear that Brexit Secretary David Davis , Trade boss Liam Fox and Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson could fall out . one Eurosceptic Tory MP say : ` ` do not underestimate the likelihood that they screw this up . ` ` Winning the referendum be not the end of it - the really hard stuff come now , and there can be no rowing back . ' ' meanwhile , businessman Richard Tice have set up lead leave , which plan to hold Mrs May to account on her pledge to leave the EU . he say : ` ` when it come to negotiate Brexit , no deal be good than a bad deal . ' '
over To EU ; UK Must ' LISTEN ' To RULINGS Euro judge to sit on Brexit panel PM deny big court compromise Euro judge would sit on Brexit panel to settle dispute between Britain and the EU in a compromise plan suggest by minister . the UK would also have to listen to the European Court of Justice ' S decision and may have to consult with it after leave . the scenario emerge in the Brexit ministry ' s new position paper aim at solve a negotiation stand-off . London and Brussels be at loggerhead over EU insistence the Luxembourg court must oversee part of the Brexit deal . PM Theresa May be force to deny any of the proposal mean she have weaken her stance on stop Euro judge make British law after Brexit . there be also anger among some Tory that EU judge could still overrule UK court for year after Britain leave in March @card@ . Whitehall official contradict Mrs May ' s declaration that the ECJ ' s ` ` direct jurisdiction ' ' would end on that date by say it could still be in force during a transition period of up to three year until @card@ . the PM insist Brexit would still mean the UK would ` ` take back control of our law ' ' . most senior Brexiteers back the compromise plan , with Tory Eurosceptic Bernard Jenkin describe them as ` ` normal nation-to-nation dispute resolution mechanism ' ' . but Brexit-backing legal expert Martin Howe QC say : ` ` we must not have the ECJ via the back door . ' ' meanwhile , minister publish a fresh position paper , the fifth this week , on protect Britain ' S £118billion digital economy after Brexit . disrupt cross-border datum would be hugely costly for the UK and the EU , Minister for Digital Matt Hancock say . incoming President of the Supreme Court Baroness Hale of Richmond say politician - one from the government and one opposition member - should help select Britain ' s most senior judge .
BREXIT Clarity BOOST for Tories THE Cabinet ' s Brexit compromise be begin to come into focus . the Chancellor , Philip Hammond , below , get a three-year transition in which not much change to try to smooth out the process of leave , while the Brexiteers will eventually get their version of Brexit - Britain out of the single market and the custom union . if the EU play ball , then this be a fairly sensible solution . there be nothing wrong with a transition as long as it be timelimited . Britain must not end up be stick half in , half out for ever . crucially , Hammond accept that this transition need to end before the next election , mean the opposition can not try to turn that vote into a referendum on Brexit . when Theresa May give her Brexit speech in September we will get confirmation of what transitional deal this country be seek . but there be a political , as well as a governing , imperative for clarity from the government . for it be only when the Cabinet be agree on a policy that the Tories can begin to take Labour to task for their contradictory position on Brexit . since the election , the Shadow Cabinet have have more stance on Brexit than Coleen Rooney have have holiday . but the Tories have n't be able to exploit this confusion as they can not contrast this with their own clear position . Labour ' s inability to say whether they want to be in or out of the single market or the custom union be absurd . these be two of the big question face the country , and a party that think it will be in power sooner rather than later should have answer to them .
Sturgeon ' s surge to free the Scots Nicola Sturgeon ' s bold intention to hold a second Scottish independence referendum within two year have certainly put the cat among the pigeon . as Theresa May ' S government railroad its Brexit Bill through the British house of Parliament , the intervention of the Scottish First Minister be a welcome reminder that the Tory Brexit show be not the only one in town . as always , Sturgeon ' S timing be impeccable . she choose to make her big announcement on the day of the Brexit vote in the House of Commons . it also happen to be the week Theresa May intend to formally trigger the Article @card@ process to leave the EU . in one fall swoop , Sturgeon manage to take all the sheen off the government ' s ' victory ' in parliament . she also , incredibly , force the government into an embarrassing delay to the formal start of the Brexit process . not a bad day ' s work for the Scottish leader . some on the pro-Brexit side see this as a cynical last-ditch move by Sturgeon and the Scottish Nationalist party to save her political career and thwart the ' will ' of the British people . this be an inaccurate portrayal of the fact . since the Scottish referendum in @card@ , circumstance have change dramatically . the decision by the UK last year to leave the EU be one against which the majority of the people of Scotland ( @card@ per cent ) vote . that dissent , along with Northern Ireland ' S , be acknowledge by Prime Minister May and promise be make to involve the Scot in plan the Brexit process . as the tide within the government race toward a hard and destructive exit from the EU , so too harden the position of May and her government towards sottish involvement . lead voice in Scotland look for a settlement which would see them stay in the Single Market and the Customs Union . as Sturgeon and other advocate for a soft and economically less damaging Brexit , the PM turn on them for dare to have a different view on the way forward . this disregard for Scottish concern , and the disrespect show toward the elect government in Edinburgh , have directly lead to the announcement of this referendum . Theresa May and her cavalier colleague in Whitehall have only themselves to blame . allegation that Sturgeon be play a ` ` political game ' ' with this propose referendum ring hollow come from a PM who herself engage in the most high-risk political game in British history . the depth of feeling in Scotland about the Brexit decision can not be underestimate . SNP deputy leader Angus Robertson say on Monday night he do not want to ` ` sit in the back of the Tory Brexit bus and see the prime minister drive us off a Brexit cliff ' ' . many Labour and Tory MP in Westminster have express similar sentiment , but they have fail to step up and be count . at least the Scottish nationalist be put their money where their mouth be . a referendum be high-risk , but arguably so be stay mute on as destructive a course as Brexit be shape up to be . there be plenty of scoff from pro- Brexit wag about the fate of the Scottish independence referendum . they say it can not pass , because so many issue which be raise in the previous referendum have yet to be answer . this be ironic thinking , give that these same people campaign for the UK ' s exit from the EU without be able to answer any of the fundamental question in a meaningful way . the Brexiteers win because they appeal to heart and mind , rather than to rationality or reason . they would be foolish to assume the SNP and all those campaigning for Scottish independence can not do the same . the emotive argument be far more highly charge now than they be for the last independence campaign . Scot be a proud people , who see their global future as a partner in the EU and on the world stage . the prospect of retreat into ' Little Britain ' horrify them . yes , Scottish economic fortune have take a hit with the collapse of oil price , and yes , the path to independence would be one of economic uncertainty . but unlike the last campaign , the unionist can not promise any great economic security within the UK . they ' ve sacrifice certainty , and quite probably economic success , for some nebulous concept of ' sovereignty ' . so why do they assume the Scot wo n't do the same ? circumstance have change since the last Scottish referendum . remain in the UK be no long the safe harbour which it arguably be in @card@ . suddenly , assert its own independent path within the EU look like a rather appealing and secure option . my money be on Scotland secede from the Union . what a legacy that will be for Mrs May . and what incendiary issue will it raise in Northern Ireland ? the break-up of the UK be firmly on the card .
Brexit look as if it ' s a balls-up ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter what kind of state be Britain go to be in after Brexit ? your columist Andrew Nicoll be spot on when he say the SNP will be quite happy to see it fail . and they wo n't be the only one - the majority of Scot vote to stay in the EU , but they be not listen too . Scotland should be ready to ditch England if it want to continue on this devastating course of action . Brian MCGINLAY Rutherglen , Lanarkshire HOW can we have any confidence in this government when we be tell free movement be to end in @card@ and then we be tell that a transition period will take until @card@ , just in time for the next General Election . be this to allow this government when they fail again to say it be not their fault that Brexit fail ? we deserve a government that can do the job not this useless Tory party . Hugh Campbell Coatbridge WE seem to be lead by incompetent who just do n't know what they be do . the fact that Brexit negotiation be go at a snail ' S pace make me think the whole thing will collapse , leave us in possible poverty and political limbo . Helen Muir Dundee Chancellor Philip Hammond , picture , should resign after his comment about people be happy to let mass immigration continue for year after Brexit . this be not what the British public vote for and if this spineless government ca n't deliver Brexit bring someone in that can . Gary Britain by email the EU Brexit negotiator be laugh up their sleeve . they only have to sit back and watch the remain saboteur from the United Kingdom do the job for them , and it appear that Chancellor Philip Hammond be their ace card . Theresa May should reshuffle her negotiation team to MP who vote to leave . transitional period will only give them more time to cripple Brexit altogether . john TALLAN Hamilton I WAS astound to learn that Durham police be no longer intend to prosecute non-commercial grower of cannabis plant . what they do n't seem to realise be that these addictive weed grow like courgette and we all know just how much trouble courgette grower have give away their massive crop . such policy can only lead to the privatisation of the police force in order to uphold standard and save our youth from the ravage of these evil plant . john Eoin Douglas Edinburgh in life you often only get a small window of opportunity to deal with thing . regard North Korea , the Americans have wait too long already . some people only understand and respect force . I hope Kim Jong-un do not have as much as a bad hair day - who know where it could lead ? William Strang Falkirk
what BREXIT Means To EU ; Irish Eye up Vital UK Poll This referendum be a no-brainer . economist rarely concur with each other but on Brexit , the OECD , IMF , IBEC and the ESRI all agree that Brexit represent a serious threat to the economy of the UK , Ireland and Northern Ireland . e The UK be our large trading partner with ( Euro ) 1.2billion trade over the Irish sea weekly . IBEC estimate this could be hit by as much as @card@ per cent in the event of Brexit . that ' s the type of economic earthquake we could do without . the UK trade more with us than it do with China , India and Brazil combine . s Ireland and the UK must be the two most integrated nation in the world . there ca n't be an Irish family without friend and love one in the UK . Brexit create so much uncertainty for those living across the two nation . it be no coincidence there have be a big rise in passport application . leave do n't have many answer when it come to crucial issue such as continuance and transfer of pension right . there be also the serious consideration as to how Brexit will impact relation between Ireland and Northern Ireland . if leave win we ' ll see a hardening of the northern Irish border with increase custom and migration check . Ba Stay S h this have be confirm as inevitable by both the UK and Irish government . we view this as a massively retrograde step in the harmony of our island . during our campaign , Irish4Europe have be reach out to the Irish who can vote . we ' re ask Irish people with a vote to consider the terrible impact a Brexit would have on us and our close friend and neighbour . the last thing we need be a Brexit . Let ' s build bridge not border . anything Ireland get from a Brexit will simply be peripheral but one of the main thing it would raise be the issue of our membership of the eurozone . the euro have be an absolute disaster . we join the euro and effectively say we ' d go for lunch . it begin the process which leave to us with ( Euro ) 64billion of bank debt . a Brexit would force our pro-EU political elite to have a rethink . it ' d also have a massive impact across Europe . go -It would get people think about take power back from the EU to member state and halt the integration process . nation would then get the chance to take back some of the authority we ' ve cede unquestioningly to Brussels . for the past @card@ year our political elite have be totally submissive to the EU . this one-way process have hugely contribute to the rise of populism across Europe , the racism and xenophobia . fishing right be one area where there need to be a drastic rethink . that have be disastrous for Donegal , Wexford and the North . this also apply to law . around two-third originate in Brussels and be nod through here . but Denmark get prior warning of EU law come and can give input . we should push for this , rather than be at the end of the process . free trade will continue between Ireland and the UK under all realistic leave scenario , so there will be no custom post on the border . such claim be simply scaremongering . Post-Brexit would see a huge and necessary debate . we need to ask question rather than the groupthink happen at the moment . time to go . . Farage be key leave back
White Paper demand ' be a delay plot ' Labour MP and Tory rebel be accuse yesterday of plot to delay Brexit by demand the government spell out its demand in the Commons . Brexit Secretary David Davis be ask @card@ time to publish a White Paper detail the government ' S objective . MP urge him to publish it with the ` ` Brexit Bill ' ' where the government will ask Parliament for approval to trigger Article @card@ and begin EU divorce talk . last night it be claim up to @card@ Tory MP could consider join Labour and the SNP to back an amendment demand such a move before they let the PM launch Brexit negotiation . Shadow Brexit Secretary Kier Starmer say : ` ` we need something on which to hold the government to account through the process . ' ' Furious Tory backbencher say it be a blatant bid to delay Brexit . Mr Davis say Theresa May have lay bare the government ' S position last week in a speech where she reveal Britain would seek to leave the single market . and he add that go public with the entire strategy would ` ` undermine ' ' talk with the EU . last night No10 refuse to rule out a White Paper . but the PM ' s official spokesman say : ` ` we will do nothing to undermine our negotiate position . ' '
set EUR CLOCKS ; 11pm March @card@ , @card@ be Brexit time ... by law Freedom Day @card@ minister want to enshrine in law the date and time Britain will quit Europe . an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill aim to ` ` remove all doubt ' ' that the divorce will take place at 11pm on March @card@ , @card@ . the move aim to kill off Remainer plot to extend Brexit negotiation . Brexit Secretary David Davis say it would give voter , business and potential trading partner ` ` crystal clear ' ' certainty over our future . just last night EU official float the idea of prolong membership beyond @card@ , so Brexit negotiation could continue during the two-year transition period . but the government hope to increase pressure on Brussels to open trade deal talk . the Brexit bill , which hand the government a swathe of power , return to the Com-mons next week . if pass , a new vote would be need to extend exit talk . the amendment be recommend by Labour MP and Brexit supporter Frank Field . Mr Davis say : ` ` this important step demonstrate our pragmatic approach to this vital piece of legislation . ' ' Brussels have warn Britain it must agree a divorce bill within two week . Mrs May have pledge £18billion but last night it be claim that could increase to break the deadlock before next month ' s EU summit .
EU TURN..BREXIT Will NOT Cost BRITS £2.2K the head of a group that warn Brexit would cost every British household £2,200 have backtrack on the threat . Angel Gurria , OECD secretary-general , say the quality of life in Brexit Britain will ` ` probably remain as it be today ' ' . his comment come a year after the economic organisation enrage Brexit backer with a ' Project Fear ' warning to voter . the group warn leaving would impose a ` ` persistent and rise cost on the economy ' ' amount to the equivalent of £2,200 per household by @card@ . speak yesterday , Mr Gurria say the OECD have try to persuade voter of the danger of a ` ` Brexit tax ' ' on live standard . but he say : ` ` the quality of life will probably remain as it be today , because the value will remain the same . ' ' Last September , the OECD warn Brexit would hit the UK economy later but harder than think . but in March it improve its @card@ forecast , say the impact have be less severe . yesterday ' s OECD report also reveal the number of foreign resident hit @card@ million between @card@ and @card@ - mean that @card@ per cent of the population be overseas national . the number of people give settlement right and number of asylum application both fall .
Eur mess it all up , Theresa all up , Theresa Theresa May yesterday move from make it up as she go along on Brexit to reach staggering new depth of incompetence . all day it appear she be negotiate a separate deal for Northern Ireland - infuriate government in Scotland , Wales and Gibraltar and add fuel to the fire of IndyRef2 . instead , it seem , she plan an offer which would see the whole of the UK stick to share rule with Europe over key area like agriculture and energy . and , somehow , she aim to pretend that be still Brexit . Mrs May have persistently parrot the catchphrase ` ` Brexit mean Brexit . ' ' well , whatever it mean , it do not mean stick to the same rule and regulation as before it ' S just possible she could have sell that nonsense to her own Cabinet , but not to the voter . all this have prove be that , in a surprise to nobody but Michael Gove and Boris Johnson , Brexit be an impossibly difficult and tangled process . impossible The EU have make it clear that , in any talk , it will side with its member state Ireland over the UK , which want to go . until yesterday the UK Government have refuse to engage with the concern of Dublin over the border , despite Euro estimate that Brexit could cut the Irish economy by @card@ per cent a year . instead it have insist all part of the UK must have the same Brexit www.deal.No shading , no difference . it ' s one out , all out - and that go for Ulster , Scotland , Wales and even Gibraltar . that have prove an impossible conundrum , apparently beyond the wit of anybody in government . when the Holyrood Government come forward with a plan to allow Scotland to stay inside the EU custom zone , Brexit Minister David Davis brand it unthinkable and fling it in the bin . instead Mrs May opt for a one-in , all-in approach , apply existing Euro rule to all part of the UK - whether they vote to get out or not . she face an impossible choice . by ditch a special deal on the Irish border , the PM will jeopardise the entire Brexit process . by force the whole country to stay in the EU while pretend we have leave , she will spark another political civil war .
Theresa May yesterday vow to [ ... ] ; @card@ ... ... ... ... ... Wednesday , June @card@ , 20172SM UK in CHAOS Battle BEGINS ; ON How To QUIT Europe ; lPM facing ' war ' on deal lVows ' cross-party ' talk , the soft exit consistent with actually leave and control law , money , border and trade . ' ' but after his talk with Mrs May , President Macron say the ` ` door remain open ' ' to Britain stay in the EU . the point be echo by Germany ' S Finance Minister Wolfgang Schauble .
Wise up , guy : Brexit be go to happen here be my New Year ' s resolution for all those eyebulging anti-Brexit bigot . Let ' s have a brand new start for Heseltine , Blair and Osborne , for Nick Clegg , Sir Keir Starmer and Sir Vince Cable and anyone else who think they have the right to veto democracy . in @card@ , resolve that you will finally accept the result of the EU referendum . in @card@ , you will understand that Brexit be really happen and nothing on earth can stop it now . in @card@ , you will admit to yourself that the large vote in the history of British democracy must be respect . and in @card@ , you will finally stop all your pathetic , mealy mouth whine about Brexit . because , quite frankly , the anti- Brexit bleat be become more than a little hysterical . Lord Heseltine , @card@ , right - one of those youthful anti-Brexit voter we have hear so much about - suggest that a Jeremy Corbyn government that would destroy our economy , take union law back to the seventy and insert a gang of craven IRA groupie in Downing Street , would be good for this country than leave the European Union . Nick Clegg , due to be knight for his service to lie to student and turf out of his Sheffield Hallam constituency by voter in the General Election , publish a book call how to stop Brexit , as if democracy can be cancel . and George Osborne tell colleague at the Evening Standard newspaper that he will not rest until ` ` Theresa May be chop up in bag in my freezer ' ' . can you imagine if Nigel Farage use that kind of violent language about a pro-Brussels woman like Anna Soubry or Nicky Morgan ? he would be drum out of public life forever . but the anti-Brexit bigot have be free to spew their rage . and in @card@ it have to end . because this country ' s departure from the EU be unstoppable now . and there be nothing that can conceivably happen - not Theresa May leave Downing Street , not Keir Starmer put on his angry face , not the endless sneering of the establishment - to stop it . we should be optimistic about our country ' S future . now get it sort the Remainers have continue to predict that the UK be doom outside of the EU . and it be clearly not true . economic expert predict that the British economy will overtake France ' S by @card@ . that ' S despite Brexit , as they say on the BBC . we want to be good neighbour . we want to continue to buy German car , Italian clothes and French wine . and despite the huff and puff of the bum of Brussel such as Barnier and Juncker , they want to keep sell us their good . why would n't they ? leave a crumble , federalist empire to take back control of your own destiny can never be a bad move . the people have speak . now get it sort . and make a New Year ' s resolution to finally stop all the anti-Brexit bellyache . even a perfectly rational decision such as the reintroduction of blue passport be treat as though we be bring back slavery . for decade , those of us who dream of the UK leave the European Union be deride as raving loony . but today it be the Project fear merchant who be foam at the mouth . so who be the nutjobs now ? thank you for read this column over the past year and I wish you and yours peace and happiness in @card@ . happy New year !
BOJO : fund NHS NOT THE EU , PM ; Split Over BREXIT Offer ; no £10bn-a-yr deal Boris Johnson will not accept Theresa May pay £10billion a year to the EU as part of an interim post-Brexit deal , it emerge last night . in sign of a Cabinet split ahead of the PM ' s Brexit speech next week , senior Tory say he believe the UK must slash Brussels payment as soon as we leave . he want the government to live up to Vote leave ' s promise of an extra £350million a week for health , Sun columnist James Forsyth reveal today . Environment Secretary Michael Gove be also push for more NHS funding . the row risk dominate the run-up to the PM ' S big Brexit speech in Florence , Italy . she be expect to map out her vision of Britain ' s future relationship with Europe . report yesterday say she would offer to keep pay into the EU until a new deal come into force in a bid to break the Brexit talk logjam . the side be lock in a bitter divorce bill dispute . Brexit will leave the EU with a near-£30billion shortfall from @card@ . a bridge phase would ensure we keep close to exist relationship with the EU between Brexit and a new trade deal starting . a senior EU official say : ` ` there should be a transition . there ' s a contribution to make for single market participation . ' ' One Eurosceptic play down prospect of a row . but another top Tory lift the lid on the tension by blast a lack of consultation over government strategy . they say : ` ` it ' S all be keep very tight among the PM and the kitchen cabinet of Remainers - Damian Green , Amber Rudd , Philip Hammond . ' ' the PM ' s ex-chief of staff Nick Timothy say : ` ` if the PM try to force the pace by make too great a concession , she would risk give away too much too soon . ' '
end this EU blackmail WE have now reach a point in the Brexit talk where whatever divorce bill payment we offer be never go to be sufficient to meet the greedy EU demand . while we keep up our offer - the late be believe to be £40billion - the EU assume it be in control . well , now be the time for us to show the EU we be in control and that our final offer be , indeed , final . we will be make our own trade regulation in our own free trade market . we will control our own law and not be restrict by EU court . so take it or leave it - because we certainly will leave , deal or no deal . David Roberts Market Rasen , Lincs if the increase Brexit divorce bill will not be enough to satisfy Italy and France , surely the straw have now finally break the camel ' S back ? this country have always be see to be a fair nation but this be as far as we should go . Theresa May Must now call time on this blackmail . john Smedley Willenhall , West Mids MRS May be surely get barmy to offer EU negotiator , Michel Barnier more money to get her divorce . she should be ask for audited account of how the EU have spend our money and whether some have be spend on EU building and infrastructure . we should claim for the repayment of money spend on such thing . terry Lyden Staines , Middx I ' M concern to be still hear talk of how toxic a ` ` no deal ' ' could be to the UK . we must go into talk willing to walk away , or the EU will understand we can be bully and will give in . everyone must show unity - and collectively support Brexit . we should all want the good for the nation , our nation . James Bell Bracknell , Berks THE Government be use every excuse in the book to delay Brexit . the EU be use every threat it can muster to delay Brexit . Mrs May try very hard to lose the election so as not to be involve with Brexit . so be there now a masterplan afoot , by both side , to prevent Brexit ever happen ? Brian Lea Nottingham MRS May , why be you allow the EU to pull down the pant of British taxpayer in the quest for a soft Brexit ? when be you go to say , ` ` enough ' ' ? when Barnier and Co have their hand on Britain ' s crown jewel ? Robert Kay Great Missenden , Bucks THE reason Brexit negotiation be go badly be because the UK have offer too much , too soon . we have all the ace , king and queen because our export to Europe compare , with the import from Europe , be pretty small . we should be negotiate from a position of strength . Alan SADDINGTON Canvey Island , Essex have no one in our government the ability to tell Brussel what term we will agree to , on a take-it-or-leave-it basis ? if we be not hard enough , the EU will continue to up the ante and make the hard-working , Government-trusting UK national a laughing stock . we do not need to deal with the EU . what it be cost us to continue the futile negotiation would go some way to compensate for any initial financial shortfall when we leave the EU . get some backbone , Mrs May . Geoff BROADMENT Lytham St Anne , Lancs Tony Blair once say we must draw a line under the past to win peace . he draw a line by grant an amnesty to IRA killer , who must have laugh their sock off . so it ' S only right the government draw a line under the past by exempt all of our Northern Ireland veteran from prosecution . Gerry Adams see it as an ` ` act of bad faith ' ' . it ' s exactly what the British government do for Provo killer . it ' s high time these shocking double standard be correct . jane Turnbull Newcastle upon Tyne TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply GLAD to see Angela Merkel suffer . she let million of immigrant into Germany . people get upset . it ' S payback time . Andy Steadman Wareham , Dorset Jane Miller should n't be prosecute , as any rider would hit someone who grab their horse ' S rein . Marie , Carlisle Good on rugby girl Ceri Large and her friend for chase off a burglar . have n't enjoy a story that much since the burglar who discover the house be own by a boxer . David Sandler , London Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
' BREXIT tax ' ON Car Fee ; Avis in rental shock car rental giant Avis have be slam for issue a Brexit tax in Europe . Lord John Krebs be hit with an extra £2.19 charge when he return a car in France and be tell it be due to leave the EU . the Oxford professor have the fee rescind after argue with Avis staff . Lord Krebs say : ` ` I notice the charge which have no explanation . the manager in the Avis branch say , ' oh that be the Brexit tax ' . ` ` I say what do you mean and he say , ' that ' s what we charge now ' . ` ` I say we have n't Brexited yet , and refuse to pay . prior or post Brexit it be not right . ' ' a source at Avis say the charge at Marseilles airport be add when the pound fall after the Brexit vote . they admit other driver may have be charge the penalty . but a firm spokesman later say it be down to a system error and say call the fee a Brexit tax be a ` ` miscommunication ' ' by staff . have you be hit by a Brexit Tax charge at Avis ? call the Sun on @card@ @card@ @card@ or email
disaster down to own making ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter instead , the conservative campaign on attack the pensioner , take away school lunch and bring back hunting . the result be a hung Parliament - and Theresa May face the Wolves of Brussels in a greatly weaken state . this election be a disaster for the country - a disaster of the Conservatives ' own making . Philip Roberts by email the result of this General Election see Britain go from one of the strong nation in Europe to the weak . now that the Eurocrats think the people of the UK be cool towards leave the EU , the Brexit negotiation will be a whole lot harder . I fear we have witness the end of a Brexit that mean no contribution to the EU www.coffers.UK history will be very cruel to Mrs May . Barry Flavell by email the Europhiles in the EU must be rub their hand with glee now that Theresa May have lose her ability to force a good Brexit deal for the UK . she will now have to allow for cross-party influence in leaving , which will no doubt peg us back in the impending discussion . ken Clark by Email Theresa May and the Tories blow this election with a terrible negative election manifesto , which target the old generation and the triple lock on the pension payment , winter fuel payment and the dementia tax . Jeremy Corbyn promise voter the earth , which will be fund by their ` ` magical money tree ' ' and a lot of the British public fall for it . mike Breach by Email I Can NOT believe that after vote to leave the EU we then do n't see it through by back the PM who surely would have get us the good deal . it ' S madness . you ca n't take anything away from Labour . they fight a campaign on target the young voter . what ' S worry be what happen now , Europe be lick its lip at the negotiation to come . carl Dunn by Email MEMO to Tory high command . the point of a manifesto be to persuade the majority of the population to vote for you . this be achieve by put forward policy that will make life that bite easy for ordinary hard-working family , while also take care of the old and the young - not by alienate half the population . nancy Filby by email
BREXSEAT ; LEAVE ' BLUEPRINT ' CHAOS ; lBoris and PM in EU showdown lRudd : he be drive from back Boris Johnson will hold crunch EU talk with Theresa May this week after his Brexit blueprint plunge the Cabinet into disarray . Tory source yesterday say they fear the Foreign Secretary could even quit if the PM do not listen to his demand . Mr Johnson want her to slash payment to the EU post-Brexit - and invest the cash in the NHS . the pair will have showdown talk after his 4,000-word blueprint be publish . Home Secretary Amber Rudd have also criticise the timing of his piece in the Daily Telegraph . she say she have be busy dealing with Friday ' s terror attack to read it but accuse him of ` ` back seat driving ' ' over Brexit . she say : ` ` I do n't want him manage the Brexit process . Theresa May manage that process . she ' S drive the car and I ' m go to be make sure of that and the rest of the Cabinet be concerned we help her do that . ' ' Mrs May be expect to give a speech in Florence , Italy , on Friday where she will map out her plan for the path Brexit should take . BoJo will be at her side but the invitation come before his article be publish . the row have lift the lid on tension between Cabinet minister . Brexit backer fear she may offer the EU £10billion a year during a transition deal to maintain access to the single market and break the deadlock in negotiation . they want her to opt for a hard Brexit and threaten to cut tie in @card@ . but First Secretary Damian Green say there be little in Mr Johnson ' S blueprint that differ from exist government policy and insist he would not be sack . BBC ' S Panorama tonight claim the EU have hand out £264million to thousand of former people smuggler in Niger , Africa , to help them move into legitimate work .
BREXIT ' tax ' on IRN-BRU ; FIZZ BOMBSHELL LEAVING the EU could hike Irn-Bru price , the Lib Dems warn yesterday . the fall in the value of the pound since June ' s Brexit vote mean the cost of import fizzy drink ingredient such as sugar soar by @card@ per cent in a month . the party calculate that if half the ingredient in AG Barr ' s top secret recipe be affect then a two-litre bottle of the pop could cost an extra 6p . MSP Mike Rumbles say : ` ` when Boris and his pal be tell us about the brave new world that Brexit would bring , they fail to mention that Scot could see the price of our favourite soft drink increase . ` ` Scot face the prospect of a Brexit Irn-Bru tax if AG Barr ca n't keep their cost down . ` ` million of business be already face high cost as a result of Brexit . if we abandon full membership of the single market then thing will only get bad . ' ' the cost of import good include fruit juice , citric acid , sweetener , preservative and vitamin rise by just one per cent in the month pre-Brexit vote . Mr Rumbles , leave , add : ` ` I be sure that company like AG Barr will be crunch the number to protect their customer . ` ` but they be not help by a Tory government that be refuse to tell us anything about what Brexit would look like or whether membership of the single market be under threat . ' '
bitter ending ; Euro Chief RANTS : BREXIT Britain Will GET ' Vinegar ' ; Tusk promise pain EU chief last night warn Britain face a bitter and ` ` painful ' ' EU exit and ` ` consequence ' ' for leave . European Council president Donald Tusk say that the only alternative to a hard Brexit be remain in the EU . the Eurocrat claim : ` ` there will be no cake on the table for anyone . there will be only salt and vinegar . ' ' he even urge PM Theresa May to reverse the Brexit vote and vow brit would lose all EU benefit . in a direct assault on Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson , he dismiss his claim that a new deal could be do that see access to market and border control as ` ` cake philosophy ' ' . he claim Britain ' s ` ` pro-having it and proeating it ' ' ambition be a ` ` pure illusion ' ' . Mr Tusk tell the European Policy Centre in Brussels that it be ` ` useless to speculate about soft Brexit ' ' . he say : ` ` the only real alternative to a hard Brexit be no Brexit , even if today hardly anyone believe in such a possibility ' ' . meanwhile , a legal bid bring by financier to give Parliament power to say when we leave the EU be yesterday dismiss as an attempt to ` ` steal the referendum by the back door ' ' . the High Court challenge , lead by multi-millionaire philanthropist Gina Miller , should conclude next month .
we NEED Bridges But NOT Borders ; Leo ' S BREXIT CALL To DUP Leo Varadkar take a swipe at the DUP over Brexit yesterday . the Taoiseach say : ` ` at a time when Brexit threaten to drive a wedge between north and south we need to build more bridge and few border . ' ' speaking at Queen ' S University Belfast , he also urge all northern politician to resolve their difference and restore powersharing , as the Brexit clock run down . the Fine Gael party leader , visit the North for the first time as Taoiseach , describe the UK leave the EU as ` ` the challenge of this generation ' ' . he call on Britain and the EU to preserve their relationship after the break-up . Mr Varadkar warn that time be run out to try to achieve the good outcome for the island of Ireland after the UK leave the EU . he say : ` ` Every single aspect of life in Northern Ireland could be affect by Brexit . Time be run out , and I fear there will be no extra time allow . ' ' Mr Varadkar warn that hard Brexiteers have already have @card@ month to come up with a plan and have achieve nothing . he say : ` ` there be people who do want a border , a trade border between the United Kingdom and the European Union and therefore a border between Ireland and Britain and a border across this island . ` ` these be advocate of a so-called hard Brexit . ` ` I believe the onus should be on them to come up with proposal for such a border and to convince us and convince you - citizen , student , academic , farmer , business people - that it ' S in your interest to have these new barrier to commerce and trade . ` ` if they can not , and I believe they can not , we can then talk meaningfully about solution that might work for all of us . ' ' the Taoiseach be set to attend an event at Belfast ' s gay pride today . Mr Varadkar be the country ' S first openly gay leader and have be vocal about campaign for change in Northern Ireland . when ask about the DUP ' S view on same-sex marriage , he say : ` ` I wo n't be make any compromise . ' '
Davis : end DILLY-DALLY ON BREXIT ; REMOANING MANDARINS ; no more excuse for civil servant BREXIT Secretary David Davis will this week order go-slow Whitehall mandarin to ` ` get ready for Brexit ' ' . and he will say they have run out of excuse . Brexit official will return implementation plan draw up by government department and insist official start ` ` deliver ' ' so Britain be prepare in time for March @card@ . the push cover domestic policy on everything from custom desk to the type of HGV licence foreign trucker require once we leave the EU . critically , the shift in approach be design so the UK can cope in the event of a ` ` no deal ' ' with the EU , leave with no trading agreement . it come a day after PM Theresa May ' s New year vow to ` ` keep up the progress ' ' on Brexit talk this year . a senior source say : ` ` we ' re move from a plan phase to delivery . we will be remove the excuse some department have for not be ready . the intention be to ensure we be ready to deliver Brexit , whatever be negotiate in Brussels . ' ' Mrs May have be warn that business chief ' patience over Brexit be ` ` wear thin ' ' . British Chambers of Commerce director general Adam Marshall say firm want clarity from the government and suggest industry be dismay by ` ` division and disorganisation ' ' in Westminster .
Britain wo n't be great after this bad Brexit ; Andrew Nicoll
Davis : end DILLY-DALLY ON BREXIT ; REMOANING MANDARINS no more excuse for civil servant BREXIT Secretary David Davis will this week order go-slow Whitehall mandarin to ` ` get ready for Brexit ' ' . and he will say they have run out of excuse . Brexit official will return implementation plan draw up by government department and insist official start ` ` deliver ' ' so Britain be prepare in time for March @card@ . the push cover domestic policy on everything from custom desk to the type of HGV licence foreign trucker require once we leave the EU . critically , the shift in approach be design so the UK can cope in the event of a ` ` no deal ' ' with the EU , leave with no trading agreement . it come a day after PM Theresa May ' s New year vow to ` ` keep up the progress ' ' on Brexit talk this year . a senior source say : ` ` we ' re move from a plan phase to delivery . we will be remove the excuse some department have for not be ready . the intention be to ensure we be ready to deliver Brexit , whatever be negotiate in Brussels . ' ' Mrs May have be warn that business chief ' patience over Brexit be ` ` wear thin ' ' . British Chambers of Commerce director general Adam Marshall say firm want clarity from the government and suggest industry be dismay by ` ` division and disorganisation ' '
Theresa MAYBE ; BREXITEERS Near TEARS PM refuse to confirm if she ' d vote for Brexit now the PM spark anger last night when she refuse to say if she would vote for Brexit in a new referendum . which side she would back in a new referendum when quiz by LBC radio host Iain Dale . Theresa May , who back Remain last year , say she would come to a ` ` judgment ' ' after weigh up all the fact . she say : ` ` You ' re ask me to say how would I vote now against a different background . a different international background , a different economic background . circumstance move on . I think we should all be focus on deliver Brexit . ' ' her admission horrify Brexiteers , and spark question about whether she believe leave the EU be the right course for the country . but one pro-Brexit minister tell the Sun : ` ` oh my God . that ' s the Mrs May refuse four time to say the PM spark anger last night when she refuse to say if she would vote for Brexit in a new referendum . Theresa May , who back Remain last year , say she would come to a ` ` judgment ' ' after weigh up all the fact . her admission horrify Brexiteers , and spark question about whether she believe leave the EU be the right course for the country . Mrs May refuse four time to say which side she would back in a new referendum when quiz by LBC radio host Iain Dale . she say : ` ` You ' re ask me to say how would I vote now against a different background . a different international background , a different economic background . circumstance move on . I think we should all be focus on deliver Brexit . ' ' but one pro-Brexit minister tell the Sun : ` ` oh my God . that ' S the easy question to answer . I just want to cry . ' ' leave campaign boss and former Labour MP Gisela Stuart say : ` ` the duty of the government be to implement the decision of the referendum . ` ` it would have be more helpful if she have say she believe in this . ' ' Pro-EU supporter also blast the PM . Labour MP Chris Bryant say : ` ` this make her hard Brexit policy all the more irresponsible . ' ' it will place Mrs May under renewed pressure follow her disastrous conference speech last week . during the live phone-in , she also refuse to give a guarantee to all 3.2million EU citizen in Britain that they could stay on if there be no Brexit deal . quiz by one worried European living in the UK , Mrs May would only say : ` ` we do n't know what ' s go to happen . ` ` we be work on it , but I want EU citizen to stay - we wo n't be throw EU citizen out in future . ' '
letter
PM in CRISIS ON EU DEFEAT ; Brexit report revolt a constitutional crisis erupt last night after Theresa May be force to accept a Labour demand that she publish assessment of Brexit ' S impact . a pro-EU Tory rebellion see the government abandon a Commons vote to oppose it . minister refuse to reveal all secret paper , insist they would damage negotiation . but Speaker John Bercow say he could consider it contempt of Parliament if the government fail to release Brexit impact study . he tell the government that it ` ` do have to respond ' ' . Brexit Minister Steve Baker say that No10 will ` ` reflect on Parliament ' S debate ' ' . Shadow Brexit Secretary Sir Keir Starmer use an ancient parliamentary procedure to try to force the government to reveal the Brexit analysis across @card@ economic sector . but confusion reign last night on whether the method , know as a ` ` Humble Address to her Majesty ' ' , be bind on the government . one Tory EU rebel , former Transport Minister Stephen Hammond , say : ` ` Parliament should have the right to see and debate that . ` ` if we really think the Europeans be n't do an assessment of their own , that would be foolish ' ' . the chaos deepen fear about PM Mrs May ' s chance of be able to pass the huge number of Brexit law soon to come in front of MP . international Trade Secretary Liam Fox blast Cabinet colleague ' use of inflammatory language on Brexit , say it be harm prospect of agree a trade deal with the EU .
we still want a hard Brexit Never have I see politics in such a mess . the EU referendum be a distant memory with Brexit voter think ` ` what be the point ? ' ' it have become nothing short of farcical , with many of the electorate feeling cheat . a soft Brexit be not what the majority vote for . these be indeed worry time as Theresa May get it so , so wrong . the world must be laugh at us . Sandra Queen Harlow , Essex NOW the election be over it ' s time to accept the Tories have to make a go of it . Let ' s try one and all to get together to make it work . if people stop stir thing up and promote the great Britain we be , we can complete our Brexit with the PM lead and all following . join as one nation and show them we mean business . john Armstrong Newton Aycliffe , Co Durham So Theresa May be on ` ` probation ' ' for a possible two year . well , may I remind MP of all party they too be on ` ` probation ' ' until the next vote . so get behind the PM so she can deliver a hard Brexit to satisfy the electorate . then you will not be forget when the voting come around , which may be sooner than expect . David Roberts Market Rasen , Lincs All the headline and politician be indicate that a hard Brexit be dead in the water . this be due to people vote for Mr Corbyn in large number . they do not vote for his vision of Brexit . they vote for that money tree he be sell but would not achieve in power . Mrs May , keep the hard Brexit on your list . ask the real people - the work man , woman and the pensioner , not money-drunk millionaire . Malcolm SYGROVE Bishop Auckland , Co Durham Theresa May have manage to win round Tory MP who now feel she ' s capable of another two year as PM . she confess to all her failing and take the criticism on the chin . perhaps now she can get stick back into Brexit . not to mention the all-important task of keep Jeremy Corbyn at bay . Adam Irving Westerhope , Tyne and Wear NOW the stitch-up begin and we all see what the establishment be capable of . the course of Brexit have run through Parliament , lawyer , the Supreme Court , the Lords , an election , and now a double cross . Yep , she make a blunder , do n't we all ? but she do n't sell us down the river . William Sharp Coventry Can someone please explain to Gina Miller , Anna Soubry , George Osborne and Co that Britain do not vote against a hard Brexit . they vote against the cut the Tory be go to make , such as winter heating allowance . if Mrs May or whoever go for a soft Brexit , they will lose thousand of vote - 17.4million vote for a hard Brexit . ray Whitehouse Redditch , Worcs To have a successful Brexit we must focus on the free global market with as few trade restriction as possible . we should be build inclusive trading relationship base on economic equality and reach out to individual business within develop country . Stephen Sellers Great Hucklow , Derby it ' S reassure that Theresa May have be allow to continue in her role as PM . this be now the time to listen to the people about what they want and need . ditch the foreign aid budget , the TV licence , keep the triple lock for pensioner , and stop persecute diesel driver . while NHS worker have be stop from get decent pay rise , MP have be give them . these thing really get people ' S back up . Brian Richardson Romford , Essex do N'T believe anything any member of the government say about crack down on terror . a jihadi , catch with terrorist document , have fight deportation with £250,000 in legal aid from taxpayer ' money . tough on terrorism ? what a joke . Alan ANDREWS Paignton , Devon Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
our Brexit bill the fallout from Brexit continue apace . Finance Minister Michael Noonan yesterday warn Ireland will have to pay hundred of million a year more into the EU ' S coffer to help plug the gap leave by the UK . there have be widespread fear about how we could be affect by Brexit . yesterday the Finance Minister talk about brass-tacks matter . our net contribution to the European pot be already set to soar next year . but Noonan admit we ' ll also be pick up the tab from Brexit . he warn Britain ' S withdrawal may ` ` need to be mitigate by increase contribution from other member state , reduction in EU funding programme , or a combination of both ' ' . one of the country ' s lead thinktanks , the ESRI , have already warn how the fallout from Brexit could hit job , economic growth and state finance for the next ten year . a simulation of the economy by the ESRI and the Department of Finance show job in export and import , such as in the food industry , be not the only one in the line of fire . the ESRI say even the least disruptive outcome for Ireland , in which the British strike the soft of Brexit term with the EU , would spell bad news for our national finance . now another bill could be on the way . Britain ' s complex divorce from the EU be start to hit home .
CAM-FISTED ; Blundering Dave help Ukip by call for Tory landslide to deliver soft Brexit HAM-fisted David Cameron be last night accuse of boost Ukip by back a soft Brexit . he say he want a Tory landslide so Theresa May could defy MP ' call for a hard Brexit . former MP Mr Cameron , in his first speech of the campaign , say : ` ` this be one of the most define election I can remember . ` ` it ' s important conservative win well so Theresa can negotiate a Brexit deal and stand up to people who want an extreme Brexit . ' ' but the ex-PM ' s intervention risk reopen Tory feud over Europe - and deter Ukip supporter from switch to the Tories . Ukip leader Paul Nuttall say : ` ` the mask slip . Cameron ' S comment be what we think all along . Mrs May be a Remainer at heart . this election be about ensure a majority of lobby fodder to force through a soft , meaningless Brexit against the wish of the people . ` ` Ukip be never more necessary than today to ensure Tory be unable to backslide on the referendum . ' ' Ex-Ukip boss Nigel Farage add : ` ` Cameron let the cat out of the bag . a big Tory majority soften Brexit . ' ' Mr Cameron ' S blunder come as he campaign in key Tory Cheshire marginal Crewe and Nantwich . he say : ` ` it ' S important Labour do n't do well because they put up a candidate for Prime Minister who be completely unsuite . ' ' an aide say he plan more election campaigning . Mrs May , ask whether a landslide would help her defy right-winger , say : ` ` it ' S about ensure we ' ve get a strong negotiating hand . ' ' UKIP will not contest nearly a third of seat to boost pro-Brexiteers ' chance .
will it Kill Off BREXIT ? ; Election @card@ LEAVE Victory in PERIL From Labour Gains ; lLibs will push for vote No2 lBrussels glee at May loss BREXIT could be in jeopardy due to a hung Parliament , it emerge last night . the Lib Dems would likely use a second referendum as a key demand in any future coalition deal . and the PM could be hold hostage by hardline Brexiteers or Remainers if she have a tiny majority . last night Ukip boss Paul Nuttall blast that Brussels ` ` will have look at the exit poll and be cheer very loudly because right now , if we believe the exit poll , Brexit be under a bit of threat ' ' . he add : ` ` if the exit poll be true then Theresa May have put Brexit in jeopardy . I say at the start this election be wrong . hubris . ' ' Former Labour spin chief and ardent Europhile Alistair Campbell say : ` ` I can not see Brexit happen on the current Article @card@ timetable . ' ' last week the EU say Brexit talk could be delay from their @card@ June start date if Labour pull off a shock election win . EU official admit Brussels would be willing to push back the start date if a new government in London request more time to prepare . ' we ' re on course for an interesting Parliament ' A source say : ` ` if the UK be to turn around and say , ' we need a bit of leeway ' - we do n't have a lot of leeway in the big scheme of thing . ' ' they add : ` ` there be only a number of month - less than two year - to do this , so there be n't a terrible lot of scope . but the Commission will agree with the UK the date for the first negotiating session . ' ' Tory grandee Ken Clarke say the result indicate Britain be on course for an ` ` interesting Parliament ' ' . the arch-Remainer : ` ` if we continue with another Parliament with a small majority , then firstly we will have to have some deep debate ... particularly on Brexit . ' ' he go on : ` ` we face some appalling difficulty in my opinion , this be a critical stage for us - politics be change . ' ' with Brexit talk due to start in ten day time , Labour say the PM be ` ` deeply wounded ' ' ahead of the crunch Brussels showdown . Mr Clarke , who be the only Tory to vote against trigger Article @card@ , tell the BBC : ` ` I think the bad outcome for the United Kingdom would be a weak government and a hung parliament of any party , and we just have to see where we get . ' ' he support Mrs May in call the election to boost her majority to deal with Brexit , as he say he acknowledge Britain be go to leave the European Union . Lib Dem president Baroness Brinton say her party could not work with either Labour or the Tory as both be push for a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . she tell Sky News : ` ` a coalition be not on the card , not just because of the @card@ result but because of big policy difference . ' ' last night German Chancellor Angela Merkel be picture enjoy a glass of champagne on a visit to Argentina . polling expert Prof John Curtice say the result indicate Mrs May have fail in her bid to get a great mandate for Brexit but he could not rule out the possibility that the Tories would still gain a small majority .
no MAYTES ; Premier FROZEN Out ; Brexit triple blow at crunch EU talk Theresa May be freeze out in Brussels yesterday in a triple Brexit blow . she be ignore on arrival at a crunch EU summit with footage show her look awkward as leader greet each other at EU HQ . it come hour after revelation that Britain ' s EU ambassador to Brussels Sir Ivan Rogers have warn her in October that Eurocrats believe a Brexit deal could take ten year . and last night an unnamed EU diplomat reiterate Britain could be serve with a whopping £50billion divorce bill . the PM be tell she would not be welcome at a work dinner at yesterday ' S EU Council where the @card@ other leader discuss Brexit . insider insist she have chat to German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other . Downing Street say they be confident a ` ` quickie ' ' Brexit divorce be possible . source last night claim Sir Ivan ' s private comment may have be leak to weaken his position . after meeting Mrs May , European Parliament chief Martin Schulz say of Brexit : ` ` there be the second large economy in the single market leave the EU . this be weaken it without any doubt . ' ' in contrast , ex-Ukip leader Nigel Farage get a warm welcome at Trump Tower in New York yesterday , where he meet member of Donald Trump ' S team . he be not expect to meet Trump .
may DEMANDS No BREXCUSES ; Cabinet in BREXIT Summit Theresa May have put Brexit success at the ` ` top of the in-tray ' ' as she strive towards a negotiate strategy to leave the EU . the Prime Minister have summon Cabinet minister to discuss Britain ' s EU exit as she return to Westminster . Mrs May , at Lord ' S for England ' s one-day cricket international against Pakistan yesterday , have order them to come up with idea to make a success of Brexit . they will meet at her country pile Chequers on Wednesday to deliver their pitch . it signal that all department , not just the Three Brexiteers of Boris Johnson , David Davis and Liam Fox , will play a role in leave . May ' s urgency surround Brexit come as she travel to meet world leader at the G20 in China next weekend . she will use it to ` ` highlight the wealth of opportunity that will arise from Brexit ' ' and discuss possible trade deal with world power . but Lord O'Donnell , former head of the civil service , have say Mrs May need to work out what version of Brexit she want before formally trigger the leave process . he say Brits may want to remain in a ` ` broad , more loosely align ' ' EU and that Mrs May would be ` ` unwise ' ' not to hold a Commons vote before start Brexit . labour grandee Kate Hoey have say the party face electoral wipe-out if it oppose Brexit .
build ON Donald ' S BREXIT Joy Donald Trump want Brexit to succeed and be prepare to expend political capital to make that happen , accord to those close to him . those who have speak to Trump since his shock victory , say he do n't think he ' d be president but for Brexit . Trump think the fact Britain vote to leave the EU show he be right about what be worry people . leave aside that his victory and Brexit be two very different event , Trump ' s emotional connection to Brexit be something this country should seek to take full advantage of . those advise Trump be keen on a rapid UK-US trade deal post-Brexit . they say they be not against all trade deal , but just one with lowwage economy that they argue lead to the loss of manufacturing job back www.home.No one think an agreement with the UK would lead to worker be undercut in Pennsylvania and Michigan . Theresa May ' s Cabinet have yet to discuss Trump ' S victory . but the government need to ensure they seize the opportunity present by Trump ' s enthusiasm for Brexit .
brit will get ` ` the soft [ ... ] ; More WRANGLING ON EU ; Split will be ' soft of soft ' , warn Tory BRITS will get ` ` the soft of soft Brexits ' ' , a Tory minister claim . Lord Prior of Brampton , below , also hint there will be continue open border for skilled EU migrant . his comment at a private business summit threaten to embarrass the PM and spark more Tory rift . a source at yesterday ' S Insur-Tech Challenger workshop say : ` ` Lord prior be ask how we could hire EU citizen after Brexit . he say with @card@ per cent of academic at Cambridge University be foreign , do you really think we will have barrier to entry for skilled worker ? ' ' insider say the peer add say it be ` ` now look like it be go to be the soft of soft Brexits ' ' . soft Brexit backer want freedom of movement to continue . but the PM have say it have to stop . Brexiteer Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` it be not helpful if he have use this term soft Brexit - it mean nothing to anyone . ` ` the reality be - as the PM and the Chancellor have confirm - we be leave the single market , the custom union and EU . that ' S not hard or soft , that ' S just Brexit . ' ' the row come as a report warn fail to reach a deal in March @card@ would trigger a huge reduction in trade with the EU , spark a @card@ per cent plunge in the pound and push up fruit , veg and beef price . change Britain boss Gisela Stuart say the report take a ` ` misleadingly pessimistic view ' ' .
PM ' S tactic be all wrong if Theresa May have set out to give another independence referendum a boost she could hardly have go about it well . even after the mess of the Brexit vote , nobody could pretend Scotland be boil for another crack at independence . Mrs May could have respond to the threat of another vote with a little bit of compassion . she might have offer a word or two of reassurance . she might have tell Scottish voter that she understand their bafflement over Brexit , that she ' s work on it , she ' S get their back and we can get a successful deal out of this - well than go it alone . instead , she stick her finger in her ear , stamp her foot and say ` ` no ! ' ' Telling Nicola Sturgeon she have no mandate for a referendum be more than provocative - it ' S also just plain wrong . back in May , when the prospect of a Brexit vote seem so remote as to be incredible , Nicola Sturgeon put this referendum in her manifesto . that manifesto see Ms Sturgeon return to government . her SNP win more constituency than Alex Salmond have , with more vote and a big share of the vote , and Ms Sturgeon get her mandate . she spell it out for the voter that the Scottish Parliament must have the right to ask people how they wish to respond if Scotland be take out of the EU against its will . and that ' s exactly what be happen . Scotland vote almost two to one to remain , but Scotland be be drag out anyway . in the four month since the EU vote , Ms Sturgeon be the only politician who have react with calm . she have refuse to give in to racism by insist that European family settle here be still welcome - while Westminster say they be ` ` bargaining chip ' ' . and she have set out a list of condition Scotland need to salvage something from Brexit . all we have have from Westminster be ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' and a bizarre claim that UK trade can be revive by sell jam and scone around the world . Mrs May promise that Scotland would play a full part in the Brexit negotiation but , while there be special deal on offer for City of London financier and car manufacturer in the North East of England , the Scottish Secretary be leave outside the door of her Brexit committee . the threat of another referendum be about so much more than independence . it ' S about Brexit and get the good deal for Scotland . so who be offer it ?
EU SNUB May ' S Citizens Plan ; BREXIT MIGRANTS BUST UP ; Rights row as PM beg Jez for help Euro MP last night blast Theresa May ' s offer on EU citizen ' right after Brexit as a damp squib . they claim it would make European second class citizen here . the snub come as the PM call on Jeremy Corbyn to help her deliver Brexit and tackle challenge . in a speech tomorrow she will urge the opposition to ` ` contribute , not just criticise ' ' . Mrs May have previously hail her ` ` generous ' ' plan to give 3.2million EU citizen the right to permanent stay after five year . but the Euro Parliament ' s Brexit team , lead by Guy Verhofstadt , warn of a ` ` cloud of vagueness and uncertainty over the life of million ' ' . the Belgian say it be wrong European come after Brexit would have to have a certain wage to bring in relative . and he say the PM ' S plan would stop them vote in local election and leave doubt over right for their kid bear here after @card@ . the PM be in talk with the EU Council and Europe ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier rather than MEPs . but MEPs will still have a veto on a final @card@ deal . lib Dem chief Tim Farron say : ` ` Theresa May try to use EU citizen as bargaining chip . they call her bluff . ' ' the PM will admit lose her majority have change her outlook as she ask other party for assistance . she will say : ` ` the reality I now face be different . ` ` I say to other party , ' come forward with idea about how we can tackle these challenge as a country ' . ` ` we may not agree on everything , but through debate and discussion idea can be clarify and improve . ' '
EU Must All SUPPORT Me ; Sturgeon BREXIT Challenge ; Nic demand rival back power plan Nicola Sturgeon yesterday challenge rival to back her bid to get EU power hand to Holyrood after Brexit . the First Minister call on opposition party to unite behind her plan for a shake-up of the UK ' S constitution . and she claim Scotland would need the new power regardless of what happen with Brexit . write below in today ' S Scottish Sun , the SNP leader say : ` ` it ca n't be right for Scotland ' s clear voice to be silence and our national interest ignore - so whatever the term of the final Brexit deal shake-up . . Kez & Sturgeon we must think again about how power in the UK be exercise . ' ' in her Brexit plan - now be consider by Downing Street - Ms Sturgeon call for the whole of the UK to stay in the single market . and she claim that if that be n't possible , PM Theresa May should argue for a similar deal for Scotland . but under both scenario , she insist Holyrood would need new power because of the ` ` profound effect ' ' of Brexit . the move would mean take full control of fishery and employment protection from Brussels . it would also see Holyrood responsible for immigration and energy market . Labour leader Kezia Dugdale back a beefed-up settlement and call for a ` ` radical reshape ' ' of the country . she say : ` ` the time have come for a people ' s constitutional convention to re-establish the UK . after more than @card@ year , it be time for a new act of Union to safeguard our family of nation for generation to come . ' ' Tory chief Ruth Davidson add : ` ` more power should and will come to Holyrood as a result of Brexit . ` ` what ' S vital be that we have a serious debate as to which power be well place at Holyrood and which be well place at a UK level . ' ' and Lib Dem boss Willie Rennie say : ` ` whatever the outcome of this Brexit process we need to transfer power across the UK to create a Federal United Kingdom . ' '
Quick Brexit will finally stem the flow of migrant the EU ' s claim that we have @card@ month to sort out a Brexit deal , and not two year , be fantastic news . but one have to wonder , just how many more migrant will make Britain their home over the next year and a half ? I hope this deal be sort ASAP . Clint Webster Taunton , Somerset be the EU Commission make up their own rule , say Brexit will have to be negotiate in @card@ month ? be there no timetable write into Article @card@ ? if not Theresa May need to negotiate on her own term and get us out when she have good deal . Leon Davenport Inkersall , Derby why do we have to go through all this rigmarole to leave the EU ? with the threat that we be get from Brussel about trade deal , why do n't we just say , ` ` up your pipe ' ' and just get out . they be not interested in our interest , just their own as they have be all along and be take us for mug . Alfred VERRALL Trowbridge , Wilts HOORAY ! we will have @card@ month to get out of the EU . that mean we ' ll get our money back sooner - but only if dopey Brexit Minister David Davis do n't give it away again . Geoff Tip Lancing , West Sussex PRIME Minister Theresa May ' s decision to reveal her Brexit plan to fend off a parliamentary revolt by Tory Remainers telegraph a clear advantage to the European negotiator . it be tantamount to a penalty-taker inform the goalkeeper which corner he intend to shoot into . Jim Sokol Banbury , Oxon BREXIT will never happen . never mind @card@ month , if Theresa May be serious she would have trigger Article @card@ a long time ago instead of wait for it to be block , which it will be . the government may continue to pay billion to keep access to the single market and only slightly diminish the free movement of so-called immigrant , which will turn out to be the usual million . Mrs May start well , it ' s a shame she join the other who will gloat at her failure to deliver . James Lucy Bexley , Kent THE obstacle , threat and hostility emanate from EU leader relate to Brexit , do not worry me too much . what do concern me be the treacherous conduct of the anti-Brexit MP and other in the establishment . when we should be see to be unite , they be weaken our hand at this most crucial time in our history . George Pickles Ripon , North York when will Anna Soubry , Nicky Morgan and other anti-Brexit MP get their head around the fact that the people have speak and want out of the EU ? they try to delay and sabotage our exit from Brussels . they would do well to remember that both of their constituency , whom they be suppose to represent , vote leave . either accept the result or resign . ray Walter St Leonards-on-Sea , East Sussex I be alarm by the tone and rhetoric of so-called democrat . their brazen support of the EU body we will be negotiate with give the impression there be million of people in this country who will support the EU ' s hard line over our Brexit negotiation . these ` ` democrat ' ' be a direct threat to the well-being of the people of this country and our economic interest . James Wiseman Keighley , West York TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply everybody I know have a horror story about the NHS . it employ sub-standard doctor because it be cheap , because it be burst at the seam with patient who have contribute little or nothing . J Kenny , Kent All MP seek to stop or delay Brexit should be name along with which constituency they work for to make sure they do n't get vote for in future as they be not represent us . PB , West Mids How we fight to free Europe . now we be prisoner . Alf , Newton Abbot , Devon in the mad rush to robotise everything , include sex , people should remember that just because you can do something do n't mean you should , however clever it may be . BRIAN email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
forget Brexit ' talk ' ... we ' ve pay bill , now let ' s check out of the EU hotel ; Britain Ca N'T Wait TIL @card@ To Go it be time to stop use the mislead term ` ` Brexit negotiation ' ' . Britain ' s exit from the European Union be not subject to negotiation . it have be determine by the British people - the sole legitimate authority on this issue . one negotiate to enter an institution , not to leave it . we be simply check out of the EU hotel . we pay our bill long ago and be free to leave . we be merely say a courteous farewell . the weasel term ` ` negotiation ' ' - too uncritically accept by Leavers - suggest we can only leave the EU by gracious permission of the Brussels apparatchik , that they will decide how many law , regulation and even payment into the EU budget will still be impose on Britain . unhappily , many British civil servant who will be involve in the ` ` negotiation ' ' share this absurd mindset . the mentality of these people , marinate in the habit of deference to the EU , be that Britain be an offender petition the parole board for early release . the government ' s pretence that Article @card@ can not be trigger until next year typify this delusion . why should hundred of British official toil unnecessarily to prepare for complex and protracted ` ` negotiation ' ' with an entity we be abandon to its increasingly ominous fate ? when EU apparatchik place voluminous document for ` ` negotiation ' ' on the table , they should simply be sweep on to the floor as irrelevant . since voting for Brexit , the United Kingdom be no longer subject to one sentence or comma of the monumental acquis communautaire , or accumulate body of EU law . Remainers ' delusion British ` ` negotiator ' ' be only create imaginary obstacle to our departure . trade agreement - the only area in which the term ` ` negotiation ' ' be relevant - can be conduct separately from the brief formality of departure and conclude after finalisation of Brexit . there be now two level of delusion among the survive Remainers . at the most extreme level be the cerebrally challenge view that Britain ' s exit from the EU can somehow be prevent . the headline report this hallucinatory mindset speak for themselves : ` ` we wo n't trigger Article @card@ until after @card@ - and that mean Brexit may never happen at all ' ' , ` ` Brexit ' could be delay until late @card@ ' with Whitehall department not yet ready to trigger Article @card@ ' ' , ` ` the UK Supreme Court have a clear legal path to block Article @card@ and stop Brexit ' ' . the arrogant implication behind these fantasy of the defeat Entitled Ones be that the will of 17.4million voter be illegitimate because they be ` ` stupid ' ' . if Brexit be delay as suggest in those headline the public backlash would be on a scale unseen in England since the 17th century . if activist judge be to block the clear will of the British electorate , at a time when confidence in both the judicial and political system have never be low , they would be court disaster . and if the Supreme Court uphold the Brexit vote , what would the malcontent do - appeal to the European court ? the majority have finally assert its right and will not be deny them . the second , marginally less insane , delusion be that the Brexit ` ` negotiation ' ' can somehow be protracted , complicated and fudge so that the EU can claw back control of Britain and impose almost as many law and regulation as under full membership . the EU anthem and flag would have to be sacrifice , but through some form of ` ` associate membership ' ' , ` ` Norway model ' ' or other device , Britain could end up remain in the Single Market , subject to EU law while exclude from any role in make them , still unable to control immigration - the key referendum issue - and contribute to the EU budget . in other word , in a bad situation than under full membership . Iain Duncan Smith , the prominent leave campaigner who be well aware of this conspiracy ( to give it its proper name ) , recently call on Theresa May to take measure to ensure Brexit be enact imminently , with Britain leave the Single Market . he say the Brexit decision must not deteriorate into a ` ` neverendum ' ' . he be right and it ' s high time leave supporter abandon timidity and spell out some home truth . the Remainers make much of predict chaos in the market , which do not materialise . but the market , which have now factor Brexit into their calculation , notoriously loathe uncertainty . yet the Remain bunker , formerly so concern about the market , be engineer prolonged uncertainty , to the detriment of investment . the most urgent issue for the leave camp now be the psychology of Britain ' s approach to the EU . our so-called ` ` negotiator ' ' need to present themselves in Brussels as soon as possible and say : ` ` you can put away all those mountain of bumf , we ' re only here to say goodbye nicely . we do n't want any form of associate membership , thank you very much . trench warfare ` ` what part of ' we ' re outta here ' do n't you understand ? now , bring us the visitor ' book and we ' ll sign out . ' ' that be what a majority of Briton want . not only the 17.4million voter who support Brexit , but a grow number of former Remainers . in the immediate aftermath of the referendum , distraught Remainers , notably the BBC , construct an anecdotal narrative of ` ` Leaver remorse ' ' that claim many leave voter regret their action . few such people concretely materialise . this myth be base on the genuine shock of voter , long accustom to impotence under consensus politics , startle to find they have successfully impose their will on the political class . surprise be misrepresent as regret . now that the postreferendum excitement have die down , a genuine phenomenon have emerge of many Remain voter , in the democratic British tradition , reconcile themselves to the decision of the majority . their view now be that we should get on with Brexit and make it a clean break with Brussels to prevent a further decade of trench warfare tear Britain apart . that apply more specifically to the Conservative Party , which must end its internal European schism or fall apart . Theresa May should remember the fate of David Cameron and ensure that Brexit really do mean Brexit - and within a much short time-span than two year . trade with Europe , like the rest of the world , be up for negotiation . otherwise , there be nothing to negotiate . l this article be first publish on Reaction.life . Gerald Warner be a lead author and broadcaster .
BREXIT Plan B ; PM tell UK must prepare for no-deal divorce Theresa May be warn yesterday to prepare for a no-deal Brexit or risk economic ` ` Armageddon ' ' . Senior Tory fear EU chief will struggle to agree a divorce settlement in the two year before the deadline for Britain to leave . they have urge the PM to plan now to avoid possible chaos at port , gridlocked road and financial meltdown . the ` ` doomsday ' ' scenario be spell out in a report sign by @card@ Tory MP . it stress there be every chance Brexit Secretary David Davis will clinch a deal that will enable Britain to continue buy and sell good tariff-free with Europe . but it warn the government must prepare now for every eventuality , include walk away without a deal . failure to plan could lead to ` ` serious disruption ' ' if we be not ready on day one , the report say , with traffic delay of ` ` biblical proportion ' ' . a plan to keep trade flow post-Brexit be outline in the report ` ` ready on Day One ' ' by Dover MP Charlie Elphicke . Mr Elphicke say : ` ` we must put ideological discussion behind us . there be practical step we can take now to ensure we be ready on day one to make a success of Brexit . ' ' the port of Dover handle £120billion of import and export a year . it account for @card@ per cent of all trade with the EU . in his report , Mr Elphicke say there be no doubt the government be commit to a deal . but he say : ` ` Two year be a very short time and it be likely that the EU will struggle to be able to move swiftly enough . ` ` industry leader have be trenchant in their warning of the serious disruption we face if we be not ready on day one . ' ' the report call for resilient road to all Channel port , custom system ready to go and one border agency to replace the array of ministry and quango . last night a Eurosceptic think tank insist Britain have a ` ` very strong negotiate hand and should n't be afraid to play it ' ' . Jonathan Isaby , of Brexit Central , dismiss EU tough talk as ` ` posture you would expect at the opening of a negotiation ' ' . he add : ` ` there be no reason for us to take an existing model for a deal off the shelf when we can ensure one be create to fit our unique circumstance . ' '
UK need to Brex-celerate I WAS please to learn that Brexit Secretary David Davis will this week order go-slow Whitehall mandarin to get ready for Brexit . they have certainly run out of excuse . what the Remainers forget be the majority of people in this country vote for Brexit and it be go to happen , whether they like it or not . as soon as we be free from the EU ' S shackle , the well . other EU country will follow in our footstep - they have just be too scare to stand up and say so . it may be a long , hard battle for us but it will be easy for other in the future and be one reason why the EU have probably make it so difficult for us to leave . Geri Burton Corwen , Clwyd Well say , Daniel Hannan . his column in Saturday ' S Sun be a superb example of optimism for Britain ' S future , so lack in the whingeing Remoaners . Daniel tick off the many reason we have to be positive , despite the negativity of the anti-Brexit brigade . the possibility we can benefit from when we be free from the suffocate grip of the EU be endless . thank you for display such pride in Britain and what we can achieve - and for stick it to the anti-Brexit crowd in the process . mark Patten West Denton , Tyne and Wear Lord Adonis have brand the Prime Minister extremist . what planet be he on ? the PM vote to remain but have accept the will of the 17million , of which I be one , who vote to leave . she be do a brilliant job of navigate the UK ship through the choppy Brexit water with heavy flak from all side . but there be clear sign that we be move into calm water . Adonis and his ilk should support the will of the people or move to their beloved mainland Europe and leave us in peace . harry Hodge Preston Last year ' s doomsday prediction of the Remoaners have be reveal as utter rubbish fuel by desperation . it ' s time they make their own New Year ' S resolution and get behind Brexit as whatever they say or do , they can not reverse the will of the people . they be like survivor desperately cling on to a sink ship , the only difference be that despite all their agitate propaganda it ' s their ship that ' S sinking . the sooner they get use to that , the well . carol Davies Stannington , Northumberland here we see another Remoaner try his damnedest to overturn the democratic referendum result of the majority of British people who have vote to leave Europe . why ca n't they get it into their head that we be leave Europe and no amount of duck and diving will change that ? I suggest Adonis do the decent thing by resign from the House of Lords , emigrate to Europe and take along other baggage in the form of Blair , Heseltine , Mandelson , Clegg and Osborne . good riddance . matt Adams Worcester what a cheek to be compel to pay for a TV licence . the BBC should fund its own wage pay to over-rated , highprofile staff . the holiday programme have be a disgrace . same old rubbish , nothing worth watching . we should have a choice if we want to watch BBC or not and I could save myself £147 a year . ray Burnside Manchester Prince Philip , who jokingly ask if a man with a long beard be terrorist , be a breath of fresh air . he always have be - and even more so in the PC world that seem to prevail at this time . I suspect there be million of people who do identify with his sense of humour , so why not compile all of his so-called slipups and quip and show them on television ? it would be interesting to see the viewing figure . Roy Davies Northwich , Cheshire TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply WE seem to follow everything that go on in the US . I wonder if the great former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani , who cut crime rate in the Big Apple , would consider come across the Pond to sort out the mess in our country ? we need someone like him ASAP . Gary K , Banbury , Oxon Justice Secretary David Lidington be believe to back release OAP prisoner into cushy care home because ` ` they be unlikely to commit another offence ' ' . another namby-pamby idea from those in ivory tower . Willy , Benfleet , Essex Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
HESS-HESS-G.B . ; Heseltine : Brexit vote like let Germany win war Lord Heseltine spark fury yesterday after he claim voting for Brexit be like let the Nazis win World War Two . the Tory Europhile say Britain have ` ` abandon the opporthat tunity to influence Europe ' ' . and he claim Brexit will now allow Germany to dominate European politics . the veteran peer rant : ` ` Germany lose the war . ` ` we ' ve just hand them the opportunity to win the peace . I find that quite unacceptable . ' ' he moan Brexit mean we have lose the ability to represent the Commonwealth in Europe and predict our special relationship with the US would end . the peer , sack as a government adviser for rebel over the Brexit Bill , claim Theresa May could lose the next General Election because of the ` ` bitter fury ' ' of Remain voter . but angry MP hit back last night . Ukip ' S Douglas Carswell say : ` ` Poor Hezza . his political career be define by try to ensure we have more EU . and now he ' s be prove wrong . ' ' Recent TV drama SS-GB be set in an alternative timeline in which the UK be occupy by the Nazis . the Sun say - Page @card@
can EU Hurry UP ? ; PM demand non-stop Brexit talk to end deadlock BREXIT @card@ Theresa May have call on the EU to agree to non-stop talk to end the Brexit stalemate . the PM want face-to-face Brussels negotiation to move from one week a month to roll weekly session until the deadlock be break . it also emerge last night that the next round of talk , set to start on September @card@ , may be delay a week so Mrs May can lobby key EU leader in the margin of a UN summit in New York that week . talk stall over EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier ' s refusal to open trade talk until Brexit Secretary David Davis agree to a divorce bill of up to £80billion . yesterday embarrass Mr Barnier backtrack on his threat to use negotiation to ` ` educate ' ' UK voter on Brexit ' S consequence . he insist he have not mean to single us out , tweet : ` ` Brexit = occasion to explain single market benefit in all country , incl my own . ' ' yet at the same time Commission boss Jean-Claude Juncker ' s chief of staff Martin Selmayr suggest leave voter be ` ` stupid ' ' . the German say : ` ` Brexit be bad , it ' S a stupid decision . ' ' he add : ` ` the only people who can reverse it would be the British people and I be not a dreamer , I be a realist . ' ' meanwhile , a research note from economist Morgan Stanley predict Cabinet Brexit split will force an election next year .
we can get Brit trade on a roll like Swiss first thing first . Eighty-five per cent of us vote for party that pledge to leave the EU . the party that want a rerun - Lib Dems , Greens and SNP - all lost ground . there have never be a more Brexit-friendly Commons . what kind of Brexit , though ? be there now a majority in Parliament for a so-called ` ` soft Brexit ' ' , in which we end up be boss about by EU judge ? might Europhile Conservative and Labour MP leave us with a Brexit that happen in name only ? no . that option have never be on the table . as Donald Tusk , the President of the European Council , say : ` ` the only real alternative to a hard Brexit be no Brexit . ' ' and ` ` no Brexit ' ' be not an alternative when more than @card@ per cent of MP have be elect for party that promise to implement the referendum . ` ` Hard Brexit ' ' do n't mean refuse to work with our EU ally . on the contrary , most leaver want an open and global UK , in which we maintain our existing EU tie . so what be our option ? we could have a simple trade deal with the EU , like South Korea . there would be no ongoing budget contribution , and we ' d have total control of our immigration policy . but our export to the EU , especially in financial service , might drop and we ' d struggle to keep the current border-free deal with Ireland . at the other extreme , we could get a Norway-style deal , inside the common market but outside the political institution . we ' d get back control of farming , fishing , trade and citizenship right . but we ' d have to accept free movement on something close to the current term and pay into the EU budget . worse , we ' d have to take every new Brussels regulation . both of these option be good than where we be now . but we should aim high . in between the two be Switzerland , which have a kind of partial membership of the single market . it do not accept the ruling of the Euro-court but copy many of them through domestic legislation . it have many more trade deal than have the EU , include with big economy like China and Japan . Switzerland pay a small sum to Brussels - around a sixth as much per head as we do . EU and Swiss national have reciprocal work right but must have job to go to . importantly , the Swiss be not oblige to keep give benefit right to EU national whenever the European Court decide to extend them . I ca n't help notice the Swiss be do well . they be the secondrichest people on Earth and , the UN say , the second-happiest . they export more than four time as much per head to the EU as we do . their company be worldbeating : Nestlé and Novartis , Rolex and Swatch , Glencore and UBS . we co-found the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) with the Swiss back in @card@ . resume our seat there would n't be soft or hard Brexit . it would be global Brexit , extend our trade link with Europe and the whole world . be n't EFTA a compromise all side could live with ? lDaniel Hannan be a Conservative MEP and the author of what next : how to get the Best from Brexit
reality CHEQUE ; UK ' must wake up to huge Brexit bill ' divorce payout , it tell Britain to meet the cost of relocate its agency back across the Channel after Brexit . it also insist Britain remain subject to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . the uncompromising mandate be agree through the EU ' s General Affairs Council . ahead of the meeting , Mr Roth insist Brexit be a lose-lose for both side but the reality of Brexit have yet to ` ` break through ' ' in Britain . the council guideline say Britain ` ` must honour its share of all the obligation undertake while be a member ' ' . it add : ` ` the UK should also fully cover the specific cost relate to the withdrawal , such as the relocation of EU agency currently base in the UK . ' ' the European Medicines Agency and the European Banking Agency be in London . if they move , the EMA will face a £345million bill for break its Canary Wharf rent deal . EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier say the term reflect a ` ` demonstration of determination and confidence ' ' . Brexit Secretary David Davis hit back at Brussels ' demand , in particular its ` ` ideological obsession ' ' with retain court jurisdiction . he say : ` ` it be not acceptable and will not work . ' '
Priti Low Blow ; Sacked minister ' s salvo at May ' s Brexit ' fail ' BREXIT News @card@ Priti Patel last night deliver a wither attack on Theresa May ' S entire Brexit strategy , for sell Britain short . just week after quit the Cabinet , the former aid boss claim the Govern-Cment have lack ` ` conviction and clarity in term of our end state ' ' . and the leave supporter say it be a ` ` fail ' ' that the Prime Minister have not set out her vision of post-Brexit Britain . speak at an event organise by the Spectator magazine , Ms Patel smile and nod when it be point out that Mrs May ' s Cabinet be still to discuss what sort of trade deal to try to wrestle from Brussels . and she also insist that the PM should have tell Brussels to ` ` sod off ' ' over a big divorce bill . she say : ` ` I think it ' s fair to say Brexit be an enormous challenge and government have be ill equip in term of preparation for the negotiation . it ' S not an ideal state at all . ' ' after quit earlier this month over undeclared meeting in Israel , she warn the PM in her resignation letter she would be able to talk freely about Brexit . Ms Patel also unleash a furious attack last night about how the Conservative Party be run , say it be time to ` ` completely recalibrate and start again ' ' to fight Jeremy Corbyn . to cheer from her Tory audience , she demand that member get to elect the Cabinet position of party chairman .
the Sun ON Sunday SAYS @card@ @card@ @card@ 65billion Brexit bonus BREXIT Britain have 65billion reason to be optimistic about our future . that be the figure @card@ top economist say we will be good off by outside the EU . their chief Prof Patrick Minford write in the Sun on Sunday today : ` ` Brexit be a new dawn for the UK economy . ' ' the top economist , who correctly back Margaret Thatcher ' s revolutionary @card@ budget and rightly dismiss Project Fear , say Brexit will speed up growth and create a job boom . next time a gloomy Remainer say the Brexit apocalypse be come , they should listen to Prof Minford . he have be prove right before - and will be prove right again .
Euro tour to trigger meeting on Brexit Theresa May will fly to Berlin and Paris to defy the EU and force the start of Brexit talk . the PM ' S tour come after her first Cabinet meeting today - where she will insist leave the EU should be use to improve ordinary brit ' life . Mrs May will tell the Cabinet : ` ` it will be the responsibility of everyone sit around the Cabinet table to make Brexit work for Britain . and it will also be their duty to deliver success on behalf of everyone , not just the privileged few . ' ' Chat . . Merkel ` ` the PM will then challenge EU leader , who forbid informal negotiation until we ask to leave . she will meet German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Wednesday and French President Francois Hollande on Thursday . she want informal talk on Brexit , as the formal trigger of Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty set a tight two-year deadline . Downing Street insist yesterday that Brexit Secretary David Davis have not be put in sole charge of orchestrate Brexit , call it a ` ` collective effort ' ' . Mrs May also slap down Nicola Sturgeon after Scotland ' S First Minister claim she have be give a Brexit veto .
pm : vote Tory for BEST BREXIT ; Tories BEST for BREXIT Election @card@ : @card@ Days To Go Theresa May today call on leave voter to let her ` ` fulfil the promise of Brexit ' ' by back her as PM . in a major speech , she will paint an upbeat vision of Britain ' S future ` ` free from the shackle ' ' of Brussels . Mrs May , right , will insist opportunity outside the EU be enormous , but only the continue on Page Two continue from Page one Tory can deliver what Leavers vote for . party chief believe the @card@ per cent of brit who vote leave be key to the election ' S outcome . the next seven day will see the PM try to persuade Ukip , Labour and even Lib Dem Brexiteers to defect . that even mean treat the election as a re-run of last summer ' S referendum , she will insist . speak in the North East , which vote overwhelmingly for Brexit , Mrs May will tell Leavers it be ` ` time to act on their decision and deliver their will ' ' . she will argue : ` ` we be now @card@ month on from the EU referendum . ` ` in one week ' S time , they have the opportunity to affirm that decision and secure that bright future by vote for me to continue as Prime Minister . ` ` we can fulfil the promise of Brexit together and build a Britain that be strong , fair and even more prosperous than it be today . the opportunity before us be enormous . ' ' as well as make the country ` ` a great global trading nation once again ' ' , Brexit be also a chance for a major national renewal internally , she will say . the PM will add : ` ` we will build a more united country as our shared value , interest and aspiration bring us together ' ' . she will also say that mean ` ` make the most of every talent and ensure no one be leave behind ' ' . Jeremy Corbyn will today also spell out Labour ' s Brexit vision . yesterday Mrs May visit Tory-held marginals in Plymouth and Bath as poll show the race tightening . the Financial Times last night become the first national newspaper to call for a Tory win . the Sun say - Page Eight
what TYPE of BREXIT ? with call for compromise and an ` ` off the shelf ' ' deal with the EU , here be some option for Brexit Britain ' s future relationship with the EU base on other nation ' experience ... Norwegian it have access to the single market . but it make a hefty contribution to EU coffer and obey the majority of its law - and accept free EU movement . hard BREXIT RATING : @card@ out of @card@ Swiss Access to EU market through a series of deal with individual country . it make a small budget contribution and have free movement , but do not apply law . hard BREXIT RATING : @card@ Turkish A Customs union member so it can trade without tariff or duty in the EU , but unable to forge free trade deal with country like www.US.No free movement or EU law . hard BREXIT RATING : @card@ UKRAINIAN DEALS over security , defence and free trade - almost everything UK be seek . crucially , it do not pay into EU budget , accept judge ruling or have free movement . hard BREXIT RATING : @card@ Canadian I TS recently-signed deal scrap tariff on trade good without free movement , budget contribution or EU law . heavy regulation on food and manufacture good . hard BREXIT RATING : 4NO DEALUK would fall back on rule set by the World Trade Organisation . with tariff but without budget contribution , free movement , regulation and EU law . hard BREXIT RATING : @card@
HONDAFUL ; NOW Britain ' S MOTORING ; UK car plant ' S £200m Brexit boost Honda yesterday pledge its full commitment to post-Brexit Britain with a huge £200million investment boost . the Japanese car giant ' s Europe chief Katsushi Inoue say the company want to transform its Swindon plant into a ` ` global production hub ' ' . he unveil plan to build a new five-door Civic at the Wiltshire factory . confirm the firm ' S strategy , the motor boss say : ` ` it be our plan regardless of Brexit , it be the plan before the vote in June , and it remain the plan after the Brexit www.vote.No change . ' ' the announcement be also a boost for Prime Minister Theresa May . it come just day after Japan ' S Prime Minster Shinzo Abe issue a wither assessment of the uncertainty Brexit will cause . in an unprecedented 15-page report that emerge at the G20 , the Japanese government warn of ` ` great turmoil ' ' if Britain lose access to the EU ' s single market . under the late plan for the Civic , Honda will build @card@ motor a year at the Swindon site . but critically , around @card@ per cent of the production will go to the US - the first time the plant have make car for the American market . this will reduce the plant ' s reliance on trade with the European market . industry expert have fear Honda may use the referendum result as an excuse to shut Swindon - which be mothball for two month at the height of the credit crisis . the plant be due to stop make the C-RV in @card@ but from the end of that year it will now be responsible for global production of the Civic .
it ' S just another lick in the wall ; Floyd STAMPS. . but NOT BREXIT BREX Factor @card@ Commons leader Andrea Leadsom blast Royal Mail yesterday for issue a set of Pink Floyd stamp - but refuse to do the same for Brexit . the lead Out campaigner condemn its decision to honour the rocker , fame for hit another Brick in the Wall , while fail to mark the UK leave Europe in @card@ . she say she ` ` completely disagree ' ' with the Royal Mail ' s view that it ` ` be n't an important event worth recognise ' ' . she become the fourth Cabinet minister to back the Sun ' s campaign for commemorative Brexit stamp , call it an ` ` excellent way to celebrate leave the EU ' ' . Environment Secretary Michael Gove , Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson , and Trade chief Liam Fox have also back it . ` ` she say : ` ` I must say that I agree with Michael , Boris and Liam in their support for the Sun ' s campaign for commemorative Brexit stamp to be issue to mark our independence day in March @card@ . if they can produce stamp collection for Game of Thrones , Ladybird Books and Pink Floyd ( and , in @card@ , a set commemorate our accession to the EEC ) , then there ' s no reason not to do so for Brexit ! ' ' over the weekend Dr Fox call our campaign a ` ` first class idea ' ' . Mr Johnson declare ` ` let ' s deliver a stamp that show the world we ' ve get Brexit lick ' ' . the Department for Business say : ` ` all commercial matter , include stamp theme , of the Royal Mail be independent of the government . ' '
Irish PM SLAMS THE BREX ON Trade TALKS THE Irish PM have warn that Brexit trade talk may be delay by the UK-Ireland border issue . Leo Varadkar say a proper solution be need so good could cross between Northern Ireland and the Republic . on his first official visit to Belfast he call Brexit the ` ` challenge of our generation ' ' and warn the clock be tick . the Irish chief , who will meet with other EU PMs in October , want a bilateral EU-UK custom union as well as a ` ` deep ' ' free trade arrangement with Britain . his meeting in the autumn with @card@ other EU chief could determine the fate of Brexit talk , he say . the Taoiseach warn : ` ` we will decide together whether sufficient progress have be make on three key issue to allow the Brexit negotiation to proceed to the next phase . ' ' one of these issue be the question of the border . Mr Varadkar add : ` ` it be my fervent hope progress will have be make , but I do not underestimate the challenge we face . ' ' the government insist Brexit negotiating be ` ` very clear ' ' , despite day of public Cabinet bickering . apprentice star and business mogul Lord Sugar offer his service after claim politician lack negotiate skill . the number of Irish passport issue in Britain be set to almost double this year follow the Brexit result , accord to Ireland ' s ambassador to the UK .
a great deal PM ? what about Brexit we all vote for I ' M dream of a real Brexit - just like the one we vote for . oh , what agony have be endure just to get to Friday morning ' s modest breakthrough , allow talk on trade to begin . any euphoria would be misplace . the EU have throw Theresa May a bone before she have no choice but to walk away from the table - that ' S all . Brexit be a deal still light year from be do . in @card@ , 17.4million of us vote for a return to control over our economy and the trade deal we cut with the rest of the world , a return to control over our border , law , sovereignty and destiny . we be tell by our then prime Minister that our decision be final and irrevocable . David Cameron look us in the eye and say , choose carefully , little people , because there will be no go back . it have not work out like that . now even an ex-Prime Minister , Tony Blair , feel bold enough to gob in the face of democracy and boast that he be work to ` ` reverse Brexit ' ' . Friday ' S deal give Theresa May what she need - not for Brexit itself but for her political survival . but this be not about any politician ' S career . this be about our country ' S future . very soon we will be hear more lame excuse about why the country ca n't have the freedom it vote for in large number than we have ever vote for anything . if Mrs May ca n't make Brexit a reality then it be time for her to call the removal man into Downing Street and make way for someone who can . we be sick of see a British Prime Minister get down on her knee before Brussels . why be the border between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland ever such a deal-breaker ? the wealthy country in Europe , Norway - which be not in the EU - share a non-hard border with Sweden , which be in the EU . if the non-EU Norwegians and the EU Swede can manage an open border , then it should never have be beyond the wit of the UK and Ireland to work out a border that suit everyone . but , of course , there be many people who relish see Brexit falter and fail . there be foreign politician such as little Leo Varadkar , the puffed-up Irish premier , who actively enjoy see a British PM squirm . cynical soul and there be cynical soul closer to home , like Labour , who view Brexit as a blunt instrument with which to beat the wicked Tory . and it all look a bit too much for Mrs May . I do not doubt her essential decency , patriotism and sense of duty . but even after Friday , I have come to doubt her ability to get Brexit do . I doubt her ability to say to Brussels : ` ` bog off . ' ' why do we crawl to these creeps ? the UK be the second-largest contributor to the EU . we have pour billion into the gravy train . like a bitter dump boyfriend , the ruffle feather of Michel Barnier , Donald Tusk and Jean-Claude Juncker be understandable . but our people - free , democratic citizen of a country that have not bend the knee to any foreign invader for @card@ year - vote to leave . and that be what must happen . the Brexit denier try to make it complicated . but it be really , really not complicate . it be as brutally simple as can be . the British people either get the real Brexit they vote for or receive the message that their vote mean nothing . and democracy no long matter in this country . I ask the BBC , Tony Blair , Nick Clegg , the House of Lords , Keir Starmer , Vince Cable , Jeremy Corbyn , Bob Geldof and all the rest of the Brexit denier - do you really want to send that message to the British people ? it would be a very dangerous message to send .
deal for No Deal ; Davis UPS THE BREXIT Stakes Plan in case EU talk flop Covers @card@ % UK business David Davis will today detail government preparation for a ` ` no-deal ' ' Brexit . the Brexit Secretary ' S plan cover @card@ sector of the economy , make up @card@ per cent of the UK ' S income . he will spell them out to the Cabinet as he try to up the stake in stalled Brussels talk - and to show Britain can walk away instead of accept a bad deal . a Government spokesman say last night : ` ` we continue to undertake analysis to support progress in negotiation and ensure we ' re ready for Brexit whatever the outcome . ` ` there be @card@ sector use in the analysis and cover the breadth of the UK economy . ' ' meanwhile , tax boss have be slap down by minister for claim it may take five year to set up a post-Brexit custom system to check and tax import . HMRC say a new computer network , the Customs Declaration Services programme , must be introduce . in addition @card@ Border Force staff will have to be hire and checkpoint and lorry park build . Customs declaration will soar fivefold to @card@ million a year when we leave the EU in a hard Brexit scenario . HMRC chief Jon Thompson refuse to guarantee it would all be ready by March @card@ , @card@ , at an MP ' committee hearing last week . but minister call the claim pessimistic ` ` feet-dragging ' ' . a Government source say : ` ` the main thing HMRC need be CDS , which will be in place from October @card@ . ` ` there may be longer-term , nice-to-have thing that could take around that timescale . ` ` but they ' re not businesscritical to a successful Brexit . ' ' the Scottish Sun have also learn HMRC brief minister over a nightmare scenario of long port tailback if checkpoint get clog up for even a few minute . and custom post on EU coastline will not be fully staff for a year after Brexit . but HMRC insist : ` ` the CDS be on track for delivery by January @card@ . ' '
do N'T EU Go SOFT ; fear we ' ll make big concession to get Brexit deal Downing Street be under internal pressure to make big concession to the EU to get a Brexit deal , it have emerge . however , pro-Brexit minister fear give too much away to Brussels . one warn that too many concession could see ` ` the bottom fall out of the bucket ' ' and the government risk collapse . minister urge Theresa May to appoint a ` ` no deal ' ' Secretary of State to show the EU we be prepare to go it alone . yet Brussels official have brief that they have little faith in Mrs May ' s ability to get MP to approve a final deal . this would heighten the need to plan for a no-agreement scenario . Sun columnist James Forsyth today reveal the PM ' s Europe adviser Olly Robbins be behind the push to yield to the EU . Pro-Leave MP fear Mr Robbins , move from the Brexit department to No10 last month , hope to allow the EU to declare ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have be make to start trade talk . Tory MP Charlie Elphicke warn Mrs May to prepare for a no-deal Brexit in a paper call ready on Day one : meet the Brexit Borders Challenge . he say it be vital to prepare for the possibility of walk away without a deal . talk in Brussel be due to re-open next week . it be think British official will refuse to tell the EU how much we be prepare to pay to settle the Brexit bill .
Juncker ' insult ' in May row FURIOUS MP have accuse an EU chief of ` ` insulting ' ' Theresa May and Britain - and try to sabotage the Brexit deal . Jean-Claude Juncker be say to have tell the PM the EU ` ` be not a golf club ' ' after minister suggest the UK should quit for free . the Commission president launch the attack after claim talk at a No10 dinner last Wednesday have be ` ` constructive ' ' . he call Mrs May ' s Brexit expectation obstinate and naive . when the PM tell Mr Juncker they should share make Brexit work , he tell her : ` ` Brexit can not be a success ' ' . she yesterday call it ` ` Brussels gossip ' ' . Labour Brexit Secretary Sir Keir Starmer say : ` ` this be evidence that May ' s rigid and complacent approach to Brexit negotiation risk lead Britain over a cliff edge . ' '
BOJO : BREXIT be on a KNIFE-EDGE ; Fears Remoaners will reverse vote Warns soft Brexit bad than none Boris Johnson have warn his ally that Brexit be far from a certainty and they face a big fight to deliver it . the Foreign Secretary privately share ex-Ukip boss Nigel Farage ' S fear that the Referendum result could be reverse . he insist the ` ` establishment ' ' across Whitehall and the City will step up their effort in the next @card@ month to halt Britain ' s EU exit . BoJo , right , have also confide in friend his concern that Theresa May will be wear down by mandarin and Remainer Cabinet minister . he fear she will eventually be force to accept a bad deal during trade talk in March . Johnson have say that still have to accept diktat from Brussels would leave the UK as ` ` just another Norway ' ' and tell pal : ` ` I ' d rather us stay in than leave like that . ' ' the ex-Mayor of London be also frustrate with the Cabinet ' s failure to be more positive about the advantage of Brexit to halt a poll reverse . the need to keep sell the nation ' S decision be why Mr Johnson be work on a major speech to push the case for a ` ` liberal Brexit ' ' . his warning follow another renewed alarm from Mr Farage , who last week cause uproar by say there may be a need for a second referendum on EU membership . he go on to tell the Observer yesterday that Leavers could ` ` lose the historic victory that be Brexit ' ' . call on Brexiteers to get organise , he add : ` ` the Remain side be make all the running . ' ' Jeremy Corbyn yesterday deepen suspicion that Labour would one day pull a U-turn and back another poll when he refuse to rule one out . Shadow Foreign Secretary Emily Thornberry go further , suggest the party could back a second vote . she say : ` ` if @card@ per cent of the population be now say we must stay in the European union that would be a challenge that would be there for all of us who be democrat . ' ' Mrs May ' S inner Brexit Cabinet will meet this week in the first of three showdown to try to pin down a position for trade talk . royal Mail have snub the Sun ' s demand for special stamp to mark Brexit Day on March @card@ @card@ and claim the day be not an ` ` important anniversary ' ' .
fantasy Island ; Russell ' S BREXIT BROADSIDE ; Nat mock Tory vision of ' buccaneer ' trade boom the Tory vision of Britain as a ` ` glorious trading nation ' ' after leave the EU be a fantasy , Nat Mike Russell claim . the Brexit Secretary blast Theresa May ' s government after the PM say it be up to Brussels to break the divorce talk deadlock . Mrs May have insist she want a ` ` special partnership ' ' with the EU and add : ` ` the ball be in their court . ' ' she also claim the UK would get a deal to prove anti-Brexit ` ` doomsayer ' ' wrong . but Holyrood ' S Brexit Secretary Mr Russell , right , dismiss her comment , and Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson ' s claim of a ` ` glorious Brexit ' ' , as nonsense . he add : ` ` they be pursue a fantasy . there be n't a good Brexit . ` ` it ' s base on a fantasy of the UK , some buccaneering , glorious trading nation which do n't and ca n't exist . ' ' it come as European Council President Donald Tusk make clear he do n't expect enough progress on the deal to greenlight UK trade negotiation until December at early . on Monday , Westminster set out plan for a ` ` stand-alone ' ' customs system if Britain exit without a deal - see as a bid to pressure EU country to speed up progress . but Mr Tusk , speak ahead of a summit in Brussels next week , say : ` ` the EU be not work on such a scenario . however , if it turn out that ' sufficient progress ' have n't be reach , then together with our UK friend we will have to think about where we be head . ' ' Labour MP Ian Murray blast minister over the slow pace of negotiation . he say : ` ` a hard , destructive Brexit with no deal at all be increasingly likely . ` ` the good option for job and our economy be to stay in the single market and custom union . ' '
vote can finally sort Brexit row ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter now we can vote for what we want - and hopefully that will put an end to all the argue , back-biting and whingeing . if you want IndyRef2 then vote for the SNP . if you want to stay in the UK and the EU vote Lib-Dems , if you want Brexit and the UK to stay together then vote Tory . Let ' s get this do once and for all . Paul Craig Aberdeen great news about an election . now Nicola Sturgeon can properly get the mandate she require for IndyRef2 . happy days.JAMES Taylor Glasgow Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron try to seduce voter into support his party at the election , for a so-called ` ` soft Brexit ' ' which he claim be beneficial to the British people . like his colleague , Nick Clegg , this man be a flag-waving Eurofanatic who know his version of an EU settlement would ensure continued free movement and UK tax boost Brussels ' coffer . Jim Sokol by email the only way to stop a hard Brexit be to vote either Lib Dem or SNP at the election . if they gain enough vote then we can reverse Brexit or at the very least stay in the Single Market and negotiate on free movement . this will allow us to retain the UK and avoid the folly of Theresa May ' s negotiate stance with the EU . Barbara Orton Dumfries May state it ' s too soon to allow Scotland a referendum because all the fact be not yet know on Brexit deal , yet it be now OK to hold a General Election while we do n't know what the Brexit deal will be . double standard or opportunism while the opposition be in chaos ? take your pick . Alex Cruickshank by Email why do n't they add a none of the Above to the list of candidate so we can give this sanctimonious bunch a wake-up call ? Ian FIDOM by Email why should May take part in any TV debate ? the SNP , Labour and the Lib-Dems will obviously gang up on her . they can now be leave to stab each other in the back . john TALLAN Hamilton AFTER three series of the excellent Broadchurch , star David Tennant and Olivia Colman , picture , I be hugely disappoint with the dull ending . not what we expect at all . we be wait for a twist . it never come . Sam Clare by email
HEZZA : JEZZA for PM BEATS BREXIT ; EX-DEPUTY PM LASHES Out Tory say split more risky Tory grandee Lord Heseltine last night claim a Jeremy Corbyn government would be less damaging than Brexit . the political heavyweight predict Labour would eventually adopt a policy to stay in the EU as Brexit become ` ` more unpopular as people realise what it ' S all about ' ' . and the former deputy PM suggest the ` ` short-term pain ' ' of a have Mr Corbyn in No10 would be worth the hit if it mean Britain stay in Europe . speak to the pro-EU Limehouse podcast , Lord Heseltine say : ` ` we have survive Labour government before . their damage tend to be short-term and capable of rectification . ` ` Brexit be not short-term and be not easily capable of rectification . ` ` there will be those who question whether the short-term pain justify the avoidance of the long-term disaster . ' ' but Tory MP Nigel Evans say : ` ` only a Euro fanatic of the pedigree of Michael Heseltine could believe a Corbyn Government would be preferable to leave his beloved EU . ' ' in March , Lord Heseltine spark controversy when he claim voting for Brexit be like let the Nazis win World War Two . he later describe hard Brexit as a ` ` cancer gnawing at the heart ' ' of the Tories . matt.dathan @ theFears www.sun.co.uk
can EU Hurry UP ? ; PM demand non-stop Brexit talk to end deadlock BREXIT @card@ Theresa May have call on the EU to agree to non-stop talk to end the Brexit stalemate . the PM want face-to-face Brussels negotiation to move from one week a month to roll weekly session until the deadlock be break . it also emerge last night that the next round of talk , set to start on September @card@ , may be delay a week so Mrs May can lobby key EU leader in the margin of a UN summit in New York that week . talk stall over EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier ' s refusal to open trade talk until Brexit Secretary David Davis agree to a divorce bill of up to £80billion . yesterday embarrass Mr Barnier backtrack on his threat to use negotiation to ` ` educate ' ' UK voter on Brexit ' S consequence . he insist he have not mean to single us out , tweet : ` ` Brexit = occasion to explain single market benefit in all country , incl my own . ' ' yet at the same time Commission boss Jean-Claude Juncker ' s chief of staff Martin Selmayr suggest leave voter be ` ` stupid ' ' . the German say : ` ` Brexit be bad , it ' S a stupid decision . ' ' he add : ` ` the only people who can reverse it would be the British people and I be not a dreamer , I be a realist . ' ' meanwhile , a research note from economist Morgan Stanley predict Cabinet Brexit split will force an election next year .
passport to a well future ; letter
Brexit debate ' S back with bang if you think the debate over Brexit and Scottish independence have go away , think again . we have a fortnight ' s lull while our politician go to ground for the festive period - doubtless plot their next move as they tuck into their turkey . yesterday , Nicola Sturgeon ease us back into the debate for @card@ , where this complex , multi-pronged debate will be back in full swing within day . in essence , she suggest indyref2 could be on hold for at least two year until after the Brexit process have play out . but despite some kerfuffle surround her comment , a close inspection reveal she actually say little more than she have in @card@ . the First Minister confirm in plain language than she have previously that indyref2 would be off the table in the short-term - but only if there be a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit . by ` ` soft ' ' , she mean Britain keep full membership of the European single market . this be oppose to a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit favour by Eurosceptic Tory - mean out of the single market , but with full control of immigration . opponent leap on Ms Sturgeon ' s comment as evidence she be retreat from her previous claim that indyref2 be ` ` highly likely ' ' . but in reality , we be where we be before Christmas . twitter addict Ms Sturgeon take to social medium to clarify that she reckon there be more chance of another referendum than a soft Brexit . so , we ' re back where we start . expect many more of these political riddle in the come day , week and month , as politician of all creed survey the constitutional chaos and try their damnedest not to commit to anything . Theresa May be due to make an EU speech any day now , hopefully shed at least some light on her tactic . crucially , we have no idea how she intend to balance our trade link with Europe - where leader insist free movement of people must remain - with her desire to regain full control of our border . as Ms Sturgeon rightly say yesterday , the ball be firmly in the PM ' S court .
EU be To Lay Down LAW ; BREXIT Deal FALLOUT ; agreement to be ' legally binding ' MEPS have demand that the Brexit deal ensure a soft border in the North become law immediately . it come after British Brexit secretary David Davis say the UK could alter the agreement or weasel out of it later , in a weekend TV interview . he claim the deal - that also agree the ( Euro ) 44bn the UK must pay the EU on leave - be ` ` much more a statement of intent than it be a legally enforceable thing ' ' . but after the Irish government brand his statement ` ` bizarre ' ' , the EU have push for the Phase one deal to quickly become law . European Commission spokesman Margaritis Schinas say that while the plan be n't legally binding it be see as ` ` a deal between gentleman ' ' that be ` ` fully back and endorse ' ' by the UK Government . he note that UK PM Theresa May and European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker have shake hand on the agreement . but the European Parliament ' s Brexit co-ordinator Guy Verhofstadt fume : ` ` Remarks by David Davis that Phase one deal last week not bind be unhelpful and undermine trust . ` ` European Parliament text will now reflect this and insist agreement translate into legal text ASAP . ' ' meanwhile , the Central Bank have warn that Brexit still pose a major risk to our economy despite the agreement that there wo n't be a hard border in the North . it say change to our trading relation post-Brexit may hit export demand and supply chain . and the review warn that the agri-food and manufacturing sector be particularly vulnerable . Deputy Governor Sharon Donnery yesterday say : ` ` the agreement reach between UK and EU negotiator last week be to be welcome . ` ` but Brexit continue to pose a major risk to the Irish economy give that any final deal be still subject to continued negotiation which will be both significant and complex . ' ' the top banker add : ` ` in the absence of a final trade deal , disruption to supply chain be also a possibility , with many firm currently use the UK as a land bridge for transport good here . ` ` any change to transport route or increase border wait time might mean a knock-on increase in price for Irish shopper . ` ` high level of indebtedness in many Irish firm may deter investment and leave them vulnerable to any economic downturn or unable to raise the finance require to alter business model post-Brexit . ' '
Brexit bungle what a shambles - we start off yesterday hear there be a Brexit deal . Tanaiste Simon Coveney reveal that Taoiseach Leo Varadkar be to make a ` ` positive statement to the country ' ' about the post-Brexit border in Ireland . the podium be roll out for his speech only to be roll back in again . everyone clearly get ahead of themselves - everyone except the DUP . British PM Theresa May have seemingly concede that there will be no divergence of rule cover the EU single market and custom union on the island of Ireland post-Brexit . but as May go for lunch to seal the deal in Brussels , she take a phone call from DUP leader Arlene Foster - and the deal tank like Leo ' s sock at a people before Profit Christmas party . Foster insist that her party ` ` will not accept any form of regulatory divergence ' ' that separate the North from the rest of the UK . why the stance adopt by the DUP should have surprise May or anyone else involve in the negotiation be a complete mystery in itself . Leo finally give his speech over three hour later , say he be ` ` surprised and disappointed ' ' at the British government . the day have come full circle . a workable compromise on the border , post-Brexit , have to be find and quickly as the clock be now tick down to the European Council summit next week . the DUP be only one party - and one party must not be allow to torpedo a vital deal which be crucial to the future of the island . our government must stand firm on Brexit and ensure there be no hard border . but after the deal-and-no-deal shenanigan yesterday , we be now border on a total mess .
PM Stuck in the Middle WITH EU ; BETWEEN Block and Hard Case Two Tory rebellion on Brexit Theresa May be catch between two Tory rebellion over Brexit last night . a letter back by more than @card@ hardline Brexiters urge the PM to set out a clear timetable for cut all tie with Brussels from March @card@ . at the same time pro-EU Tories line up in the commons to demand Mrs may soften her stance . the face-off come hour after Brexit Secretary David Davis introduce the EU Withdrawal Bill to MP . he urge all Commons member to back the legislation , which be design to enable us to walk away . however , MP Suella Fernandes circulate the leak ` ` Hard Brexit ' ' letter , which originated from leave lobby group Change Britain . it demand the UK quit the single market and stop all budget payment to the Commission when we do . it say : ` ` when we leave in @card@ we need to make sure we be well and truly out . ' ' meanwhile , ex-Attorney General Dominic Grieve call the Withdrawal Bill an ` ` astonishing monstrosity ' ' and say it give minister too many power . the PM ' s spokeswoman yesterday confirm all the point raise by the letter be ` ` subject to negotiation ' ' with Brussels . former Cabinet Minister Stephen Dorrell warn : ` ` the Brexit policy of hardliner would push our economy off a cliff edge . ' ' Labour ' S Sir Keir Starmer confirm the party would vote against the Bill . campaigner vow to hijack the BBC ' S last Night of the Proms tomorrow night by hand out European Union flag . the Sun say - Page Ten Hard BREXIT brigade we need to be well and truly out in @card@ - Tory SUELLA Fernandes SOFT BREXIT brigade repeal Bill be an astonishing monstrosity - Tory Dominic Grieve
now He GETSXIT ! ; Border Deal be crucial in BREXIT TALKS ; l Cam : migration key issue l he tell EU to control it l but kiss-off from Brussels David Cameron tell a Brussels summit last night that Britain be leave the EU because voter believe immigration have spiral out of all control . the PM also insist that Europe ' S @card@ leader must agree to reform free movement as part of any post-Brexit deal . curb the number of new arrival to the UK be the only way Europe can continue strong trade link with the world ' s fifth-largest economy , he warn them . his remark come during his first tense meeting with Europe ' s boss since last week ' s historic out vote . however , today he will be tell to leave the EU Council summit - his last before he step down in September - so his counterpart can plot their response to Brexit . the PM last night lay out his thinking over his final dinner with EU leader , tell them he have ` ` nothing to lose ' ' . a Government source say beforehand : ` ` he believe one of the key issue in the referendum campaign , and why a lot of people vote to leave , be this sense that there be no control of immigration or freedom of movement . ` ` he will tell the other leader that if the EU want a close economic relationship with the UK , they ' re go to have to do some work on freedom of movement . ' ' the PM ' S outburst effectively set out the first term of his successor ' S long Brexit negotiation , and establish EU free movement as the define issue of the Tory leadership contest . at the dinner , Mr Cameron also point out the EU still have to resolve major wrangle on free movement with other border country such as Switzerland . ' these be very tricky issue ' the source add : ` ` he believe it ' s worth them give this some think now , before formal process begin of negotiate our departure . these be very tricky issue . ' ' Arriving yesterday afternoon , Mr Cameron call on his fellow EU leader to make the Brexit process ` ` as constructive as possible ' ' . he add : ` ` we must n't be turn our back on Europe . ` ` these country be our neighbour , our friend , our ally , our partner and I very much hope we ' ll seek the close possible relationship . ' ' but the scale of the next PM ' S task be make clear yesterday by more tough talk from EU chief . German Chancellor Angela Merkel warn there would be no access to the single market for post-Brexit Britain without accept free movement . insist talk will not be ` ` a cherry-pick exercise ' ' , she say Britain ` ` can not expect to have no more obligation but keep the privilege ' ' . Italian PM Matteo Renzi say we can not have the EU ' s ` ` good thing ' ' without the ` ` bad thing ' ' . EU Commission boss Jean-Claude Juncker again urge the UK to activate the official notification for its walkout so that break-up talk with a two-year deadline could begin . he also ban his official from talk to UK official over Brexit until ` ` Article @card@ ' ' have be trigger . Mr Cameron himself will today go so the rest can discuss Brexit - the first time a British PM have be exclude from a full EU Council in @card@ year . however , some world leader call for calm yesterday . Dutch PM Mark Rutte say the UK have collapse ` ` politically , monetarily , constitutionally and economically ' ' , add : ` ` I would argue to give them some space . ' ' US President Barack Obama say : ` ` there ' s be a little bit of hysteria post- Brexit vote , as if somehow Nato ' s go , the trans-Atlantic alliance be dissolve , and every country be rush off to its own corner . that ' S not happen . far-right politician try to exploit Brexit , which France ' S National Front leader Marine Le Pen call ` ` the most important moment since the fall of the Berlin Wall ' ' .
BREXIT Bill ' S IN-SURGENTS ; May DEFEATS REBELLION @card@ Tories side with Labour Theresa May see off a revolt by top pro-EU Tories last night in the big challenge to her authority yet . the PM thwart a demand that she get MP ' approval before walk away from a bad Brexit deal . but seven Tory vote with Labour , include four former minister . three more abstain , include ex-Chancellor George Osborne and ex-Education Secretary Nicky Morgan . the government win the knife-edge vote @card@ - a @card@ majority . MP be debate the Article @card@ bill to grant Mrs May permission to trigger Brexit talk . Tory rebel and Labour MP want to prevent a hard Brexit deal that would see the UK pay tariff on EU trade . but Brexit minister David Jones say slapping condition Perry ... jihadi jibe on the PM would be ` ` a great signal of weakness ' ' in EU talk . insult fly as former Transport Minister Claire Perry liken anti-EU Tories to ` ` jihadis in their support for a hard Brexit ' ' . and one-time Justice Minister Anna Soubry accuse Brexiteers of ` ` willy-waving ' ' . minister win over some Tory by offer ` ` a meaningful vote ' ' on a final draft Brexit deal before the European Parliament pass it . the final hurdle for the Article @card@ bill be tonight .
PM must stem Brexit strategy betrayal fear Reports that Theresa May have manage to frustrate even the Queen be the final confirmation the nation be officially feed up with be tell : ` ` Brexit mean Brexit . ' ' so , the good news . the Prime Minister now plan to give a speech set out the government ' s vision for leave in the New year . which could end the fear that the government be not reveal its strategy because it do not have one . give most speech have to include actual sentence , there be a great deal of excitement about what Mrs May might say . but the less good news I hear , be that very little work be go on at the moment in No10 to prepare for the speech . the Brexit department be still work on its review of how leaving will affect different sector of the economy , but it be also pour considerable effort into stop Tory MP from get too agitate . one source say : ` ` for a lot of people in our party , the sense of betrayal over the year about what they ' ve be tell the EU will be like and what the reality have turn out to be be so great that they think they ' re go to be betray again by Brexit . ' ' Mrs May have be work hard on the Remainers in her party too . a meeting in No10 last week with prominent pro-EU MP ( not include Nicky Morgan , naturally , after her Trousergate comment ) be ` ` well-tempered ' ' . the Prime Minister can afford to be relax about this group of Remoaners , as they do n't have a clear leader to challenge her . there have be a few grumble that Mrs May be n't spend enough time in the Commons charming backbencher , but most MP accept that she be busy travel to meet foreign leader to get them onside ahead of a very test @card@ . charming European counterpart be far more important than charming lonely backbencher . ' she do n't understand her power to set the Brexit tone ' so everything be calm in Westminster - for the moment . this mean there be very little pressure on the Prime Minister to reveal very much detail at all about what Britain ' s arrangement for leave the EU will be . ` ` she could get away with say very little , ' ' say one Cabinet minister . indeed , the more she say , the hard her aide will have to work to stop a betrayal narrative take hold among eurosceptics who do n't feel she be go far enough . in fact , Tory eurosceptics seem far less concerned about what she ' ll say about Brexit than they do about how she ' ll say it . ` ` she do n't quite understand her power to set the tone about Brexit , ' ' say one senior conservative . ` ` at the moment the narrative that Brexit be bad and mean we ' re retreat from the world be take hold , but she ' S the Prime Minister and can give us a much more upbeat line . she should say Britain should be a more actively engage country in the world . ' ' whatever Brexit turn out to mean , Mrs May need to show her party that she believe it be good news for this country and the rest of the world too . and that she know what she ' s do . lIsabel Hardman be assistant editor of the Spectator . James Forsyth be away .
may ' S MIGRANT HAMM-ER Blow ; Top Tories in BREXIT BUST-UP ' Unlimited top skill ' the Chancellor be set for a head-on row with the PM after say brit do not mind unlimited high-skilled immigration - and full EU trade link be as vital as border control . Philip Hammond vehemently deny the suggestion that migration matter more to the government than be in the single market . and he say that people who vote for Brexit in the ref-erendum have only show they do not want ` ` full free movement ' ' from the EU . he also lavish praise on Bank of England Governor Mark Carney , say he would be keen for him to serve a full eight year . and he attack the UK medium for be too positive about the economy follow the bombshell Brexit vote . he warn it will slow down until Britain have a ` ` much clear picture ' ' of what a Brexit will look like . his remark come @card@ hour after a Tory conference where PM Theresa May insist Britain would decide how it control immigration in Brexit talk . she also criticise the Bank of England ' S policy . Mr Hammond ' S comment will fuel Tory fear of a loom Cabinet rift over Brexit negotiation . source predict either he or Trade Secretary Liam Fox will quit . he concede there would have to be some control on low-skilled immigration . but he say : ` ` the problem be not highly skilled and highly pay banker , brain surgeon , software engineer . ' ' he add there would be ` ` give and take ' ' on immigration to get the good deal.But he say it be not about not let ` ` any people from the European Union to come into the UK ' ' . Mr Hammond be speak in the US , where he meet bank boss to reassure them the City of London would retain lucrative access to the EU post-Brexit .
stop TAKING THE SNP , Nic ; Scot BREXIT SLAPDOWN ; May ' s blast for Sturgeon A Fresh Brexit row erupt after the PM accuse SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon of ` ` undermine ' ' the EU negotiation . No10 slap down the Scot ' First Minister for try to strike her own exit deal with Europe . Theresa May also leave her irate by rule out Ms Sturgeon ' s ` ` flexible Brexit ' ' proposal for part of the UK . under it , pro-Remain area such as London and Scotland would stay in the single market while area that vote leave would see a clean break . but Downing Street insist we would leave the EU ` ` as one UK with a single UK position ' ' . the row erupt in a meeting of the PM , Ms Sturgeon , Wales ' S Carwyn Jones and Northern Ireland ' S Arlene Foster and Martin McGuinness . Ms Sturgeon claim Mrs May do not currently have a Brexit negotiating position and say : ` ` you ca n't undermine something that do n't exist . ' ' Mrs may later rounded on Labour MP for try to stop Brexit . veteran Welsh leftie Paul Flynn accuse her of a ` ` little England ' ' short-sightedness that would lead to the UK ' s break up . but the PM say : ` ` the UK vote to leave the EU . he and other can try all they like to find way to weasel around that decision . ' ' Mrs May also try to defuse her Brexit standoff with Parliament as MP warn her silence be spook business . she offer a series of debate on her exit negotiation ahead of trigger the Article @card@ departure process before next April - but they will not include a vote . Tory and Labour MP be demand a say . meanwhile , the PM insist a tiny Belgium region block a major EU-Canada trade deal will not sabotage Brexit . it have spark fear socialist chief of Wallonia could also hold Britain to ransom over its exit deal from the EU .
warn of Brexit income tax rise Nicola Sturgeon yesterday suggest Scot could face tax rise due to Brexit . the First Minister tell how the leave vote , which freak the financial market , ` ` clearly have consequence ' ' for Scotland . the revelation come as Scottish Lib Dem leader Willie Rennie quiz her at Holyrood . he say : ` ` I already have concern about funding for college , school and nursery . that could get bad with Brexit . ' ' but Ms Sturgeon refuse to rule out raise tax to cushion the Brexit blow . she say : ` ` we do n't yet know fully what those consequence will be . we be take time and care to look at all element of our budgetary planning . ` ` that will undoubtedly have an impact on our timescale for budget and spending review over the next period . ` ` I be not say anything be on or off the table right now , but that be another aspect of the very careful work that we will have to do in the month ahead . ' ' before May ' S election , the SNP vow to freeze the basic income tax rate despite Labour and the Lib Dems urge a 1p hike . speak after FM ' S question , her spokesman say she be n't be specific about tax but would keep the manifesto pledge . he add : ` ` we be in a situation that be not of our own making . all sort of ramification be come from the referendum and the result , that we do n't call for . I ' m not go to pretend we have answer to everything . ' ' it come as ex-SNP minister Mike Russell , who head Holyrood ' s finance committee , warn the budget be now subject to much great volatility .
nothing on the Table ; Sturgeon FACES May in Euro Summit STALEMATE ; lNic attack Tory Brexit plan mystery ; lAnger at fruitless 2hr talk-in at No10 ; lNats vow to pull Scots from ' cliff edge ' Nicola Sturgeon claim Theresa May ' S government have no clue what its Brexit strategy be follow a heated summit yesterday at No10 . the First Minister go to Downing Street look for answer on the EU withdrawal but come away ` ` no clearer ' ' after a frustrating two hour . and Ms Sturgeon dismiss talk of Scotland weaken the UK ' s negotiation with Europe as ` ` nonsense ' ' . she say : ` ` to be brutally frank about it , you ca n't undermine something that do n't exist . ` ` from everything I have hear today there be n't yet a UK Government negotiate position , which be one of the great source of frustration . ` ` what I ' m not prepare to do be stand back and watch Scotland drive off a hard Brexit cliff edge . ' ' Ms Sturgeon and her Brexit Secretary Michael Russell join colleague from the UK ' S devolve government at the talk . also there be Welsh First Minister Carwyn Jones , Northern Ireland ' S Arlene Foster and her deputy Martin McGuinness , and Tory secretary for Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , David Mundell , Alun Cairns and James Brokenshire . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` we discuss the UK ' s negotiate position in general . but it be safe to say we get no more detail on that than we have before . ` ` I get the strong sense the UK Government do n't know what it be try to achieve . that be why many part of the meeting be deeply frustrating . ' ' Ms Sturgeon and Mr Jones have both call for vote on the Brexit strategy in each of the UK ' S parliament . they insist the Article @card@ countdown should not be trigger until there be an agreed approach . First Minister Sturgeon say the meeting have agree to establish a sub-committee of the Brexit group which will involve the devolve administration . but she add : ` ` we have still get a lot of work to do . the UK Government have to be much more open about what they be try to achieve . ` ` I be determine , for my part , to do everything I can to work within this process to protect Scotland ' S interest . ' ' but she be dismissive of a phone ' hotline ' be set up between the UK capital and Tory Brexit minister David Davis . she say : ` ` have a direct line be good , but it wo n't mean much if he be not prepare to say anything when he pick up . I do n't have any interest in silent call . ' ' Welsh supremo Mr Jones say : ` ` if the UK Government ca n't negotiate a position with devolve nation , there be little hope for a good Brexit deal with @card@ country . ' ' Downing Street say devolve leader be warn not to ` ` undermine ' ' negotiation by try to win a good deal for their area . a No10 spokesman add : ` ` they must not undermine the UK ' S position . ' ' PM May say : ` ` work together , the nation of the UK will make a success of leave the EU while further strengthen our own unique union . ' ' but Ms Sturgeon ' s Holyrood rival last night urge her to get on with run the country and ditch her push for indy . Tory leader Ruth Davidson say : ` ` Scotland ' s good interest will be serve by cooperation not confrontation between our two government . ` ` the SNP be n't go to answer any of the issue throw up by Brexit by divide the United Kingdom . Nicola Sturgeon can not avoid the fact that our UK single market be more than four time as important to Scotland as the European Union . ` ` use Brexit to crank up support for separation be the wrong way to go . ' ' Lib Dem leader Willie Rennie say : ` ` if the SNP be commit to get the good for Scotland they should stop pursue independence and the chaos of another referendum . ' '
royal Fail R ; Fury as mail chief rule out Brexit stamp the Royal Mail have be blast for rule out commemorative Brexit stamp - after announce a game of Thrones set . boss confirm that it have no intention of issue a special collection to mark Britain ' s exit from m the European Union on March @card@ next year . but angry politician hit out at the move after the Royal Mail reveal @card@ new stamp feature image from the smash-hit US TV show . Ukip MEP Ray Finch say : ` ` it ' s a disgrace the Royal Mail be advertise for a commercial product like Game of Thrones but ignore something of real importance like Brexit . ' ' Tory Brexiteer Nigel Evans say : ` ` it ' s inconsistent , irritate and annoy . ` ` they have time to change their mind . I hope they will . ' ' it come as Westminster Environment Secretary Michael Gove back a campaign for a Brexit stamp . supporter want mail boss to think again after they snub the idea - even though they issue one when we vote to join the EEC in @card@ . we have today produce a mock-up Brexit stamp to show how it might look . Mr Gove say : ` ` Royal Mail mark Britain ' s entry into the EU and it ' S only right they mark the choice to leave . ' ' a spokesman for Royal Mail say : ` ` we do n't intend to issue a stamp to mark the EU exit . ' '
the Sun ON Sunday SAYS @card@ @card@ @card@ May have to show bleater the Brexit in the three month since she become PM , Theresa May have already transform politics . she ' S set out a distinct vision . but all those idea pale before the magnitude of the task of secure Brexit . it ' S a sobering thought that Mrs May have a majority of just @card@ . even John Major have a big majority and he have to fight nonstop to get his plan through the House of Commons . the Remoaners be go to do everything they can to frustrate Mrs May ' s determination that Brexit really will mean Brexit . with her waferthin majority , they can do a lot . the alliance of loser Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg with Remain figure like Nick Herbert and Keir Starmer be a sign of what be to come . they plan to force a vote on Article @card@ - and with the Scottish nationalist say they will fight against Mrs May ' s Brexit plan , they will almost certainly win . she ca n't even rely on her own MP . it ' S easy to forget that a majority of Tory MP campaign for Remain . Mrs May need a mandate and may end up be force into call an early general election . not because the referendum be n't clear enough but because practical politics mean that she ' ll need a proper majority in the Commons . and the Remoaners who refuse to accept the verdict of the referendum need to be put back in their box .
up & AMAY ; ESCAPE From EU ' S Red Tape ; PM : firm must aim high and go global after Brexit British business should ` ` aim high ' ' when free from EU red tape after Brexit , Theresa May say yesterday . the PM say our high-tech firm and ` ` nimble ' ' economy could help forge a new path outside the bloc . yesterday morning she summon her ten-strong Brexit core committee to take sounding ahead of a full meeting of her divided Cabinet today . minister be split over how close Britain should stay to Brussels rule after Brexit to keep trade flow . to the delight of Cabinet ` ` divergers ' ' such as Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and Environment Secretary Michael Gove Mrs May say the UK ' s economic future be on a ` ` global not European stage ' ' . but as the PM begin hammer out Britain ' s future relationship with the EU , ` ` aligners ' ' such as Chancellor Philip Hammond and Home Secretary Amber Rudd warn of job loss if the UK stray too far from Brussels . however , Brussels quickly move to dash hope of a ` ` gradual divergence ' ' from EU red tape - favour by some Cabinet minister . EU Brexit boss Michel Barnier ' s righthand man brand plan to find a middle way between soft and hard Brexit an unwelcome ` ` buffet ' ' . Stefaan De Rynck insist that for the survival of the EU there could be ` ` no cherry-pick or what one could call a buffet-style transition where one pick the bit one like ' ' . but he hint Britain could get a tailor-made Brexit deal . reject increase call for a second referendum , Mrs May say ask the country again would be a ` ` betrayal ' ' . millionaire Labour peer Lord Malloch-Brown have vow to stop Brexit . the former minister have be hire by a pro-EU campaign fight to dilute Britain ' S exit . he be now chair of Best for Britain , found by Gina Miller , who win a court battle to secure a Commons vote for our EU divorce .
Britain WARNED To SORT Border FIRST TALKS on Brexit will not go ahead unless Ireland be happy with the UK ' s proposal for a frictionless border , Europe ' s top politician have vow . European Council President Donald Tusk yesterday insist he would ` ` consult the Taoiseach ' ' before suggest any move on to Brexit trade negotiation at a summit of national leader in two week ' time . emerge from talk in Dublin with Leo Varadkar , he say : ` ` let me say very clearly : if the UK offer be unacceptable for Ireland , it will also be unacceptable for the EU . I realise that for some British politician this may be hard to understand . ` ` this be why the key to the UK ' s future lie , in some way , in Dublin , at least as long as Brexit negotiation continue . ' ' Tusk also reveal he have give British Prime Minister Theresa May until Monday to make a ` ` final offer ' ' on the Irish border . he say : ` ` the Irish request be the EU ' S request . ` ` the EU be fully behind you that there should be no hard border on the island of Ireland after Brexit . the UK start Brexit , and it be their responsibility to propose a credible commitment to do what be necessary to avoid a hard border . ' ' the former Polish prime minister later tweet : ` ` my message from Dublin : Ni neart go cur le cheile . there be no strength without unity . ' ' meanwhile , the Taoiseach warn Brexit would stall without ` ` acceptable commitment on the border ' ' . he add : ` ` that position be share across the political spectrum in Ireland . ' '
up & AMAY ; ESCAPE From EU ' S Red Tape PM : firm must aim high and go global after Brexit high British business should ` ` aim high ' ' when free from EU red tape after Brexit , Theresa May say yesterday . the PM say our high-tech firm and ` ` nimble ' ' economy could help forge a new path outside the bloc . yesterday morning she summon her ten-strong Brexit core committee to take sounding ahead of a full meeting of her divided Cabinet today . minister be split over how close Britain should stay to Brussels rule after Brexit to keep trade flow . to the delight of Cabinet ` ` divergers ' ' such as Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and Environment Secretary Michael Gove Mrs May say the UK ' s economic future be on a ` ` global not European stage ' ' . but as the PM begin hammer out Britain ' s future relationship with the EU , ` ` aligners ' ' such as Chancellor Philip Hammond and Home Secretary Amber Rudd warn of job loss if the UK stray too far from Brussels . however , Brussels quickly move to dash hope of a ` ` gradual divergence ' ' from EU red tape - favour by some Cabinet minister . EU Brexit boss Michel Barnier ' s righthand man brand plan to find a middle way between soft and hard Brexit an unwelcome ` ` buffet ' ' . Stefaan De Rynck insist that for the survival of the EU there could be ` ` no cherry-pick or what one could call a buffet-style transition where one pick the bit one like ' ' . but he hint Britain could get a tailor-made Brexit deal . reject increase call for a second referendum , Mrs May say ask the country again would be a ` ` betrayal ' ' . millionaire Labour peer Lord Malloch-Brown have vow to stop Brexit . the former minister have be hire by a pro-EU campaign fight to dilute Britain ' S exit . he be now chair of Best for Britain , found by Gina Miller , who win a court battle to secure a Commons vote for our EU divorce .
EU LOT WO N'T REMAIN MP ; UKIP Target Threat the five Labour MP who vote to thwart Brexit despite serve leave area have be tell : ` ` Start look for another job . ' ' New Ukip chief Paul Nuttall say his party would devote all its energy to axe those who have ` ` go against the will of the people ' ' . his warning come amid prediction Labour could have come fourth in yesterday ' s by-election in Sleaford , Lincs , a Brexit heartland . the five - Barry Sheerman , Angela Smith , Graham Allen , Chris Evans and Paul Farrelly - be among the @card@ who refuse to back Theresa May ' s timetable for Brexit in the Commons on Wednesday . but @card@ vote to support the PM ' s bid to trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . Mr Nuttall say : ` ` from the first day of my leadership I ' ve say woe betide any MP that go against the will of the people and try to block a clean Brexit . ` ` as Ukip become the party of the patriotic working-class , any Labour MP that vote against the bill on Wednesday should start look for another job . ' ' Mr Sheerman hit back , declare : ` ` Bring it on . ' ' the MP for Huddersfield , which vote leave by @card@ per cent , say : ` ` a significant percentage of voter in my constituency do n't vote . ' ' Mrs May ' S spokesman say it be clear Parliament back ` ` get on ' ' with Brexit so the focus must now be negotiate the good deal . but Remain voter , Labour ' S Ben Bradshaw , say the @card@ could still mount a campaign to block Article @card@ . Tory MP and pro-EU former Attorney General Dominic Grieve say the referendum and Wednesday ' S vote be no more than ` ` grand opinion poll ' ' . but Brexit-backing Tory Steve Baker dub Wednesday ` ` VB Day ' ' , Victory on Brexit Day .
' MADAM BREXIT ' A Polish interpreter accidentally call Mrs may ` ` Madam Brexit ' ' during yesterday ' s joint press conference , with the new nickname raise a smile ( main picture ) . translate a speech by Poland ' S PM Mateusz Morawiecki , the interpreter stumble on Mrs May ' S name , say : ` ` as Madam Brexit say , Brexit be Brexit . ' '
Backmy Brexit plan ..and I ' ll back you ; Exclusive : PM ' S RALLYING CRY To EVERY Sun Reader PM : back Me and I ' LL Back you Theresa May today vow to use Brexit to rip up the privilege of the elite and make Britain work for ordinary people again . write for the Sun , the Prime Minister issue an emotive plea directly to our reader to support her new Brexit plan and help her unite the nation again . she also reveal she will unveil her flagship new industrial strategy next week to start her mission to make the country ` ` more equal ' ' . the blueprint for the workplace of the future will tear down ` ` barrier of privilege ' ' , Mrs May insist . and in another pitch that may trouble more traditional Tory , the PM also pledge to not just protect worker ' right but ` ` build on them ' ' . also on a day dominate by reaction to Tuesday ' s unveiling of her 12-point Brexit plan : Boris Johnson liken France ' s president to a World War Two prisoner of war camp commandant . Michael Gove brand the Foreign Secretary ' S attacker ` ` deliberately obtuse snowflake ' ' . Malta ' S PM say our EU exit deal would have to be ` ` inferior to membership ' ' , but other Brussels chief liken Mrs May ' s speech to Winston Churchill ' S vision . the Brexit Secretary say high immigration from Europe may continue for two year after we leave . the Supreme Court reveal it will deliver its verdict on whether MP must sign off Article @card@ departure talk next Tuesday . a taxpayer-funded human right chief spark fury by warn of a hate crime surge when Mrs May trigger EU divorce talk . Senior aide insist Mrs May ' s industrial strategy will be the first part of her plan to leave a big legacy than deliver on Brexit . today she promise Sun reader she will forge ` ` a Britain - and a Brexit - that work for ordinary working people ' ' . she write : ` ` Our Modern Industrial Strategy will lay the foundation to build a more prosperous and more equal Britain . ` ` we will create a fair society by break down the barrier of privilege and make Britain a great meritocracy where success be define by work and talent . ` ` so , as Sun reader , I urge you to support this plan and to help us bring our country back together . ' '
Blair : I ' m tempt to return to politics Tony Blair have hint he could run for Parliament to stop Theresa May hijack the country over Brexit . and the former Labour PM say voter should consider back Tories or Lib Dems if it mean elect MP ` ` open to question ' ' the Brexit strategy . he tell the BBC : ` ` I look at the British political scene at the moment and I almost feel motivate to go right back into it . ` ` it look like a landslide - I have never see poll like it . ` ` be it possible to return as many people as possible who be go to keep an open mind on Brexit negotiation ? ' ' the pro-EU Open Britain campaign group have vow to publish a list of candidate who would stop a hard Brexit . Blair the Best for Britain campaign group lead by pro-EU millionairess Gina Miller be set to launch on Wednesday . Jeremy Corbyn ' s former press officer Matt Zarb-Cousin immediately call for Mr Blair to be kick out of Labour . a Lib Dem spokesman say : ` ` Tony Blair ' S intervention show something - this election be your chance to change Britain ' S future . if you want to avoid a hard Brexit you need to support the Liberal Democrats . ' '
grow for it ; Sun City Britain BASKS in POST-BREXIT Consumer Boom Britain be bask in a post-Brexit consumer boom , late figure show . the economy grow by @card@ per cent in the three month to September , accord to revise figure from the Office for NATIONAL Statistics . their statistician have previously put growth at @card@ per cent . it be a blow for Brexit doommongers , who have warn that the economy would fall off a cliff if Brits vote to leave the EU . on statistician Darren Morgan say : ` ` Robust consumer demand continue to help the UK economy grow steadily in the third quarter of @card@ . ' ' Ruth Gregory , an economist at CAPITAL Economics , say the figure suggest that the Brexit vote have have little impact on the economy . she say she expect growth in the final quarter to be positive . meanwhile , a survey of spend trend for @card@ find that cinema hit like the Girl on the Train , Inferno and Trolls haul Britain out of a pre-Brexit spending hole . the BARCLAYCARD survey report that overall spending be up @card@ per cent over the past year . the ` ` experience economy ' ' - spend in restaurant , cinema and pub - lead the way , up @card@ per cent . Barclaycard ' s managing director Paul Lockstone say the growth in spending be healthy give that Brexit and other issue have ` ` cause uncertainty for many ' ' . but , he warn , it be also clear that some of the growth be ` ` drive not only by increase spending on the ' experience economy ' , but also by rise price in key sector ' ' . @card@ % up - UK economic growth in @card@ month @card@ % up - overall spending in the UK over the past year @card@ % up - consumer spending in restaurant , cinema & pub
good fit for Nic ' s EU report ? it ' S Labour ; Bid To SECURE Scotland ' S Future AS BREXIT Row GROWS Commentary the question that remain about the Scottish Government ' s Brexit paper be ` ` what ' s it for ? ' ' who be this document aim at ? who be it supposed to inform or impress or persuade ? it ' S clearly not intend to reach the UK Government . they either know this stuff already or they simply do n't care . they use to care . when Theresa May be Home Secretary she campaign against leave the EU because it would destroy job , damage business and weaken national security . now she be do all she can to make it happen . David Davis , her Brexit Secretary , never care . he be always a Brexiteer . he always say it would be a piece of cake and a year and a half of confront the truth have n't do a thing to change his mind . anyway , we ' ve already see how little Mr Davis care for fact and figure . at one time he be tell MP that his department have prepare dozen of report , cover gyn the impact of Brexit on every area of British industry ` ` in excruciating detail ' ' . then they be all go . all he have to show the Commons be a few page of stuff lift off the Internet . it ' S very unlikely that Scottish Government report , spell out how Brexit be go to cut £2,300 from the pocket of every man , woman and child , will make the UK Government change course . they know all that already . so be it aim at a Scots audience ? remember , Nicola Sturgeon be all about independence and , from the very moment Brexit be announce , she have use it as a lever to prise open a way into IndyRef2 . be she try to persuade Scots voter that Brexit will be so awful the only alternative be independence ? she ' S probably waste her time on that plan . Scotland vote almost @card@ in favour of Remain . the Remainers have n't change their mind . maybe the First Minister be try to reach out to soft Brexiteers who think a leave vote would be one in h f l the eye for Brussels Eurocrats with their straight banana legislation and never believe it would also blow up the economy . but leave voter do n't listen to all the advice about how disastrous Brexit would be before . they do n't believe it then , they probably wo n't believe it now and , anyway , most of them would see it as h d a price worth pay to end immigration . Ms Sturgeon say she want to ` ` change the narrative ' ' on immigration . yesterday ' S document spell out that , far from cost the economy , foreign worker bring in £10,400 a year each . Holyrood ' S Brexit Minister Mike Russell say Scotland ` ` ca n't do without ' ' immigrant which be a bleak admission but it wo n't persuade the Brexiteers who fear foreigner more than economic collapse . anyway , Ms Sturgeon ' S fact cut both way . yesterday ' S document show EU country be by far our big international trading partner , take @card@ per cent of all Scots good . that be a seriously big deal and anything that damage that relationship be clearly bad news fb d h for job and the economy . the document also say that @card@ per cent - very nearly two third of all Scots export - go to the rest of the UK . it ' S not long ago that the First Minister and her mate be tell us that leave the UK would be just fine . she quote Treasury figure , but when the Treasury say independence would be a disaster , she ignore them . no , this document be a letter to Jeremy Corbyn - or those close to him . it ' s an attempt to persuade Labour that they have a duty to act like an opposition and oppose the ` ` hard-Brexit wing of the Tory party . ' ' Labour still have n't come up with a Brexit policy . and judge by their response yesterday , they do n't really want one .
major v May ; REMOANER ON THE Attack Ex-PM in blast at ' over-optimistic ' Brexit Sir John Major last night accuse PM Theresa May of an ` ` unreal and over-optimistic ' ' post-EU vision . the former Tory PM say Mrs May be fail to prepare Britain for the big compromise she will have to make during Brexit negotiation . in a wither attack , Sir John , @card@ , warn negotiation will be very hard , over-run and potentially fail . and he say the poor who most want change , and whose hope be ` ` sky high ' ' , will be hit hardest if ` ` event go badly ' ' . he say : ` ` negotiation be all about give and take . ` ` if anyone genuinely believe that Europe will concede all we wish for - and exact no price for do so - then they be extraordinarily naive . ' ' Sir John warn that a full Brexit deal could take up to five year to negotiate . and he say the chance of there be no agreement within Article @card@ ' s two-year deadline be ` ` very high ' ' . he say fail to deliver on expectation will only ` ` sow further distrust between politics and the public ' ' and it would be ` ` well to underplay than overplay ' ' them . Sir John be give a speech to Chatham House think tank last night , bill as ` ` Britain and Europe - a reality check ' ' . he spend his seven year in No10 battle Eurosceptic ` ` bastard ' ' and have say he think Brexit will be ` ` an historic mistake ' ' . but he have concede that the government ` ` can not ignore the nation ' S decision ' ' and must now deliver on it . Sir John also say a hard Brexit without any trade deal would be ` ` high risk ' ' and threaten the social security system and the NHS . and he say Britain post-Brexit will also be more dependent on ` ` a less predictable , less reliable ' ' US under Donald Trump . No10 do not respond directly to the criticism . a spokesman say : ` ` we have a clear plan to get the good deal for the UK and be go to get on with the job of deliver it . ' ' Tory MP and Brexit campaigner Jacob Rees-Mogg call the speech ` ` bitter ' ' and ` ` incredibly pessimistic ' ' .
TOETAL RECALL ; Tories in Birmingham Steely May PUTS Her Foot Down ON EU PM vow to win back UK ' S law full control over immigration we ' ll snare Brexit trade deal Theresa May yesterday give the EU a steel toecapped kick - as she promise to regain full control over immigration and UK law . she launch her first Tory conference as leader with a tub-thumping speech in which she set out her two Brexit red line - then dare EU leader to throw-up self-defeat trade barrier against us . Brussels have repeatedly warn the UK can not have continued access to the EU single market without accept its free movement principle too . but the PM , who fittingly have stroll on to the Birmingham stage in a pair of steel-capped shoe , leave no doubt that she would not be toe the Brussels line . she say : ` ` let me be clear . we be not leave the European union only to give up control of immigration again . ` ` and we be not leave only to return to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . ` ` the process we be about to begin be not about negotiate all of our sovereignty away again . ' ' she delight her audience by say it be high time to show some faith in Britain . Mrs May say : ` ` let ' s ignore the pessimist , let ' s have the confidence in ourselves to go out into the world , secure trade deal , win contract , generate wealth and create job . Let ' s show the country we mean business . ' ' she also warn she may have to make some compromise on the road to Brexit , as every negotiation require ` ` some give and take ' ' . the PM declare she will begin formal Brexit negotiation by the end of March next year - tee up a two year-long game of brinkmanship with the EU . trigger the maximum twoyear Article @card@ process by March @card@ will mean Britain be independent from the EU by March @card@ @card@ . Mrs May signal she would fiercely oppose a legal bid to force a parliamentary vote on trigger Article @card@ . she say : ` ` they ' re not try to get Brexit right , they ' re try to kill it by delay it . ` ` they ' re insult the intelligence of the British people and that ' S why next week the Attorney General himself , Jeremy Wright , will act for the government and resist them in the court . ' ' the PM ' S critic claim her formula mean she be aim for a hard Brexit and total clean break from the EU . but Mrs May insist the idea of a ` ` trade-off ' ' between control immigration and trading openly with the rest of Europe ` ` be the wrong way of look at thing ' ' . instead of sign up Britain to an existing model , Mrs May say our future relationship would be ` ` an agreement between an independent , sovereign United Kingdom and the European Union ' ' . as well as trade , it will also include law enforcement and counter-terrorism cooperation . in a move that could infuriate other EU leader , the PM put Britain ' s world-beating counterterrorism intelligence expertise on the table for the first time . GCHQ , MI5 and MI6 ' s spy network will now be a bargaining chip for Britain in the negotiation - with country such as France and Belgium rely heavily on them to warn of impending terror attack . Mrs May ' S vision be her answer to pressure from MP and business to start define how our EU walkaway will work , have so far say little more than ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . she win a standing ovation from the conference hall and strong praise from pro- Brexit Tory MP . the fierce opposition she face come from battle a runny nose that leave her sound full of cold . at one point she be force to break out the tissue in the middle of her live TV performance . speak after Mrs May , Brexit Secretary David Davis compare the Brexit challenge to the daunting task face by new Tory PM Margaret Thatcher in @card@ . recall her battle to drag Britain back to economic health in the 1980s , Mr Davis say : ` ` they say ' it ca n't be do ' . ` ` we prove them wrong then and we ' ll prove them wrong again . ' ' but Tory and Labour MP campaigning for keep close link to the EU be unconvinced . Exbusiness minister Anna Soubry say trigger Brexit as early as March ` ` trouble me hugely ' ' . she add : ` ` the idea that we hold the card and we be go to get anything like as good as we have now be rubbish . we do n't hold the card , the EU do . ' ' EU chief praise Mrs May for name the date . but EU Council chief Donald Tusk warn Brussels be equally determine to dig in to get what it want over Brexit . he tweet in response to the Birmingham speech : ` ` PM May ' S declaration bring welcome clarity on start of Brexit talk . once Art @card@ ' S trigger , EU27 will engage to safeguard its interest . ' '
Bend Macron ' s ear at the Brexit table Emmanuel MACRON will arrive in Britain late next week for an Anglo-French summit . the French President will bring with him half a dozen of his top team . they will sit down with Theresa May and several senior Cabinet minister at Sandhurst , the officer training college that both Princes William and Harry attend . the focus , appropriately , will be on defence . the agenda span everything from terrorism to Macron ' s campaign against ` ` fake news ' ' . it should be the perfect setting for Mrs May to bend Macron ' s ear about Brexit . the whole event be a reminder of the importance of the Anglo-French security relationship which will matter long after Brexit be do . nine key issue but Mrs May ' s ability to lobby Macron will be hurt by the fact that the UK Government still have n't agree on precisely what kind of Brexit deal it want . Chancellor Philip Hammond might be justify in complain that the EU have n't be clear either . but the onus be on Britain to explain how it want the future relationship to work . before Christmas , the Brexit inner Cabinet and the Cabinet discuss the final deal they want to reach with the EU for the first time . the meeting , though , be more a chance for everyone to have their say than an opportunity to take decision . at the first Cabinet meeting of this year , Brexit be not on the agenda . it be not on next week ' S either . so there ' ll be no collectively agree policy in the next few week . however , I understand that the Brexit inner Cabinet will have a two-hour meeting next week to begin the process of thrash out the UK position . member of the committee expect there will be three of these meeting before the PM give her big speech set out what the UK want , which be now expect next month . one of those involve in prepare for these meeting caution that we should not expect much to be sort at next week ' s session of the inner Cabinet . ` ` some issue be so large they ca n't be resolve at a single meeting , ' ' I ' m tell . I understand the aim be to get a ` ` general sense of the collective approach ' ' on nine key issue , rather than to agree every detail . those in the Cabinet who favour a more gradual Brexit think thing be come their way . they believe that ` ` the practical reality of Ireland , what the EU will offer and the desire to avoid crash out without a deal ' ' will push thing their way . but those who favour the UK do its own thing more quickly believe the balance have shift in their favour with the conversion of the Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson to their cause . but Mrs May need to make up her mind quickly . for until she do , the UK ca n't push for its own preferred solution . the lack of a detailed government prospectus for Brexit be also create a vacuum that politician hunt for a purpose , such as Nigel Farage and Tony Blair , be fill with their talk of a second referendum . Mrs May have never take decision quickly . but this vacuum be damage the government at home and abroad . the sooner she say what Britain want , the well . lJames Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator
with back of new Prez , Brexit success be a Don deal ` ` Trump change almost everything , ' ' declare one Cabinet minister who support Remain but now think Brexit will be a success . their argument be that the arrival of the most unexpected US President in history have shake thing up ... and to Britain ' S advantage . those who know the new President well tell me that Trump be emotionally invest in Brexit . he feel that it and his own victory be part of the same movement . despite his alarmingly protectionist instinct , which be set out again in his speech yesterday , Trump do want a trade pact with the UK . this , and the trade offer from other country , be a reminder that Britain wo n't be isolate and alone after Brexit . Trump be tell people he want to get personally involve in negotiate the US/UK deal . I understand his team have do more work on it than it have for any other potential agreement . but Trump ' S election have also make the UK more important to Europe . Trump ' S worryingly ambivalent attitude to Nato and his desire for good relation with Vladimir Putin ' s Russia at almost any price , mean that the UK be more important to the continent ' s security than it have be for 60-odd year . Trump have also reverse US policy to the EU . for @card@ year , Washington have support European integration . but Trump do n't . he and his team prefer strong nation state to big , supranational organisation . the new President act like he want the EU to fall apart . in a provocative act , he be plan to make a Brexit-backer the US ' s ambassador to the EU and be predict that other country will follow this one out the door . this hostility have rattle EU leader . when Theresa May speak to Jean-Claude Juncker and Donald Tusk , the president of the EU Commission and Council , after her Brexit speech on Tuesday , they both bring up Trump ' s comment about other country leave the EU . they both stress how pleased they be that Mrs May have make clear that she want the EU to succeed . the respectful EU reaction to her speech - Tusk compare it to Churchill ' s vision of Britain and Europe - open up the possibility of a sensible Brexit deal . this would see Britain outside the EU but bolster it on security as it try to deal with the Islamist terrorist threat and Russian aggression . the relationship would be underpin by continued , close trading link between the UK and the EU . a good Brexit deal be in both side ' interest . as even the guy who like to play the hardman in EU negotiation , the German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schauble , admit , a breakdown in the Brexit talk , ` ` would be a disaster for all of us ' ' . with Britain not try to stay in the EU internal market , the two side - with sufficient political will - should be able to negotiate a free trade deal . add in the EU ' s desire for continued access to the City ' s financial market , as reveal in a leak of a meeting between Brussels ' chief negotiator Michel Barnier and senior MEPs , and you can see the outline of an agreement . when Trump start run for President , he think he have only a ten per cent chance of win the Republican nomination . he privately quip that his tilt at the presidency would , at least , increase his speak fee . but now he be the man in the Oval Office . who know how this truth-is-stranger-thanfiction tale will end , and the Trump presidency could go disastrously wrong , as his angry inauguration address remind us . but if the UK can secure free trade deal with the EU and the US , this country will be in a great position to head out into the world and secure a more prosperous future for itself . James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator . great position
hard TALK ; Sturgeon ' S EU BLAST ; 6UK will not get soft Brexit7 - FIRST Minister Yesterday Britain be head for a ` ` hard exit ' ' from Europe , Nicola Sturgeon warn yesterday . the First Minister claim the country face be shut out of the single market . hit out at the leave campaign , she say she feel ` ` frustration at the political irresponsibility that bring us to this point ' ' . and she stress that the ` ` uncertainty , unpredictability and upheaval ' ' of Brexit could make independence the good option for Scotland . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` the UK be head towards a hard , rather than a soft Brexit - a future outside the single market with restriction on free movement . ` ` ' Brexit mean Brexit ' be just a soundbite that mask any clear sense of direction . ' ' Hitting out at the ` ` reckless ' ' conduct of former PM David Cameron , she claim the referendum have be call ` ` to appease Ukip ' ' . and she accuse anti-EU campaigner of ` ` one of the most shameful abdication of responsibility in modern political history ' ' . speak to business leader in Edinburgh , the SNP leader set out her demand for a post-Brexit Scotland - democracy , prosperity , social protection , solidarity and influence . she warn that the UK government would not be able to match the amount of fund we currently get from Brussels . and she admit that there be challenge ahead in secure the good option for the nation . she add : ` ` we can create a solution that enable Scotland ' s voice to be hear within the UK , or we can consider independence . ` ` I do n't underestimate the challenge of find a solution . even if we agree at UK level , we face the task of persuade the EU to agree . ` ` I do n't pretend that independence would be straightforward , but the UK we vote to stay a part of be change . the outlook be uncertainty , upheaval , unpredictability . in those circumstance it may well be that the option that offer us the great control over our own destiny be that of independence . ' ' rival last night accuse the First Minister of ` ` posturing ' ' and claim she be look for a ` ` flimsy excuse ' ' to hold another indy poll . Labour ' s Europe spokesman Lewis Macdonald say : ` ` people in Scotland vote to remain in both the UK and the EU , and everything should be do to deliver on that mandate . all side must put posturing to one side for the sake of the country . ' ' Tory MSP Murdo Fraser add : ` ` there ' s only ever one test for the SNP , and that ' S separation . ` ` she be set these up to fail to provide another flimsy excuse for a referendum re-run . ' '
will and Kate To Be BREXIT Secret WEAPON William and Kate be be use as unofficial Brexit ambassador . the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge be be send to France , Germany and Poland to charm leader . they will visit Paris in two week to pay respect to victim of the @card@ terror attack . they will also attend a do at the UK ambassador ' S and watch a France vs Wales rugby match . then in July , just a few month into negotiation that will lead to Britain leave the EU , they will fly the flag in Berlin and Warsaw . all royal tour be request and organise by the Foreign Office . an aide say : ` ` after the Queen , the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge be see as the ultimate in soft diplomacy . ` ` they ' re very much see as unofficial Brexit ambassador . ' ' their tour will come at a crucial moment for Theresa May ' s Brexit negotiation . the PM will trigger the start of talk later this month . but official fear there could be clash with EU leader over initial demand by July . Germany be see as the young royal ' most important tour leg . Leader Angela Merkel be furious about the Brexit decision . but Germany love the Queen and roll out the red carpet to her @card@ month ago . a Foreign Office source say : ` ` it ' S really important to have a positive conversation about Britain that do n't start with Brexit . ' '
be EU NUTS ? ; Fresh BREXIT Cash Row Brussels boss call our £20bn offer ' peanut ' the European Parliament ' S boss have spark a fresh Brexit row by brand the PM ' s £20billion offer for a transition deal ` ` peanut ' ' . Theresa May offer to pay the jumbo sum of taxpayer ' cash into Brussels coffer for two year from @card@ . but ramp the rhetoric ahead of a crunch EU summit on Brexit tonight , MEPs ' president Antonio Tajani tell BBC Newsnight : ` ` we need our money back , as Mrs Thatcher say @card@ year ago . ` ` Twenty billion be peanut . the problem be @card@ , @card@ , this be the real situation . ' ' Mrs May be refuse to give in to Brussels demand to write a £50billion divorce bill cheque for Britain ' s future commitment on top of the £20billion transition offer . minister have accuse the EU of try to blackmail the nation . the European Parliament , once dub ` ` monkey with gun ' ' by a Spanish diplomat , have a veto on the final Brexit deal . Mr Tajani also attack Mrs May ' s Cabinet over Brexit split . he say : ` ` in the Conservative party there be different position . ` ` this be not good for good work in the next month . ' ' Senior EU official last night insist there would be no Speech trade and transition talk until Britain pay up . one Brussels source say : ` ` there be significant step London now need to take . ` ` we ' re not look for concession . we ' re look for acceptance of commitment and liability . otherwise we will not move one inch . ' ' meanwhile , in a speech at the Pink News Awards in London last night , Mrs May pledge to reform the Gender Recognition Act to make it easy for transgender people to transition . the Prime Minister also make a pledge on include lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender relationship in sex education class in school .
duty Free Glee ; ' Booze cruise ' must return after Brexit , say MP BRITS should get duty free back for trip to Europe after Brexit , say a group of Tory MP . forty have write to Chancellor Philip Hammond call for tweak in tax law so tax-free sale can return from Brexit Day on March @card@ , @card@ . duty free sale within the EU be axe by Brussels in @card@ . but the letter , organise by Dover MP Charlie Elphicke , say it make no sense for it not to apply after Brexit . the MP say it would benefit tourism , neglect coastal community , ferry port and regional airport and Britain ' s cruise ship industry . they have urge Mr Hammond to change the law now to ensure operator be ready on day one of Brexit . Graham Brady , chairman of the Tory @card@ committee , say : ` ` it ' s something the government must do as soon as possible . ' '
diplomatic DIS-SERVICE ; CLASH Over EU TALKS No10 blast ' Brexit chaos ' bureaucrat Theresa May have slap down the former head of the diplomatic service for say Brexit negotiation be in chaos . the Prime Minister ' s official spokesman say no @card@ ` ` strongly disagree ' ' with Sir Simon Fraser ' s damn view . Downing Street brush off his claim that Britain have be ` ` a bit absent ' ' from the negotiation in Brussels . it insist talk between Brexit Secretary David Davis ' S team and their EU counterpart show both side be make important ` ` progress ' ' . speak on Sunday night Sir Simon , the former top official at the Foreign Office , say difference in the Cabinet mean the government ` ` have n't put a lot forward ' ' . he say : ` ` the negotiation have only just begin . I do n't think they have begin particularly promisingly , frankly , on the British side . ` ` there be difference within the Cabinet about the sort of Brexit we be head for and until those difference be resolve I think it ' s very difficult for us to have a clear position . ' ' the row come as George Osborne ' s former chief of staff at the Treasury hit out at the ` ` uber gloom ' ' surround Brexit . Rupert Harrison question an editorial in Mr Osborne ' S Evening Standard which say the government have no idea what its future relationship with the EU should be . Mr Harrison tweet : ` ` my old boss part of consensus that be gloomy on Brexit process - once dust settle we will see outline of UK position be pretty clear . ' '
blow for EU ... and a chance for the PM ONALD B Donald Trump ' s ` ` Brexit ' ' presidential triumph be a stinging slap in the face for Hillary Clinton and the political elite who think they run America . but it be also a potentially lethal blow to the blinkered boss of the European Union - and a unique advantage for British PM Theresa May . in Berlin and Brussels there be cry of ` ` calamity ' ' and ` ` emergency ' ' as the shock result come in . ` ` the self-destruction of the West continue , ' ' scream one newspaper . but Europe ' S crisis be an opportunity for Britain - and Theresa May seize it yesterday as one of the first to congratulate Trump and stress our ` ` special relationship ' ' with America . Trump be a fan of Britain and its open market . he be the only senior American to reject Barack Obama ' s ill-judged warning we would go to ` ` the back of the queue ' ' on trade if we leave the EU . in stark contrast , the presidentelect support Brexit in the referendum and vow Britain will be ` ` treat fantastically ' ' if we quit . indeed it be Trump who put the word ` ` Brexit ' ' into the global dictionary as a definition of voter defiance . Britain an USA. . few in the US have hear the word until it be pop into his mouth by Nigel Farage who be constantly at his side . Trump promise ` ` Brexit time ten ' ' . his victory would be ` ` Brexit plus , plus , plus ' ' . now he have put wind in the sail of another insurgent , French populist Marine le Pen , who threaten a ` ` Frexit ' ' next spring . like Trump , she be an outsider , write off as a potential president . victory in Paris would trigger convulsion in Germany where Angela Merkel face an election backlash over mass immigration , and in Holland where Rightwingers be on the rampage . Le Pen want to follow Britain out of the EU . defeat for Merkel would remove the lynchpin of EU political power . the new White House incumbent have warn EU leader he will cut America ' s contribution to Nato force unless they cough up more cash for their own defence . however he respect Britain as one of the few country which meet defence spending target . this be where we can be a vital ally . Mrs May will be among the first Western leader invite to the Oval Office to meet the President after he take over in January . for all his bravado , Trump will be stun by his new responsibility as the 45th US President and leader of the free world . he be untested as a politician and statesman and will need all the experienced friend he can get . he would not be human if he do not pounce on a chance to strike up a valuable relationship with a try and trust ally , especially someone who speak English . Mrs May have the advantage as a new PM of start with a clean diplomatic sheet . Downing Street would have assume a Clinton victory , provide continuity in international affair . Trump seem by comparison to be volatile , impulsive and alarmingly inexperienced . but while predecessor David Cameron call Trump ` ` divisive , stupid and wrong ' ' over his plan to temporarily ban Muslim from enter America , Mrs May have never utter a word of criticism against the billionaire tycoon . unlike President Obama , who barely conceal his distaste for Britain ' s colonial record , Trump have invest million here with two controversial new golf course in Aberdeenshire . SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon , who sack him as a business ambassador for Scotland , have to eat her word yesterday and insist tie would remain ` ` deep and enduring ' ' . be asset to Mrs May know it be vital to cement good relation with America ' s new Commander-in-Chief . Trump have cause alarm in Europe with his eagerness to talk to Russian leader Vladimir Putin over Syria , the Middle East Ukraine . Trump fan V Syr and Uk it will be Mrs May ' s task to rebuild once-indestructible tie between the UK and US fracture by the Iraq War and sideline during the Obama presidency . Britain may no longer be a world power but the White House be fill with tribute to the UK , include a presidential desk carve from the oak timber of a British warship . until recently , a bust of Sir Winston Churchill be keep on their desk . President Obama consign it to an outside office . Tory PM Margaret Thatcher have a remarkable special relationship with successive US Presidents , especially Ronald Reagan , help persuade Russia to ` ` tear down ' ' the Berlin Wall . indeed , it be the Kremlin that dub her ` ` the Iron Lady ' ' . many Tory be already hail Mrs May as the new Iron Lady . and the election of the unpredictable Trump give her a golden opportunity to show her diplomatic skill . we be a huge asset to the US , whoever be President . our remarkable intelligence service and a place at the UN top table make Britain an important soft power on the world stage . who know , we might even persuade Trump to put Churchill ' S bust back in the Oval Office ? Britain be an asset to USA..Trump be a fan
Brexit strategy the Brexit shambles roll on and on . yesterday UK Prime Minister Theresa May come up against an unlikely rival - a billionaire former model . Gina Miller be part of a group that beat the UK Government in a landmark case over Brexit . May have plan to trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty follow the June result as early as March next year and recently declare Britain would be out of the EU by April @card@ . however follow a three-day hearing by three senior judge it be rule that May could not start the process of leave the EU without the consent of MP , mean it will now go to a parliamentary vote . expert say it could derail plan to leave the EU . but the implication for Ireland if Brexit go ahead remain as serious as ever . Taoiseach Enda Kenny have be do the round at Brexit fallout talk this week to hear from people affect by the crisis . some critic have dismiss the forum as ` ` talk shop ' ' - while Kenny maintain the talk have be useful and informative . he must now focus on stand up for Ireland ' S interest and come up with proper plan to protect the country . conference of interested group wo n't cut it - we need some meaningful proposition . with the prospect of a hard Border , we need to move beyond the consequence of Brexit and look at alternative . amid all the uncertainty , failure to plan for Brexit would Border on madness .
what kind of Brexit be this ? the programme offer by Theresa May in Florence yesterday admit that a negotiate Brexit can not possibly be achieve inside the punish two-year timetable of the Article @card@ process . and it plead for extra time - another two year or so - when we will have to pay to stay inside Europe , without actually be part of it . the Prime Minister offer to buy her way back in to a temporary ` ` transition ' ' so British business can continue their free access to EU market , but we will no longer have any say over the term and condition of that marketplace . she also speak warmly of join up to the EU ' s new border and security plan - the threatened EU army which be such a bogeyman of the Brexit referendum . at the same time she offer assurance about the future of EU citizen live in the UK . there be no real detail and certainly nothing that would satisfy negotiator on the other side . but she be clear that the EU citizen right would be decide by British court who would be allow to take European Court judgement into account . that ' S unlikely to satisfy the Commission , who want to see the European court as the final arbiter of dispute . the government remain uncertain in its own mind all these thing be matter of negotiation but this much be clear . Mrs May have change her tone out of all measure - again . from be a staunch anti-Brexit campaigner who say that leave the EU would wreck the British economy and weaken our security , she have transform into someone who now look forward to leave with ` ` enthusiasm ' ' and ` ` excitement ' ' . from staunchly stick to the notion that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' and ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' , she have move to believe that Brexit mean hang about by the exit for a couple of year while a deal - any deal - be conclude . in her speech , Mrs May say the UK have ` ` never feel totally at home be in the European Union ' ' . but have n't she forgotten the majority of Scot who - let ' s not forget - vote to remain in the EU ? try find some ` ` enthusiasm ' ' and ` ` excitement ' ' amongst those voter , Prime Minister . yesterday ' S speech have reveal , once again , that the government remain uncertain in its own mind about what Brexit actually mean . at the same time they have finally realise that everybody else be right and it ' s a lot more complicated than they think . but , in the end , it hardly matter . whatever bid Mrs May make , it be for the @card@ rival government of the EU to decide if they will accept it . the United Kingdom use to be an equal partner in Europe . now we be on our own .
bed & Brexit ; VISITORS Still Flock To Dublin Exclusive by Adam Higgins English party-goer be back throng top Dublin nightspot Copper Face Jack - follow a brief Brexit downturn . that ' s accord to club boss Darren Power , who admit publican here initially fear last June ' s UK vote to quit Europe would decimate our tourism industry . more than three million Brits visit Ireland every year , with Coppers , at the Jackson Court Hotel , a regular stop on their tour of the capital . general manager Darren reveal the number of UK visitor plummet follow the Brexit referendum nine month ago but business be on an upward curve again . he tell the Irish Sun : ` ` Our hotel be just @card@ room and we ' re full almost every night . we ' ve be full the past five or six week . we ' re have to turn people away . ` ` initially we think Brexit would hit us hard when it happen last year because we be get a lot of English people come over . ` ` we think there be an initial dip and that last for a few month but this year the volume of those booking have pick up again . ` ` we do n't know whether the people in England be nervous at the start and then just decide , ' to hell with that , we ' re go to enjoy ourselves anyway . ' ` ` we ' re not nervous about Brexit anymore . not at all . Irish people love entertainment and the tourist love come to Dublin because of that . ` ` we get a lot of stag and hen . they would n't usually stay at the hotel but we get call and emails look for early booking in the club . ` ` speak about the Brexit thing , the last couple of week the volume of these type of English booking have shoot up , so maybe the dip be just a bit of fear that they have get over now . ' ' the Harcourt Street megaclub can hold 1,600-plus punter during peak hour , with more than @card@ staff on hand to ensure all run smoothly . copper be own by ex-garda Cathal Jackson and last year turn pre-tax profit of over ( Euro ) 5million . Darren say the club ' S consistency and cheesy tune be the secret to its success . a number of employee have be with the company for more than a decade , include some of the DJs . general manager Darren add : ` ` there ' S three or four of us still here ( after ) more than @card@ year - and there ' s a lot of 15-year-plus staff too and a number of ten-yearplus staff . ` ` that ' S one thing about the place , it ' S so consistent with staff and that they ' re staying that long be such a good sign . that in itself be rare enough in this trade . ` ` I mean , we have two DJs here who be with us nearly @card@ year . they might get a bit of stick for play the 5ive Megamix and thing like that , but that ' s what people want to hear . it make memory . it ' s corny and it ' s cheesy , but it work . ' ' Coppers have recently revamp its large smoking area in a bid to pull in sport nut for daytime match and event . Darren also tell how the venue be regularly flood with sport hero . he say : ` ` we get a lot of celebs come up to the club unannounced . ` ` we do n't really get agent call in advance because we ' re not that type of place . ` ` we get a lot of sport star . we have the All Blacks in , the French rugby team , the Australian - and the Aussie rule team love come here when they play in Ireland . ` ` back in the ' 90s we use to get the big football team in as well . ` ` we have the United team in and the Liverpool lad as well . we get a lot of the English team come over for their summer break or their Christmas break . ` ` we do n't really get the Premier League lad anymore but we get some of the Championship team and a lot of the Scottish side . ` ` we have Aberdeen and Hibs here recently . ` ` the Irish boxer be also fond of us . we have the Olympian in after the Games as well . we even have a few of the jockey in last week after Cheltenham . ` ` with all the sport history in the place that ' S why we ' ve make the move to build up these new screen and thing to get people in for the sport event in the daytime to watch match . ` ` we ' ll have a few in for the Ireland-Wales game . a lot of bar and club benefit from the way those guy perform so we wish them all the good tonight and in the rest of the campaign . ` ` we ' ll have a bunch of pint ready for them the next time they ' re in . we ' ll put up pint for them for every goal they score . hopefully that ' ll get them go . ' '
the Sun SAYS Brexit express EACH setback and every delay strengthen the establishment force vie to stop Britain leave the EU . it ' S why we be please to hear Theresa may declare ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' on become PM . and why we ' re concern at report the government now think we wo n't be out before @card@ . next year ' s French and German election and problem at the new Brexit and Trade ministry have apparently make leave tricky . but with Brussel hanker after a Brexit plan and business desperate for certainty on our trading status , the brain in Whitehall should n't need three year to think up a decent strategy . of course , no one want a rush and flaw plan . but when every hesitation be seize upon by Remainers eager to halt the process , it ' s more important than ever that Mrs May get on with make Brexit a reality . we hope report of a delay be nothing more than anxious whisper .
labour BREX Into Pieces ; CHAOS AT Conference ; Corbyn ' s union pal axe EU exit debate Jeremy Corbyn throw Labour into new chaos over Brexit last night . the leader say stay out of the EU single market after the divorce would let him nationalise British industry . full membership of the EU trade bloc would limit state intervention and compel Labour to keep the railway private , he tell the BBC . he say : ` ` we need to look very carefully at the term of any trade relationship . ` ` at the moment we ' re part of the single market - that have within it restriction in state aid and state spending . ' ' MP last night label the party a laughing stock as Mr Corbyn ' s leftie union ally gang up to prevent a full Brexit debate at the party conference in Brighton today . it fail to make a list of eight topic select by a committee to be discuss . Pro-EU member have hope to force a vote commit Labour to push for continued single market membership . MP Heidi Alexander tweet : ` ` I be gobsmacked . how can Labour not have a full and proper debate on Brexit policy ? we will be a laughing stock . ' ' Former Culture Secretary Ben Bradshaw say : ` ` Keeping Brexit , big issue of our time , off our Labour @card@ agenda be silly and undermine the claim that we be listen to our member . ' ' insider say the row expose the huge gulf that remain between Mr Corbyn ' S team and the bulk of Labour MP . Senior party figure believe the leader even vote for Brexit last year , which he deny . hour earlier Shadow Brexit Secretary Sir Keir Starmer - boast of Labour unity over the EU and mock Tory division - say : ` ` Labour be now the grown-up in the room . ` ` we stand ready to take charge of negotiation . ' ' at a rally last night Mr Corbyn barely mention Brexit . he speak instead about tackle corporate crook , the environment , the refugee crisis and the war in Yemen . the Sun say - Page ten
Bertie ' s blast at a Brexit border A BREXIT would be ` ` negative in every way ' ' with land border return to the North , say Bertie Ahern . the former Taoiseach say yesterday he be concern about the impact of the upcoming referendum in Britain , which give UK citizen the chance to leave the European Union . Ahern , who attend Fianna Fail ' S @card@ commemoration at Arbour Hill , Dublin , say : ` ` we ' d be the only place that have a land border with Britain - of course other would exploit and expose it . they ' d have to check people . ` ` from a trade point of view it would be a custom border - it ' s regressive , negative . ' ' his view be refute by Theresa Villiers , the Northern Ireland Secretary , who be campaign in favour of a Brexit . she say : ` ` I believe the land border with Ireland can remain as freeflowing after a Brexit vote as it be today . ` ` there be no reason why we have to change the border arrangement in the event of a Brexit because they have be broadly consistent in the @card@ year since the creation of Ireland as a separate state . ' ' the vote in Britain will take place on June @card@ . member of the Cabinet be to head to Britain to campaign for our neighbour to stay in the European Union , it have emerge . act Foreign Affairs Minister Charlie Flanagan will target Irish community in the north of England , include Liverpool and Manchester , to convince them to vote Yes to stay in the bloc . other minister will also join him as part of the charm offensive . the move come after a report from Teagasc estimate a Brexit would lead to a drop of up to ( Euro ) 800million in agrifood export . Minister Flanagan say : ` ` a vote by the people of the UK to leave the EU will undoubtedly destabilise a number of factor - include many in relation to Northern Ireland . ' '
Trump row a taste of thing to come ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think S2
Tory childish on Brexit move it ' S fantastic news that , just like they have begin to notice the Irish border , the UK Government have finally recognise devolution . Scots Secretary David Mundell tell the Commons yesterday that a key section of the Brexit Bill will be amend , return Euro power to Holyrood and end the threat of a Brexit power grab by Westminster . it be baffle that we have get this far into the Brexit process without such an undertaking , despite clear and repeated warning that @card@ separate Holyrood power be due to be swallow up by Westminster . whether or not Mr Mundell speak up in Cabinet , minister and civil servant have plough on as if the devolution referendum , the Scotland Act , the Calman Commission , another Scotland Act , the Smith Commission and yet another Scotland Act have simply never happen . so Mr Mundell deserve credit for at last acknowledge that Holyrood be due recognition for its role in Scottish public life . but his explanation for his change of heart be either embarrassing or galling . he say the change be come ` ` not at the behest of the incoherent Labour opposition or the nationalist approach put forward by the SNP . it ' s go to be amend because Scottish conservative have come forward with practical amendment to the Bill ' ' . last month Chancellor Philip Hammond give his Scottish Tory colleague all the credit for abolish VAT on Police Scotland . this week they be get the credit for force the UK Government to admit that devolution happen almost two decade ago . the message be clear : the Scottish Government do n't count and Scottish MP do n't count - not unless they be Tory . it ' S an embarrassing and childish attitude and nobody hold those view can pretend to put the interest of the country first . Mr Mundell keep tell us that Scotland have two government . they be both worthy of respect .
CORB YOUR ENTHEUSIASM ; Labour BREXIT MUDDLE ; Jez : I ' m ' open ' to single market Jeremy Corbyn trip up over Brexit again yesterday as he be wrongfoot by a rebellion by some of his own MP . the Labour leader suggest Britain might remain a member of the single market after Brexit in @card@ . his remark come despite have previously say it would mean remain in the EU . Mr Corbyn , who also yesterday rule out ever go on Strictly because he be a terrible dancer , say all trade option ` ` be open for discussion ' ' . it leave his aide scramble to explain that he favour retain access to the single market in the same way as Norway . it also highlight the confusion in Labour over Brexit , just as more than a dozen MP be to defy Mr Corbyn in the Commons . the leader want them to vote against the EU Withdrawal Bill , which aim to transfer hundred of European law into British law . he claim it be a Tory power grab but rebel MP say it be the ` ` only option ' ' to implement Brexit . former Europe Minister Caroline Flint accuse the leadership of try to ` ` thwart the result of the EU Referendum and prevent or delay the UK leave the EU ' ' . while Tories accuse Mr Corbyn of change his mind , Mr Corbyn , @card@ , be steadfast in his opposition to ` ` anything involve with individual dance ' ' . instead , he would stick to work on his allotment , he say .
trick tactic the sign that Nicola Sturgeon be press ahead with plan to rebrand IndyRef2 as a verdict on Brexit negotiation could hardly be clear . Ian Blackford , who now lead the group of @card@ SNP MP at Westminster , make it clear yesterday that ` ` if ' ' a new vote go ahead , it will be a chance for Scots voter to have their say on Brexit . at First Minister ' S question , Ms Sturgeon choose not to answer on her own policy and instead concentrated on what a ` ` shower of charlatan ' ' the conservative be . with just four day to go before the Brexit talk begin , Britain barely have a government and certainly not one that carry much in the way of authority or public support . she make the point too that Ruth Davidson have turn like a windmill on the issue of Brexit - first against it , then for it but only if we could stay in the Single Market , then for a hard Brexit , now for an Open Brexit the challenge be for her to come down to a fix plan even if it mean disagree with Theresa May . deflect the First Minister ' S tactic be clear . she accuse the Tory of be a ` ` one trick pony ' ' party who snatch away a dozen SNP seat without any policy beyond stop IndyRef2 . her vicious assault on the already fractured leadership of Theresa May , who be go to Europe strip of authority and without any clear Brexit plan , be design to reflect back on Ruth Davidson . Ms Sturgeon want to exploit the feeling of buyer ' S remorse - regret after you ' ve make a rash purchase - among voter who may already be reconsider their support for the Scottish Tories . it ' s a magician ' S trick design to deflect attention away to the shiny thing over there while the important business be go on over here . for Ms Sturgeon , the important business be ` ` reflect ' ' on IndyRef2 for just a couple of week longer when Holyrood go into the long summer recess and the pressure will be off for a few month . for the Tory , it ' s a battle to break her resistance before people start to notice Brexit .
N.I . Sinn A BREXIT Pickle Sinn Fein have be accuse of stop the people of Northern Ireland from have a voice in the Brexit negotiation . Fianna Fail leader Micheal Martin yesterday say Brexit could leave the North with ` ` historic damage ' ' . but the TD say the pro-EU majority at Stormont be n't be hear because Gerry Adams ' party ` ` be refuse to allow the institution to be re-establish ' ' . Stormont have be without a powersharing government since January - and Martin say it be ` ` long past time ' ' for the DUP and Sinn Fein to sort thing out to allow the deadlock to be break . he say : ` ` this island ' s most consistently anti-EU party Sinn Fein be hold to the obviously cynical position that while the threat of Brexit be a threat to every element of the peace settlement that no one be allow to do anything about it . ' ' Martin blast the ` ` shambles ' ' in the UK over Brexit negotiation and add at the Longford Fianna Fail think-in : ` ` Our Government must start be far more active and ambitious in its proposal . ' '
the BREXIT NO-BILL-ITY ; Lords in Delay Threat REMAINERS ' REVOLT PLOT BREXIT-bashing peer be plot to derail Theresa May ' s timetable for quit the EU . a rebel alliance of Remainers have team up in a bid to block the PM ' s departure plan when it go to the Lords next week . they be threaten to vote it out unless she bow to their demand to move back her March @card@ deadline for push the exit button . all @card@ Lib Dem peer be hell-bent on delay - and it need just @card@ Tory to inflict a defeat on the government . Downing Street fear a pingpong battle as the Brexit Bill go back and forth between the Commons and Lords . Mrs May will face her first showdown this week as @card@ Tory MP threaten to wreck her plan by back Labour and Lib Dem amendment in Brexit vote . but former Chancellor Lord Lamont warn : ` ` the threat to the government ' S timetable be potentially great in the unelected House of Lords . ' ' he urge the PM to call a general election if peer delay her plan - then abolish the Lords . Tory MP Steve Baker , chairman of the pro-Brexit European Research Group , claim ex-Education Secretary Nicky Morgan be one of @card@ Tory MP prepare to rebel in the Commons . he say : ` ` this be a time to unite behind a democratic result , not plot to repudiate it . ' ' and Labour deputy leader Tom Watson say it would be disrespectful if more Shadow Cabinet member resign over Jeremy Corbyn ' s decision to back the Brexit Bill .
power of the City will get us fair Brexit Britain be now engage in a game of Brexit chicken . Donald Tusk , the European Council President , say the only choice be hard Brexit and no Brexit , and that he would be delight if Britain change its mind about leave . the thinking seem to be that bad economic news might send this country scurry back to the EU . a less extreme version of this theory can be find in our own parliament . one former Government minister tell me this week that he think that when the supposed ` ` economic reality come into focus ' ' , Britain would end up go for a single-market , EU-lite deal . but the deal that Britain seek must be the right one in the long term , not a short-term fix . agree to a deal where Britain simply accept rule it have no role in make would be a disaster . ` ` you ca n't run the City of London simply cut and paste in French regulation , ' ' warn one senior City figure . I be tell that the Bank of England Governor , Mark Carney , be particularly concern about this , give the size of the UK ' s banking sector . inside government , they hope there will be a ` ` vote of confidence ' ' in Brexit Britain in the next week or so . they expect that follow Business Secretary Greg Clark ' s visit to Japan this week , Nissan will announce that it Will build its new Qashqai in Sunderland . this will be a huge relief to the government . it will show that the British car industry be n't be write off by Brexit . insider be reluctant to confirm whether the government promise to compensate Nissan if the EU do introduce tariff on British-made car . but one well-place source tell me that the government be sufficiently sure that there wo n't be tariff either way , that it could make ` ` robust assurance , but be fully confident they wo n't be call in ' ' . EU must show be outside hurt the current hard-line statement of EU leader be regard by the Brexit minister as just noise . ' ' the punishment talk do n't make any sense . we ' ll get a bloody nose , but they ' ll be bad off than we be , ' ' one of them tell me . but the EU be , at heart , a political project , not an economic one . it would be dangerous to imagine that cool economic logic will win out . there will be a desire to show that being outside the club hurt . however , the EU ' s most important political project be the single currency . the Euro might have bring economic misery to large part of southern Europe , but the EU be determine to keep it go whatever the economic - and human - cost . a hard Brexit , with no deal on the EU ' s access to the City of London and vice-versa , would endanger the single currency as London be - effectively - the Eurozone ' s financial and banking capital . as the head of the large American bank , Jamie Dimon , of JP Morgan , have warn : ` ` Brexit increase fivefold the risk of the Eurozone fail in the next ten year . ' ' ultimately , it will be the EU ' s desire to protect its flagship project that will bring about a sensible , negotiate Brexit . James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator
a disaster of own making ;
we only want to blow the bloody senor off ; AS Michael Caine Hails BREXIT , Sun SAYS. . bloody SENORS Sir Michael Caine join the Brexit battle yesterday - as the Sun send Spain a mountain-sized message over Gibraltar . we beam a giant Hands off Our Rock message on to the headland as Sir Michael , left , - famous for his ` ` you ' re only suppose to blow the bloody door off ' ' catchphrase from the Italian Job - hail Brexit as a vote for freedom . the Oscar winner say : ` ` I vote for Brexit . ` ` I ' d rather be a poor master than a rich servant . ` ` it be n't about racism , immigrant or anything , it be about freedom . ' ' and he tell people worry about Brexit negotiation : ` ` in politics you ' re always go into area you ' ve never be before , so you ' re go to get lose and then you ' re go to find your way , and then it ' ll be all right . ' ' Sir Michael be the first major star to back Brexit in @card@ , attack the EU ' s ` ` faceless dictator ' ' . former Justice Secretary and Vote leave frontman Michael Gove lap up his comment last night , tell the Sun : ` ` I love Michael Caine . he ' s the kind of expert I like . ' ' Our Rock message be praise by Gibraltarian yesterday - with one say of our warning to the Spanish : ` ` it should be up there permanently . ' ' meanwhile Theresa May insist Britain will not sell out Gibraltar during Brexit negotiation . the PM hold No10 talk with EU Council president Donald Tusk - say she would push for ` ` the well possible deal for Gibraltar ' ' with no negotiation on keep it .
stop cave in on Brexit on the first day of negotiation for the UK to leave the European Union , Brexit Secretary David Davis have already crumble to EU negotiator Michel Barnier . it mean discussion of trade term will have to wait until other issue have be address , such as the UK ' s divorce bill , the right of EU national in Britain and the border with Ireland . this be the bad start we could possibly have have . how many more concession will our weak negotiator make ? this government be fast become all talk and no action , display increase weakness in many area . the EU must be rub their hand with glee . I can see a lot of political trouble ahead if thing do n't change , and that be the last thing Britain need at this time . john Stacey Henley-on-Thames , Oxon Day one of the UK ' s Brexit negotiation with the EU and the bully of Brussels have begin with their blackmail demand of an £85billion exit bill . the time to end negotiation have arrive very early in the proceeding . the EU be mistake us for a spineless country . we must disillusion www.them.No deal be good than an extortionate deal . Philip Roberts Tanyfron , Wrexham BREXIT Secretary David Davis promise ` ` the fight of the summer ' ' to ensure that trade deal run in parallel to departure term but EU negotiator Michel Barnier win the war before lunch by delay them . if Brexit boss Davis continue to surrender every time he meet with adversity , this once great country that win countless war down through the year will lose one of the great battle of all . Caroline Alden Bristol when the UK vote to leave the EU , expert agree Ukip have achieve its goal - and as a political party be now irrelevant . when Theresa May call the late election , we be tell not to waste our vote on Ukip . the result ? the Remainers now see their chance to coerce the woeful Mrs May into get a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit . what a betrayal of last year ' s referendum result . Ukip , far from be irrelevant , be now need more than ever . David White Basingstoke , Hants as the US and Russia now increase their ` ` war game ' ' in Syria , it be time for our small force to withdraw and leave them and the Middle Eastern country to resolve this can of worm . Andrew Aitken Mccluskey Birmingham the terror continue . this time by a white man drive into a group of Muslim outside a mosque in North London . and who protect him from the mob who try to take revenge on him ? an imam . well do to him - and my thought and prayer go out to all people kill or injure in this and other recent atrocity . Patricia OTTO-LANGUI Tower Hamlets , East London RECENT terror attack and the loss of life at Grenfell Tower have shock the nation . too many innocent people have die and suffer . question must be answer but be this really the time for political leader to seek to undermine our democratically elect government ? the Great get together this weekend be inspire by Jo Cox , who be kill in June last year , in the belief that there be a groundswell of people who reject divisive politics , religious and social extremism . if we want our child and grandchild to be safe and have a good life , it be time that we all put our energy into bring the country together . Lydia KEYTE Sunninghill , Berks EASYJET be right to make an emergency landing so police could arrest three man suspect of take drug in the loo . the air be not the place to be act irrationally or aggressively , which taking drug and drink too much alcohol cause . there should be a ban on booze on plane . everyone can make it to their destination without it . Jonathan Cooper East Finchley , North London TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply the restraint show by those who suffer the terror attack at the Finsbury Park mosque in London show the true nature of Islam . we ca n't let hatred win . bob Dixon OMG ! who think that put that awful family on EastEnders be a good idea . watch the viewing figure drop now . genie , Essex He may mean well but there ' s no need for Simon Cowell to do a charity record for the Grenfell Tower tragedy . why ca n't he and his wealthy pop star fraternity just donate £50,000 each ? glen , London Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
Euro gamble Just a week ago it would have be impossible to imagine Scotland ' s lead politician could unite on Brexit . but now , both Nicola Sturgeon and Ruth Davidson be demand a rethink on the hard Brexit policy which Theresa May have determine on . Ms Sturgeon have be call for a soft Brexit for month , and her government publish a plan for keep the single market and free movement of people . there ' s no surprise in the First Minister continue on that path . it be , though , a remarkable shift in viewpoint from Ms Davidson . as a dedicated Remainer , she stand shoulder to shoulder with Mrs May to campaign for stay in the EU . but , just like the PM , her conversion be absolute follow the Brexit vote . do n't forget , her candidate go into the election standing on the same manifesto pledge as every other conservative : ` ` we will no longer be member of the single market or custom union . ' ' now Ms Davidson have have another change of heart and think a gentle ` ` open Brexit ' ' might be the way forward . the only reason she can say these thing be because of her electoral success in Scotland . Ruth Davidson be the reason there be a Tory government at all - and she be use her influence at the time of Mrs May ' s great weakness . but it ' S a dangerous gamble . the PM have make it clear there will be no change to her Brexit policy . as far as she be concerned it ' s full steam ahead and damn the result of the election . so will Ruth ' S team do the right thing for Scotland - or will they toe the party line like good little Tory ? we ' ll soon see . Mrs May have brand herself a bloody difficult woman . she ' d well be if she be go to take on Ruth and Nicola . compare to that pair , the European Commission will be a walk in the park .
back Me Or GET HARDEST BREXIT ; ESCAPE From Brussels ; PM ' s warning to MP if they vote down deal Theresa May have warn MP Britain face an ultra-hard Brexit if they vote down her EU departure deal . the PM say the government would be force to resort to other arrangement rather than go back to the negotiate table if an agreement be block in @card@ . this would almost certainly mean fall back on World Trade Organisation rule with blanket tariff on export and import . Mrs May do make one climbdown yesterday by agree to spell out her Brexit negotiation in a White Paper in the come day amid fear of a rebellion by Tory MP . but Government source say give MP the chance to force her to reopen the departure deal in two year could undermine talk with Brussels . they fear EU leader may make a poor Brexit offer in the hope it encourage the UK to change its mind on leave . Labour ' S Pat McFadden trigger the PM ' s comment by demand what would happen if Parliament say ` ` no ' ' to the agreement in a vote . Brexiteers yesterday accuse the MP of try to keep Britain in the EU via the ` ` back door ' ' . Tory backbencher Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` it ' S just another attempt to delay and thwart Brexit . it do n't take Bletchley Park to decode Pat McFadden ' S view . he want to stay in at all cost . ' ' Mrs May ' s climbdown on a White Paper come @card@ hour after Brexit Secretary David Davis brush off demand for a formal policy paper lay out the negotiation plan . Pro-EU MP across the political divide insist the document be vital for them to be able to debate her bargaining plan . Labour insist it must be publish before Parliament vote to authorise the start of Article @card@ departure talk . in an attempt to force her hand , Jeremy Corbyn last night vow to push it to a vote with the support of pro-EU Tory MP .
Davis be set for an EXIT ; BREXIT BREXIT Minister David Davis plan to quit in @card@ month ' time and leave Boris Johnson the tricky task of make any deal he negotiate work . despite Theresa May ' S plan for a twoyear transition after March @card@ , Mr Davis have signal he have no wish to see the next phase through , say : ` ` someone else can do that , Boris can do that . ' ' his threat to throw in the towel will add further fuel to bitter Tory Brexit row and infuriate anti-BoJo leadership rival . hint at his EU opposite number Michel Barnier ' s future career ambition he say : ` ` I ' m retire after this , he ' S not . ' ' it be widely think that if Mr Barnier hammer out a successful divorce he will attempt to succeed Jean-Claude Juncker as President of the European Commission . the Sun understand Mr Davis believe his entire Department for Exiting the EU would become defunct as soon as he have negotiate a settlement with Brussels . last night a source close to Mr Davis say he see this as his legacy and his ` ` last big job in politics ' ' , but suggest he be be ` ` tongue in cheek ' ' about Boris . the annual Tory gathering in Manchester have be dominate by Brexit war after Mr Johnson demand that any transition phase last ` ` not a second more ' ' than two year after exit day in @card@ . meanwhile ex-Deputy Brexit Minister David Jones say if Mr Barnier refuse to talk trade it should be make ` ` absolutely clear we will terminate negotiation ' ' .
BOJO ' S BREXIT SELF-SACRIFICE ; Martyr of FLORENCEBoris ' risk job to save exit ' Boris Johnson be hail a Brexit martyr yesterday for put his job on the line to keep the EU exit on track . he go to war with Cabinet Remainers after they cajole Theresa May into seek a five-year transition . the PM have plan to announce a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' in Friday ' s speech in Florence , with put ith the final breakaway ut on hold until @card@ . but her ` ` weaken ' ' position - under pressure from Chancellor Philip Hammond - stun the Foreign Secretary into an explosive 4,200-word statement last week . that trigger a full-on Cabinet revolt that force Mrs May into cut the phase exit to two year . MP yesterday say the retreat totally vindicate BoJo ' s decision to break rank . one say : ` ` Boris be a martyr . he put his neck on the line to save Brexit . ' ' a government ally add : ` ` it be a master stroke and we be now set on a clear course for a full and clean Brexit . I for one can stomach two extra year know we will leave completely after that . ' ' BoJo be also understand to have win assurance that the million save when Britain leave will be plough into the NHS . Brexit ' Secretary David outline Davis have say the transition detail and timing outdavid . by the PM in Florence be ` ` important ' ' . and he brush off demand by EU negotiator Michel Barnier that Britain must continue to accept European court ruling . he tell the BBC ' S Andrew Marr : ` ` that ' s not go to happen . we be not under any circumstance go to be accept the overarching supremacy of the European Court . that ' s go . ' ' wood the -sun.co.u david.wooding @ Uk Three How Long Big Three WANTED EXIT To TAKE @card@ YEARS PM talk into long transition YEARS @card@ ' Bi Boris article be a ' big gamble ' year @card@ h d Hammond ' push PM for soft Brexit '
CRIPES ! ; FLAK Flying Over BOJO ' S PRO-EUROPE article ; lNicola blast as secret be reveal Clash ... May be set for talk lBoris bluster in Brexit backlash Nicola Sturgeon last night brand Boris Johnson ` ` calculating and self-serving ' ' after his secret pro-EU declaration be reveal . the Brexit bigwig write an article claim that the UK remain in the bloc would be a ` ` boon for the world and for Europe ' ' . in the previously unpublished newspaper column - pen just two day before reveal he would back the leave campaign - he also warn that quit would cause an ` ` economic shock ' ' and could spark Scottish independence . as the Foreign Secretary fight to defend himself over the revelation yesterday , critic include Ms Sturgeon round on him . quiz in a TV interview about the secret article , the First Minister say : ` ` it do n't really surprise me . ` ` I do n't think anyone doubt that Boris be make a calculation in decide which side of the Brexit argument to come down on , base not on the merit of the argument , but on what he think be well for his own political advancement . ` ` all of us , include politician , often weigh up different argument , so there ' S nothing surprising about that . ` ` but Boris be make a calculation that be about his political interest , not about the interest of the country . ` ` if we cast our mind back to the referendum , after he come out for leave Boris say leave the EU do n't mean leave the single market . ' if I ' d vote Brexit I ' d feel betray ' ' ` ` that ' s part of why there ' s no mandate to take the UK out the single market . ' ' Pro-Europe ex-deputy PM Nick Clegg , below , describe Mr Johnson as one of a number of Brexit-backing ` ` opportunist and chancers ' ' who lie to the public about the danger of leave the EU . the former Lib Dem leader say : ` ` if I be a Brexit voter , I would feel increasingly betray that I vote in the belief that all these Brexiteers know what they be do . ' ' Mr Johnson be now see as a backer of a so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' - oppose by the SNP - where the UK would be out of the single market but grab back full control of immigration . last week he insist the UK can get a deal ` ` of great value ' ' to the economy than access to the trade zone , which he brand an ` ` increasingly useless ' ' concept . but in the pro-EU article - reveal in a new book - he back zone membership . in a bid to persuade leave voter to back Remain , he write : ` ` Shut your eye . hold your breath . think of Britain . think of the rest of the EU . think of the future . ` ` think of the desire of your child and grandchild to live and work in other European country ; to sell thing there , to make friend and perhaps find partner there . ` ` Ask yourself : despite all the defect and disappointment of this exercise , do you really , truly , definitely want Britain to pull out of the EU ? ' ' yesterday , Mr Johnson defend himself amid a backlash over the article . he tell Sky News : ` ` Everybody be try to make up their mind about whether or not to leave . it ' S true that in February I be wrestle with it , like a lot of people , and I write a long piece in favour of leave . ` ` I then think , ' I well see if I can make the alternative case ' , so I write a sort of semi-parodic article , which have mysteriously find its way into the paper this morning because I think I might have send it to a friend . ` ` but it be blindingly obvious what the right thing to do be , and the people make the right decision , they vote substantially to leave the EU , and that ' s what we ' re go to do . ' ' Ms Sturgeon be now set for talk with Theresa May over the UK Government ' s twoyear divorce discussion with Brussels , which will start in the New year . poll show there be still a pro-union majority in Scotland . but the Nat chief want the ` ` right ' ' to call another indy vote if Mrs May refuse to forge a separate EU deal for Scotland and guarantee we say in the single market . she also want extra power to be devolve to Holyrood , include immigration . yesterday , the First Minister be quiz on whether she ' d drop a push for independence if Mrs May agree to her demand . ask whether she ' d halt the bid for a ` ` generation ' ' , she suggest she ' d press on , say : ` ` be I suddenly go to stop believe Scotland should be independent ? ' ' but her new deputy , MP Angus Robertson , later insist the SNP would back down from the threat of a second indy vote if Mrs May agree to SNP demand . he say : ` ` if the UK Government deliver on the safeguard for us in Europe then we would n't need to go ahead with a referendum . ' ' however , Scottish Labour ' s only MP , Ian Murray , claim the SNP demand have be set up to fail in order to pave the way for indyref2 . he say : ` ` they ' ll probably put something undeliverable in there in order to keep independence on the table . it ' S an intellectually incoherent argument to say Scotland in the EU be good , but Scotland in the UK be bad . we need to put the divisive second referendum out of the question . ' ' and Campbell Gunn , one of Ms Sturgeon ' s former top adviser , say he doubt her demand would be meet by Downing Street . Mr Gunn , who retire earlier this year , say : ` ` Theresa May will never concede everything that the Scottish Government be ask for . ' '
call time on Blair ' s Brexit block bid ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter so Tony Blair want people to vote for MP who do not support Brexit . his policy be the reason the country be in the state it be in - and why the work class have to work longer to fill the hole in the pension pot . the country have wake up to self-interested rich people like Mr Blair who have have their snout in the EU trough . he should respect the democratic process over Brexit . Ian Ashcroft by email if Tony Blair want a say on Brexit , he should stand as an MP . then we could tell him what we really think about him . Richard Carter Edinburgh Tony Blair say a small number of people be hijack Britain . seem it be a similar story when a small number of people steamroller Parliament to get us into an illegal war . who be behind that ? oh yes , Tony Blair . graham Barton Aberdeen SNP MSP Joan McAlpine recently describe life in the UK as be ` ` a hell on Earth ' ' . before make any further ridiculous and dramatic statement , she should ask herself why so many people be desperate to come here and why such a vast number of EU national be dread the potential prospect of have to leave . a Morrison Aberdeenshire I Hope Scot send out a clear message to Nicola Sturgeon that we do n't want another referendum . and we do n't want to break up the UK nor join the EU and have mass immigration to Scotland . the UK be worth fight for and together we make up one of the great nation on Earth . a vote for the SNP will be see as an endorsement for IndyRef2 . Jim Hill Edinburgh Let ' S hope Scot really think about what be at stake over the next few month and vote for our future and those of our child . Nicola Sturgeon can deliver a bright Scotland - but we ca n't be complacent . we need every vote to count if we be to determine our own future . Sam Jenkinson Paisley Line of Duty have be brilliant but when Roz Huntley have her hand chop off in hospital and carry on like nothing have happen , it lose credibility . I know woman be tough , but ... Mick Mclaughlin by Email ILIE Nastase , picture , should be ban for life from all tennis venue after his vile sexist rant during GB ' S Federation Cup tie . Dorothy Stokes by email
Brexit have pitch trad Labour voter against liberal one ... the party will die Can Labour survive Brexit ? the party now look in danger of become a political irrelevance . its reaction to the referendum result be threaten to break apart the electoral coalition of working-class voter and middle-class liberal that have be behind every one of its General election victory . more than @card@ per cent of Labour seat vote to leave the EU . in these constituency , be the party that be try to block Brexit would be electoral suicide . that ' S why the Labour leadership feel compel to accept the government ' s amendment this week confirm Theresa May should start the formal , twoyear process for leave the EU by the end of March . but many Labour MP in place that vote to Remain have different interest . they want to show their constituent they be argue for a second referendum or for Brexit-lite . right now , Labour be get catch between these two stool , satisfy no one . in two parliamentary by-election this month , Labour have see its vote share plummet in both a heavily Remain and a heavily leave seat . the party be now poll at @card@ per cent , the bad number for a Labour opposition since @card@ . Labour ' S problem be that it be have to fight on multiple front . in Leave-voting seat , Labour MP be worry about Ukip - which now have a working-class Scouser as its leader . indeed , influential figure in the party believe that Andy Burnham ' s Leigh seat could be win by Ukip if he become Mayor of Manchester and stand down as an MP . but in heavily Remain seat , Labour MP want to deny the Lib Dems the chance to outflank them as the anti-Brexit party . if Labour want to know what this kind of post-referendum squeeze look like , they just need to look north to Scotland . there , in its historic heartland , Labour be languish in a poor third place - trail the independence-supporting SNP and the fiercely Unionist Tory . compound Labour ' S problem be that those voter just look for competence be much more likely to plump for Mrs May than Jeremy Corbyn . she have a 33-point lead over him on the question of who would make the good PM . the Tories have also manage to keep a lid on their own Brexit division . as one senior backbencher put it , there be a ` ` pragmatic make Brexit work alliance ' ' emerge within the party . the problem for Labour be that even Britain leave the EU wo n't solve its dilemma . for post-Brexit , Britain will have to decide for itself its immigration and trade policy . these question will , again , pit the two side of the Labour coalition against each other . one Labour MP who vote against invoke Article @card@ believe the party will split because the difference between the two group be unbridgeable . this be exacer- bate by Corbyn , a disastrous leader who have no strategy and little popular appeal . but even if he go tomorrow - and he won't- Labour ' S problem would not go away . this be the proof of how bad thing be for Labour . Corbyn and his disastrous leadership be not even its big problem any more . l James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator . exacerbate by disastrous leader ;
lord ? have No Mercy ; BREXIT REBELLION BACKLASH Tories ' threat to abolish Upper House FURIOUS Tories last night declare war on the House of Lords as pro-EU peer hatch a last-ditch plot to thwart Brexit . Ex-cabinet minister Oliver Letwin call for a Commons debate on scrap the Lords if Europhile peer try to block the Article @card@ bill . the Brexit bill cruise through the Commons but face a choppy ride through the Lords in two week . Brexit Secretary David Davis have warn them they have a patriotic duty to back the bill . but Lib Dem Baroness Featherstone say the unelected peer have a duty to block it , while Labour ' S Peter Hain urge the government to ` ` bring it on ' ' . Dick Newby , Lib Dem leader in the Lords , claim he have support on all side for a rerun of the historic EU referendum . Angela Smith , Angel Labour ' s leader in the Lords , announce eight amendment to the bill , despite claim she be not seek ` ` to block or sabotage the start of this process ' ' . but Brexit-backing former Cabinet Minister Iain Duncan Smith warn the Lords not to ` ` get all puff up ' ' . he add : ` ` they area review but there chamber b be nothing to review here , it ' s a four-line bill . ' ' Yesterday Downing Street distance the PM from any threat of Lords abolition . yet No10 insist Theresa May want to see it pass in time for her to trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . last night a Government source tell the Sun : ` ` No10 obviously do n't want to pick a fight but a lot of people across the whole of government share the view that if they try and frustrate it , it will be very difficult for them to maintain current form and size . ' ' Former Tory minister Baroness Altmann be last night reportedly mull a vote against the government .
time for Remainers to accept Brexit vote ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think S2
surely EU Ca N'T Be Serious ON BREXIT ; BARNIER ' S Barney WITH Davis ; Euro chief slam UK David Davis clash with his EU Brexit talk counterpart Michel Barnier last night as the pair blame each other for stall . in the big face-to-face bust-up of negotiation so far , the French bureaucrat accuse the government of not take the negotiation seriously . he slam Brexit Secretary Mr Davis for not say how much Britain will pay in a divorce bill . Brussels want as much as £80billion . Mr Barnier dismiss the government ' S detailed Brexit planning with a grumpy two-minute statement . but Mr Davis eyeball Mr Barnier as he tell him twice he want this week ' s round of talk to address ` ` all the issue ' ' , not just the money . and in a sign of the souring relation between the two side , government source close to the negotiation blast Mr Barnier for ` ` ill-judged and ill-considered comment ' ' that be ` ` unhelpful for the next round of negotiation ' ' . Mr Davis ' S spokesman insist the government ` ` recognise we have obligation ' ' in relation to pay an exit bill but say the EU must admit the UK be owe money too . Mr Davis arrive in Brussels hope to break the deadlock . but before the third round of talk have begin , Mr Barnier dismiss the plea to widen the discussion to include a trade deal before the divorce bill have be settle .
expert Enter BREXIT DEBATE ESTATE agent Jeremy Leaf of Jeremy Leaf & Co : ` ` there ' s no need to panic . the Brexit debate cause uncertainty but the economy be still relatively strong . ` ` House builder be very confident . ` ` if we do Brexit , it will quieten down the market but I ca n't see this happening too quickly . ' ' Jonathan Harris , director of mortgage broker Anderson Harris : ` ` any political uncertainty be bad for the market . ` ` over the last @card@ to @card@ month , it have be slow by the election , onslaught on buy-to-let and now the Brexit debate . ` ` the big threat will be to the top end of the market . ' ' Anthony Ward Thomas of Ward Thomas Removals : ` ` the European housing market differ to ours but have never affect ours . for example , most Parisian rent home but our focus be own . ` ` Life will go on if we be in or out - and we ' ve have record number of enquiry this summer . ' ' RINDER
no plan for hard border police ; GETTING READY for BREXIT GARDAI have no security plan set for a hard border after Brexit , the Irish Sun on Sunday can reveal . and officer Enda Dunne , from Ballybofey , Co Donegal , fear rural area will be leave vulnerable to crime gang and dissident republican group because of a lack of resource along the border . Gda Dunne , who have @card@ year police experience , tell how there be so much ` ` uncertainty ' ' over Brexit within the rank . the officer , who speak to the Irish Sun on Sunday at the Garda Representatives Association conference in Galway last week , call for rural community to be protect and for more resource to be provide in the region . concern . he say : ` ` Brexit be down the line and if there be a hard border we have no police plan in place . this be a serious matter and we need to have discussion . ` ` we need to see more of a visible presence on the ground - more resource so we can have people on patrol . burglary be the main focus at the moment and we have over @card@ checkpoint in my district to disrupt this criminal activity . ` ` there be also a lot of subversive activity but we be n't keep inform of any dissident activity yet @card@ per cent of the time we be the people who will be the first to respond to an incident involve subversive . Uniformed gardai be the first responder . resource be also a huge problem at the border . ` ` what happen be that people be take off the border station to augment unit at headquarters - effectively leave huge swathe of the rural community without the service they deserve . ` ` it ' S not uncommon where you could have two officer cover an area of 65km within the Letterkenny district . we just need more manpower along the border . ' ' and Gda James Morrisroe , from the Cavan and Monaghan division , also tell of his concern over Brexit . . . Dunne The GRA delegate add : ` ` it ' S within two year that Brexit be go to happen . I do n't know if the government have a contingency plan in place . ` ` as Brexit be permanent , you would have to increase the number of gardai in Cavan/Monaghan - I ' d say you ' d have to double them at least on a permanent basis , so that have its own implication . ' ' @ IrishSunOnline
single minded ; Sturgeon ' S Warning AS Impact Study UNVEILED Nic : Brexit will hit us hard Backs ' only sensible option ' scot will be almost £700 each bad off even if we stay in the single market after Brexit , a Government report claim yesterday . First Minister Nicola Sturgeon warn the economy ` ` will take a hit ' ' no matter what but insist remain in the trade bloc be the least damaging option . Official analysis state our economy would lose £12.7billion by @card@ - £2,300 per person , equivalent to a @card@ per cent fall in GDP - if Theresa May fail to strike a new deal and we shift to World Trade Organisation rule in a hard Brexit . Ms Sturgeon say Holyrood economist look at the ` ` only three realistic outcome ' ' of the split and vow to press for continued single market membership ` ` more loudly ' ' than ever ahead of the next EU talk in March . she add : ` ` the evidence we present today be clear - the good way to minimise the economic damage of Brexit be to stay inside the single market . it demonstrate beyond doubt that if Brexit be to proceed then stay in the single market be the only option that make sense . ' ' accord to the forecast , Scotland be set to lose @card@ per cent of GDP by @card@ - £4billion - even if we stay in the single market . it would mean a @card@ per cent drop in disposable income and a near three per cent slump in business investment . the Scotland ' s place in Europe : People Jobs and Investment paper also say a Free Trade Agreement similar to one use by Canada would shrink Scotland ' s economy by @card@ per cent - £9billion . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` it be clear that stay in the single market do not insulate us from the cost of leave the EU but it will minimise those cost . ' ' the paper come after the UK Government fail to publish any Brexit analysis , despite repeat call from Nat for an economic assessment . business for Scotland chief Gordon MacIntyre-Kemp accuse UK minister of ` ` deliberately try to keep the true impact of Brexit hidden ' ' . but Tory Adam Tomkins last night brand the SNP ' S report ` ` over-the-top scaremongering ' ' . he say : ` ` No-one ' S doubt that Brexit will pose challenge , but it will bring opportunity too . ` ` that ' S why it ' S vital the SNP work with the UK Government to achieve the good Brexit deal , and not will the process to fail in the hope of further its own constitutional obsession . ' ' as rival clash , Ms Sturgeon pile fresh pressure on UK Labour boss Jeremy Corbyn to back her single market call as she insist a Commons majority on continued membership could be ` ` harness ' ' by opposition party and Tory MP who back a soft Brexit . and follow Mr Corbyn ' s previous claim that stay in the single market be not an option as membership rely on be part of the EU , Ms Sturgeon accuse him of ` ` either still misunderstand the position of the single market ' ' or ` ` try to deliberately mislead people ' ' . Scottish Lib Dem leader Willie Rennie also urge Mr Corbyn to ` ` come on board ' ' . he say : ` ` when so much be at stake , our country be badly serve by Labour waffle and shuffle round Brexit and the conservative refuse to publish any economic forecast at all . ' ' Green MSP Ross Greer blast Scottish Labour for fail to back cross-party action . he say : ` ` full access be clearly the least damaging option for Scot-land and the rest of the UK . it ' S disappointing to see Scottish Labour refuse to join in argue for this and instead essentially choose to back Ti ' j b d i h d B i ` ` Tories ' jobs-destroying hard Brexit . ' ' but Scottish Labour ' s Brexit spokesman Neil Findlay say : ` ` it ' s the security of people ' S job and the economy which should be at the heart of any deal to leave the EU . ` ` Labour will get on with fight for the well possible deal for the whole of the UK while respect the result of the EU referendum , unlike the SNP who seem never to accept the result of any referendum . ' ' the study also warn freedom of movement be ` ` essential for maintain population growth ' ' , to fund public service as our population age . it say migration will account for ` ` all of Scotland ' s population growth ' ' between @card@ and @card@ , when @card@ more death than birth be forecast . Ms Sturgeon say EU citizen work in Scotland contribute over £10,400 in tax revenue and urge the UK Government to put job prospect and live standard ahead of party politics . and she warn of a ` ` tragedy for future generation ' ' who will lose out on single market opportunity yet to come in area like energy and the digital economy . but Tory Scottish Secretary David Mundell say the report fail to flag up the importance of the UK internal market , worth £48billion to Scotland ' S economy - four time more than EU . he add : ` ` at the weekend , Nicola Sturgeon make it clear her real priority be hold a second independence referendum in Scotland , not get a good deal as we leave the EU . we urge the Scottish government to work constructively with us to deliver a deal that work for Scotland and the whole UK . ' ' Independent think-tank Fraser of Allander Institute previously warn Brexit would cost @card@ Scots job . Professor Graeme Roy add yesterday : ` ` it be imperative the Scottish government start to outline practical plan to help Scottish business respond to the challenge Brexit present as well as maximise opportunity that Brexit might create . ' '
Starm vow border on ridiculous ; Labour Labour yesterday make a flagship election pledge to end unlimited immigration from the EU - only to dump the Brexit vow within two hour . the party ' S Sir Keir Starmer start the day by say free movement of people would be stop as we take back control of our border . he declare it a ` ` red line ' ' for Labour in Brexit talk with Brussels . barely two hour later the Shadow Brexit Secretary backtrack , declare migrant with job offer here could continue to flock in . he tell the BBC : ` ` we must have immigration that work for our community and our economy . ` ` that mean there have to be movement of people to come and work in this country . the last thing we want be for our business to go bankrupt . ' ' the absurd U-turn come after he also say Labour would tear up Theresa May ' s Brexit strategy by seek a ` ` collaborative ' ' relationship with the EU . MP here will have the final say on a deal - mean if they vote to reject it , Britain will be force to keep go back to Brussel for more talk . Sir Keir insist there will be no second referendum . but Labour colleague Paul Blomfield suggest we could stay in the EU if Brussels address the ` ` concern ' ' that lead to the leave vote . Sir Keir also say a Labour government would guarantee the right of three million European to stay here . PM Theresa May slam Labour ' s Brexit strategy as ` ` nonsensical ' ' . former Tory minister Dominic Raab tell the Sun : ` ` Labour ca n't walk in a straight line on Brexit . ' ' SNOOKER ' S Ronnie O'Sullivan , @card@ , say he be a fan of Mr Corbyn and he have join the Labour Party . the Sun say - Page @card@
day of DISMAY ; Rebels humiliate PM in Brexit vote Theresa May last night lose her first Commons Brexit vote as MP win the power to amend a final EU divorce deal . a rebellion by @card@ of her MP see the PM defeat by just four vote on a key amendment to her flagship EU Withdrawal Bill . the blow on the eve of a Brussels summit leave her in the humiliate position of be unable to guar-antee to Europe ' s leader she can implement the exit term they agree . the defeat be leap on by critic of Brexit as a chance to turn the tide . rebel commander Dominic Grieve ' s amendment to the Bill will now give Parliament ` ` a meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal . Mrs May have spend the day love-bombing MP . she have vow not to implement an exit deal without give MP a take it or leave it vote . despite minand whip g out last strongthe vote st by @card@ but minister and carry minute strongarm the be lose to @card@ . one be allege whip leged to have reduce a female MP to tear . Ex-ministers include Nicky Morgan and Ken Clarke join the revolt . Labour Peer Lord Adonis say : ` ` this be the first step towards the defeat of Brexit . ' ' Ukip ' S Nigel Farage hit back : ` ` my contempt for career politician know no bound . ' ' Nadine declare rebel sh ` ` deselec never al stand ag ha thes Conservative MP Dorries the should be deselected and allow to again ' ' .
we COULD N'T See GP Holding back the tear , Tom Ridyard passionately belt out the national anthem . stand in Bolton town centre to mark Armed Forces Day , he say he feel ` ` extra proud to be British ' ' yesterday . leave voter Tom , @card@ , say : ` ` Brexit have be a win for the real people of Britain . here in Bolton , we be affect by the issue that affect people ' S life . ` ` whether that be not be able to get on the housing ladder or be see by your doctor because of the influx of migrant and cut . ` ` people in the big city be worry about the banking industry but I think that ' s the least of our worry . Brexit be a vote for the normal folk live in the stick or small town . ' ' the people of Bolton vote @card@ per cent in favour of Brexit . yesterday , just two day after @card@ per cent of the town vote , people embrace on the Union Jack-lined street . every other conversation be about Brexit . former soldier Geoff Lowe , @card@ , who serve in Northern Ireland for the Queen ' S Lancashire Regiment for ten year , say voting for Brexit make him ` ` just as proud ' ' as fight for his country . the dad of three say : ` ` I ' m so happy that small place like Bolton deliver ' out ' rather than those who live in a metropolitan bubble . ' ' despite their complaint about immigration , just two per cent of people in the town be bear in EU country while across Greater Manchester it be @card@ per cent . Mum-of-two Hayley McGwynn , @card@ , vote Remain and struggle to hide her disappointment . she say : ` ` I ' m worry for my son ' S future . we have go into the unknown . ' '
we NEED a SCOTS EU Deal ; SNP ' can block Brexit ' Westminster ' S Brexit plan must have special arrangement for Scotland or Nat MP could block it , the SNP ' S Tommy Sheppard have warn . he insist Prime Minister Theresa May would need his colleague ' support to get a proposal for leave the EU through the commons because there be no majority for the move . launch his bid for the SNP deputy leadership , the Edinburgh East MP say : ` ` Our @card@ vote in the House of Commons be go to be quite critical to her get something through . ` ` I will certainly argue , that unless the Brexit plan contain special arrangement for Scotland to allow us to have a different relationship with the EU , we will be vote down any Brexit plan and that ' s something she ' s go to have to take into account . ` ` so we be not completely powerless in this game . ' ' Mr Sheppard , @card@ , add that if a plan go through without include a deal for Scotland then the SNP would be force to call another indy vote . he say : ` ` I think then we have reach the last option standing . then we have to say there be only one way now we can discharge the mandate that the people want in @card@ to stay in the EU and that be to go back and review the decision of @card@ . ' ' Mr Sheppard also take aim at the front-runner for the SNP No2 role , Angus Robertson . he question whether Mr Robertson - already the party ' s leader at Westminster - would have time to do the job ` ` properly ' ' . he add : ` ` Angus for my mind be already part of the SNP leadership team . I want to work with him , I want to join him by play a different role and bring a fresh perspective . ' ' his other rival be MEP Alyn Smith and councillor Christopher McEleny . scottish-
BREXIT RIVALS READY To TALK Correction : in an article yesterday headline ` ` Brexit rival ready to talk ' ' , we say that Matthew Elliott and Dominic Cummings be quit the Vote leave campaign . in fact , they be merely step down from the board and remain in their respective role of Chief Executive and Campaign Director . they will also continue to attend and contribute to board meeting . we be happy to make this clear . two lead member of the Vote leave group quit yesterday , fuel suggestion of a merger between rival Brexit campaign team . Ex-Chancellor Lord Lawson be make chairman after Matthew Elliott and Dominic Cummings quit . it mean politician will get a great role . Arron Banks of rival Leave.EU say their exit clear the way for a ` ` unite Brexit campaign ' ' .
Ozzy ' S EU-TURN To Back BREXIT ; Commons SHOWDOWN ; Project Fear champion side with May George Osborne be last night prepare to back the government over Brexit in a Commons showdown . source close to the former Chancellor and pro-EU ` ` Project Fear ' ' mastermind say he be ready to side with the PM in today ' s Bill vote - after early claim that he could back rebel . one aide say Mr Osborne be satisfy minister have listen to concern and would offer MP a clear say on the outcome of Brexit talk in @card@ . the source say : ` ` George expect them to say thing that will allow him to support the government . ' ' it follow earlier intense speculation that he could join a so-called Gang of ten Tory rebel . one MP say Mr Osborne have encourage them to oppose the Bill , which his aide fiercely deny . Theresa May be desperate for MP to boot out two Lords amendment to the bill today so she can trigger Article @card@ and formally launch the process of leave as early as tomorrow . Mr Osborne ' S support would be key in help the PM to see off a revolt . it be understand Brexit Secretary David Davis would today look to head off opponent by pledge MP will be give a vote in early @card@ . it would cover withdrawal arrangement and the country ' s future relationship with the EU . that would stop short of a full veto but should be enough to see off a rebellion that could delay Brexit by week . Lord Heseltine yesterday admit that if MP boot out the amendment , peer be unlikely to oppose the bill any longer . he say : ` ` the argument for the supremacy of the Commons would be very powerful . ' ' Mr Davis urge rebel not to ` ` tie the Prime Minister ' s hand ' ' and vote with the government . the NHS face a fresh staffing crisis with @card@ worker plan to leave the UK after Brexit , it be claim . of the 1.2million staff , @card@ be from overseas , with @card@ from Europe .
Brexit be chance for indy , say Nic BREXIT could lead to our independence , Nicola Sturgeon say yesterday . she warn No10 that if it try to drive us off a ` ` hard Brexit cliff edge ' ' Scot have the right to ` ` choose alternative ' ' . speak in Dublin , the First Minister say : ` ` I ' ve always believe Scotland will become an independent country well within my lifetime - and this may be the moment . ' ' Ms Sturgeon insist a proposal to allow brit to remain EU citizen after Brexit for a fee should not be rule out . she say : ` ` we should be open-minded about solution to help those who want to retain their EU relationship . we should n't be rule out anything . ` ` we ' re go to have to be imaginative , innovative and creative if we ' re to come out of this Brexit scenario in good shape . ' ' Ms Sturgeon end her visit today by address the Irish Parliament . lNOTES flash by an aide to Tory MP Mark Field suggest the government believe France be a threat to a good Brexit deal because it want to steal our key service industry - and the UK ' s tactic in EU exit talk be to ` ` have cake and eat it ' ' . hit Indy Pocket - Page six
big ego link to poll vote for Brexit an outbreak of ` ` collective narcissism ' ' be a factor that lead the British people to vote for Brexit , psychologist claim . researcher investigate the role of xenophobia - the fear of foreigner - in the referendum that lead @card@ per cent of UK voter to support Britain leave the EU . they find ` ` predictor of prejudice ' ' be strongly link to people who vote for Brexit . Lead researcher Dr Agnieszka Golec de Zavala , from Goldsmiths , University of London , say : ` ` from Brexit , Trump and support for Vladimir Putin in Russia to the nationalist , ultraconservative government in Poland , study from ours and other lab show that collective narcissism systematically predict prejudice , aggression and a tendency to interpret innocent behaviour as provocation to the nation al group . ' '
Black pud be ' reckless Brexit ' risk KEZIA Dugdale have warn the ` ` reckless ' ' Tory hard Brexit could risk treat such as Stornoway black pudding . the Labour leader say the protect status of seek after product like Arbroath Smokies , Scotch beef and whisky could also be in danger . speak ahead of her visit to the Western Isles today , Ms Dugdale warn : ` ` the Tories ' reckless Brexit gamble have put key Scottish export like black pudding , Scotch beef and whisky at risk . ` ` food and drink export be a key part of the our economy . they secure job and essential to the nature of the Highland and Islands . omy . the be Essen Highlan ` ` any post-Brexit trade deal must protect their status . but the Tories would sell our economy down the river . ' ' that ' S statu wo om
EU ' S FOUR-MINUTE BREXIT Warning ; UK GETS THE Kiss Off ; lPay bill first call lEdict over citizen EU leader agree their Brexit negotiation guideline in four minute - as the PM be tell she will get nothing for free . the @card@ remain nation put on a unite front yesterday as they rubberstamp their nine-page dossier on divorce talk . but Brexit Secretary David Davis , who admit discussion could be ` ` confrontational ' ' , respond by urge Europe ' S elite not to put obstacle in the way of secure a deal . the meeting without Theresa May in Brussels be the first for EU leader since the PM trigger Article @card@ . Belgium ' S Prime Minister Charles Michel warn : ` ` if you be no long part of the club , it have consequence . a Brexit for free be not possible . ' ' German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble have earlier say : ` ` there be no free lunch . Briton must know that . ' ' the adoption of the guideline mean ` ` significant progress ' ' must be make before Britain can even discuss a trade deal with the EU . issue in the way include the right of three million EU citizen leave live in the UK and 1.5million Brits in Europe . European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker have reveal a text have be prepare on the right of EU citizen that he want Britain to adopt ` ` immediately ' ' . European Council President Donald Tusk call on the UK to offer ` ` real guarantee ' ' on what he say be the number one priority . progress must also be make to settle Britain ' s divorce bill , which Brussels believe could reach ten of billion of pound . and step should be take to avoid a ` ` hard border ' ' between Northern Ireland and the Republic . the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier boast : ` ` we be ready . we be together . ' ' but Mr Davis say : ` ` both side be clear . we want these negotiation to be conduct in the spirit of goodwill , sincere cooperation and with the aim of establish a close partnership between the UK and the EU go forward . ' ' German Chancellor Angela Merkel insist there would be no conspiracy against Britain . she also say a clear General Election mandate would give Mrs May a ` ` credible platform ' ' in talk .
article @card@ shade of HOORAY ; Win By Majority of @card@ Landslide vote to trigger Brexit an overwhelming number of MP last night back Theresa May to begin Brexit in three month . the PM ' s pledge to deliver on June ' s landmark referendum verdict be support by a huge majority of @card@ . the showdown vote , to call the bluff of pro-EU MP , be the first crucial test of Commons support for EU departure after MP campaign against it by a ratio of two to one . but @card@ MP still vote against her timetable to begin by March @card@ , @card@ . and @card@ more abstain , include @card@ Labour MP , leave Brexiteer Tories to accuse them of ` ` sabotage democracy ' ' . although the motion be not binding , the Supreme Court ' s top judge yesterday openly question whether a second vote by MP on trigger the Article @card@ exit talk be now even need . hear the government ' s legal bid to press on with Brexit without a Commons Lord Neuberger say it ` ` seem a bit odd ' ' to man in the street if be ask to do it again . the @card@ Brexit rebel MP include @card@ from the SNP , @card@ Labour , five Lib Dems and one Tory - veteran EU enthusiast Ken Clarke . Mrs May see off a Tory rebellion by agree publish her Brexit plan .
we deserve to know the truth know the truth in the run-up to the independence referendum , the UK Government bombard us with terrifying information about the possible consequence . every Whitehall department be put on a war footing . civil servant , from the treasury to the Foreign Office , sit up all night draft enormous document warn of the dire consequence of independence . but , when it come to Brexit , there be almost nothing . maybe that ' S because independence be regard as a credible threat . on Brexit , however , nobody in government believe the voter would swallow all that stuff about £350million a week for the NHS , a bonanza for the fishing industry and the same - or good - trade deal with Europe . it turn out the government be overly confident and a clear majority of voter - in England and Wales anyway - do buy into the deal be offer by Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson . Mess Ruth Davidson have buy into it now - even though she oppose it . Scotland Secretary David Mundell tell our fisherman Brexit be ` ` a sea of opportunity ' ' - even though he use to say they be totally misguide about take back control of their water . and the PM be determine to plough ahead - even though she use to say it would make us poor and less safe . now we learn there could be a stack of valuable information , with actual , reallife fact and figure set out the true impact of Brexit . accord to the man who use to be chief of staff for Brexit Secretary David Davis , there be document , carefully prepare by expert civil servant , set out the economic effect of Brexit . and , surprise , surprise , he say it be Scotland and the North East of England that will be hardest hit . if these document exist , the public should get to see them . it wo n't make any difference , since we wo n't be give an opportunity to comment on the final deal and Scot emphatically reject Brexit anyway . but we need to know how much of a mess we be in .
Kenny : I ca n't exit till Brexit ; Kenny DEFIANT Enda Kenny do n't plan to step down as Taoiseach anytime soon - because of Brexit . the Fine Gael leader continue on Page seven continue from Page one last night refuse to give an indication of when he plan to quit . speak after his St Patrick ' s day meeting with US president Donald Trump and speaker Paul Ryan , he call Brexit and political uncertainty in the North his ` ` immediate priority ' ' . Enda say : ` ` you ca n't have a situation where you have no leadership in Northern Ireland and where we have to define , from a European Union point of view , where Ireland would be ( and ) what the agree term of reference for the ( Brexit ) negotiation be . ` ` it ' s go to affect everybody in our country . ' ' before jet off to the US , Kenny tell his party that he would address his future ` ` effectively and conclusively ' ' upon his return . but Enda - who have be Taoiseach since @card@ - now seem set to hang on for www.months.UK leader Theresa May be likely to trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty , which will begin the process of leave the EU , at the end of the month . and party in the North have until the end of the month to form a powersharing government or risk a second trip to the poll . meanwhile , during his address at the shamrock ceremony with Trump , Kenny bash the US leader ' s anti-immigrant view . he say the Irish be once deem ` ` the wretched refuse on the teem shore ' ' .
judge dread ; Europe still rule us in Labour Brexit Britain would be rule by Euro judge even after leave the EU under ` ` soft ' ' Brexit plan draw up by Labour . the party want the European Court of Justice to continue to hold sway . Shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer reveal the plan , claim the government be out to scrap ` ` seemingly anything with Europe in its name ' ' . he say the UK need to stem ` ` impediment and regulatory change ' ' firm face when we leave . Pro-Brexit MP loathe the court for block attempt to ban terror suspect , deport foreign criminal and cut tax on booze and energy . Ex-Justice Minister Dominic Raab brand Labour ' S plan ` ` outrageous ' ' . he say : ` ` they be take the public for fool . ' ' Yesterday Shadow Home Secretary Diane Abbott say Britain should also continue to accept uncontrolled EU migration .
sobering Warning ; BREXIT Job Threat ; Industry face drink drop chaos Ireland ' S drink and hospitality business will lose ( Euro ) 130million this year due to Brexit , expert have www.warned.es d and the figure will rise if measure be n't introduce in Budget @card@ , it be claim . ( Euro ) generate ds -- d ad to t a new Drinks Industry Group of Ireland report say the continued sterling slump , combine with a hard Brexit , could cost drink and hospitality job and lead business closure . Digi chief have call on the government to slash excise tax by @card@ per cent and create ' regional Brexit hub ' to support rural business in the industry . te by their report come after datum show cross-border shopping be also on the rise . in the third quarter of @card@ , the late figure available show the number of Republic of Ireland-registered car in a -wed sample of Northern Ireland shopping centre be @card@ per cent , the high since the fourth quarter of @card@ . economist believe this trend be likely to continue as sterling approach parity with the euro . the Digi report estimate that this could cost Irish drink business ( Euro ) 60million this year as shopper cross the border to buy cheap alcohol . Secretary of Digi and chief executive of the Licensed Vintners Association Donall O'Keeffe warn : ` ` Ireland already feel the tremor of Brexit . have trem tr me ( Euro ) 2.3bn for u dlu ` ` Our new report estimate that if trend in British tourism and crossborder shopping continue , perpetuate by a devalue sterling , Irish drink and hospitality business could lose as much ( Euro ) 130m this year alone . ` ` if the UK leave the EU without a deal and a hard Brexit occur , this cost will be much more significant . d tal ou @card@ t c @card@ as ( Euro ) @card@ sig ` ` in addition to less tourism spend and more cross-border shopping , Irish drink exporter will be subject to the tariff , new regulation , border check and a small UK market , all of which will lead massive administrative expenditure that could easily sink some small SMEs in our industry . a to ` ` Digi strongly urge the Irish government to enact pro-enterprise , pro-growth measure in Budget @card@ that safeguard Ireland ' s most vulnerable industry , particularly the drink and hospitality sector which be disproportionately expose to Brexit . ' ' the drink industry directly employ @card@ and enable @card@ job in the wide hospitality sector . through a nationwide network of pub , hotel , restaurant , off-licence , distillery , microbreweries , wholesaler and distributor , the industry export ( Euro ) 1.25bn in good annually and generate ( Euro ) 2.3bn of revenue for the Exchequer . however , a report , the Economic Impact of Brexit on the Drinks and Hospitality Sectors , authore by economist Anthony Foley , outline a number of Brexit scenario that could devastate the drink and hospitality sector . Digi claim Ireland ' s tourism industry , which be inseparable from its drink industry , be ` ` disproportionately reliant on the British market ' ' . around @card@ per cent of all foreign visitor to Ireland originate from the UK , but a weak pound have make this country more expensive as a holiday destination . Mr O'Keeffe say there ' s no reason why Brexit measure ca n't be put into place now . he say : ` ` many of Digi ' S recommendation can be put into action immediately , like reduce excise tax . ` ` this punitive tax make our drink and hospitality business less competitive - particularly for British tourist with weak sterling and Irish shopper draw across the border for more affordable alcohol product . ' ' ( Euro ) 2.3bn Drinks revenue generate for Exchequer @card@ - Number directly employ by the industry
May way or the highway , Boris ; Theresa : I ' M in Front Seat ON BREXIT TALKS PM RAPS ' BACKSEAT Driver ' Boz BOJO Dad : he ' S Happy To QUIT Job Theresa May yesterday tell Boris Johnson she be in the Brexit driving seat as Cabinet unity fall apart and his future hang in the balance . the PM slap down her Foreign Secretary after he map out his ` ` glorious ' ' vision for the future outside the EU . she refuse BoJo ' s plea to spend an extra £350million a week on the NHS once we leave . and refer to Home Secretary Amber Rudd ' s weekend accusation that Mr Johnson be ` ` back seat driving ' ' , Mrs May insist : ` ` this government be drive from the front . ' ' source tell the Sun Mr Johnson decide to publish his 4,000-word blueprint on Friday as he believe Brexit negotiation with the EU will fail and end up with Mrs May be humiliate . last night he spark resignation fever when challenge about quit . Mr Johnson tell the BBC they be ` ` bark up the wrong tree ' ' . but he add : ` ` when the burden of office be lift from my shoulder , I will of course look back with great pride on my time do all sort of thing . ' ' his dad Stanley reckon Boris be set to quit over a soft Brexit . he say : ` ` this be such an important issue I would have think he would be happy , happy , happy to walk away from the whole thing if that ' s what he have to do . ' ' just day before Mrs May ' S critical Brexit speech in Florence on Friday there be increase chaos at the heart of the government as : vote leave flag bearer Dominic Cummings accuse Chancellor Philip Hammond , the Home Secretary and senior mandarin of lobby for a soft Brexit that would see the UK pay EU contribution for year ; Mr Johnson reiterate Britain will not pay ` ` extortionate ' ' sum for access to the single market , as ` ` they would n't pay for access to our market ' ' ; BREXIT-backers accuse David Davis of siding with Mr Hammond , spark a vicious counter-attack with one ally of the Brexit Secretary say : ` ` it ' S all Hammond ' S scheme ' ' ; the Brexit department ' s top civil servant , Oliver Robbins , leave to take up a new No10 role after a series of report row with Mr Davis ; the department ' s head of trade and partnership , civil servant Antony Phillipson , be say to be move to become consul general in New York ; Michael Gove , who fall out with Mr Johnson over the Tory leadership , back him over his claim Britain can save £350million a week by quit . Labour ' S Stephen Doughty , a key supporter of Remain group Open Britain , say the PM need to ` ` get a grip ' ' . he say : ` ` Boris Johnson may be back seat driving , but the car be now in danger of spin out of control . ' ' Tory Defence Minister Tobias Ellwood tweet : ` ` think many would agree we be not witness our fine hour . ' ' in Ottawa , Canada , yesterday to seal a new trade deal with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau , Mrs May insist the government be unite . she say : ` ` look , this government be drive from the front , and we ' re all go in the same direction . ` ` we ' re all agree on the basis of the principle for our negotiation that we be work hard to get the well possible deal for the UK . ' ' ask about Mr Johnson ' s challenge to her authority , the PM remark : ` ` look , Boris be Boris . ' ' Quizzed whether she back a soft or hard Brexit , Mrs May say : ` ` I do n't recognise that simple binary approach . ' ' but she refuse to rule out make big payment to Brussels for at least two year in a transition deal after the @card@ deadline to quit . Mrs May also say it be up to the government how any money save by leave would be spend . on Mr Johnson ' s £350million-a-week claim , she say : ` ` the reality be it vary . ' ' Mr Johnson ' S ally say he believe it be vital the government can walk away from the stall talk as the EU will not give the UK any big concession . he tell a pal : ` ` nobody beat the EU in a negotiation . ' ' but senior Tory be furious with him for throw the government into disarray after the EU Withdrawal Bill be pass this month . one say : ` ` it ' s be a car crash . ' ' BoJo , who meet President Trump at the UN in New York yesterday , claim he be merely try to ` ` sketch out ' ' his Brexit vision . last night Lord Hague warn the conservative to unite over Brexit or risk lose the next election . the former Tory party leader say it be ` ` high time ' ' they agree a plan .
peer pressure ; Lords ' BREXIT TALKS Warning ; UK ' must give Holyrood real influence ' Peers last night urge Downing Street to ` ` raise its game ' ' and give Holyrood ` ` real influence ' ' on Britain ' s Brexit deal . a House of Lords group blast the ` ` talk shop ' ' Joint Ministerial Committee meeting between UK minister and the devolve leader . and they echo SNP and Labour concern by warn Brexit Secretary David Davis not to use the departure as a ` ` grab ' ' to hoard power repatriate from Brussels . but the powerful Lords ' EU committee reject Nat ' demand for a separate deal for Scotland if the UK quit the single market . a report into how Brexit will affect devolve government say : ` ` the UK Government need to raise its game to make the JMC effective . ` ` this mean good preparation ... and a willingness to accept that the JMC , even if not a formal decisionmak body , be more than a talk shop . ' ' it say the committee should be ` ` authorise to agree common position on key matter ' ' and insist any attempt to use Brexit to snaffle Holyrood power could add to instability . but the report brand SNP plan to keep us in the single market ` ` politically impracticable , legally complex and economically disruptive ' ' . Committee member Lord Jay of Ewelme say : ` ` the UK Government must respect the devolve institution . it be not enough to say it be listen to them . ` ` it must take account of what they say and adjust its approach to accommodate their spe-cific need . equally , the devolve administration must work with , not against , the UK Government to get the good Brexit . ' ' Nat Europe spokesman Stephen Gethins say : ` ` this show that Scotland ' S voice , along with Wales and Northern Ireland , can not be ignore by Westminster . ' '
if YOUR NAME ' S NOT Down ... EUR Nat STAYING in ; SNP Out in Cold ON BREXIT Plans ; Fury as May snub Holyrood N t Mik R ll h Top Nat Mike Russell have blast Theresa May for leave Holyrood in the dark on her major speech about quit the EU . the Brexit minister say he be ` ` very concerned ' ' the Prime Minister have trail her masterplan for a ` ` clean and hard ' ' split from Europe without contact the Scottish government . Mrs May be tomorrow due to set out her Brexit vision before meeting minister from Scotland and other devolve nation later this week . but Mr Russell say : ` ` we ' ve be give no information about what the Prime Minister intend to say despite there be a meeting on Thursday . it ' S fair to say that I be very concern . ' ' an SNP spokesman add : ` ` the Tories seem intent on plough on with their hard Brexit plan without give Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland so much as a head up . ` ` they think they can do anything to Scotland and get away with it . it ' s time to show them they ca n't . ' ' the Prime Minister be expect to unveil a plan which will take Britain out of the single market and custom union to regain control over immigration . it come ahead of tomorrow ' s Holyrood vote over Nicola Sturgeon ' s blueprint for a deal to keep Scotland in the single market . Alex Salmond yesterday brand the UK Government'stance ` ` a farce ' ' and ` ` a full English Brexit ' ' Th Brexit ' ' . the former First Minister add : ` ` Theresa May , at the last count , be consider a special deal for Northern Ireland , the Channel Islands and the car industry in Sunderland . ` ` now there ' s an indication there could be a special deal for the City of London . ` ` that would all make it impossible to resist the Scottish Government ' s argument that Scotland should be give special status . Theresa May ' S speech be not go to cut it . the lack of stature be become more evident as each day go by . ' ' Lib Dem leader Willie Rennie say : ` ` this reckless behaviour by Theresa May risk our economy and job . ` ` this be the real danger of hand the conservative a blank cheque so they can agree any deal they fancy irrespective of the consequence . ' '
Bridget Jones ' S Bye Bye ; Firth to become Italian Bridget Jones ' s Baby star Colin Firth be to become an Italian citizen after blast Brexit . Colin , @card@ , have be marry to Italian Livia Giuggioli , @card@ , for @card@ year and speak the language . a source say : ` ` he be horrify by Brexit and be worry about the consequence . ' ' he and film producer Livia - parent to son Luca , @card@ , and Matteo , @card@ - go to Italy often and have a holiday home there . follow last June ' s Brexit vote he say : ` ` it ' s a disaster of unexpected proportion . Brexit do n't have a single positive aspect . ' ' and in @card@ he say : ` ` I do n't feel plant here . I feel very connect to America . ` ` my mother grow up there and I spend a year in US high school . ` ` grow up , I feel almost American . ' ' Colin , who live in Chiswick , West London , want joint UK and Italian citizenship like his wife and kid have . he have submit form to his local Italian embassy . his spokesman say : ` ` he ' s apply for dual citizenship to have the same passport as his family . ' '
Kez blast at Ruth ' s ' support for liar ' KEZIA Dugdale yesterday slam the Tory as ` ` Scotland ' s Brexit party ' ' . the Labour leader accuse rival Ruth Davidson of back a Westminster government whose minister sell ` ` a bunch of lie ' ' before the EU referendum . Ms Dugdale say : ` ` Senior member of the government she support be the same people who eight week ago Ruth Davidson say be lie to the British public . ` ` how can we believe a word the Tories say when just eight week ago they sell the public a proposition even their Scottish leader accept be a bunch of lie ? they be Scotland ' s Brexit party . ' ' Ms Dugdale say Tory prepare to negotiate Brexit be take the country down a path that spell year of instability . ca a RBa during the referendum campaign , Ms Davidson - lead voice on the Remain side - accuse Boris Johnson of ` ` sell a lie ' ' and fellow Tory Andrea Leadsom of tell a ` ` blatant untruth ' ' . ain
BREXIT Circus in Town Last week ' s Brexit development would be bad than laughable if it be not for the fact that the livelihood and wellbeing of million be now in the hand of people who could n't pass the car mechanics course at Billy Smart ' s Circus . there be a time - it seem in another life - when Theresa May be go around the country , urge us all to strengthen her hand in Brexit negotiation . it be always a bonkers notion . as if the EU would suddenly shatter into dust and give up its demand over citizen right and the Irish border because the Tory vote go up in Tunbridge Wells . in fact the opposite have happen . the election result leave Theresa May at the head of a crippled government with no majority , prop up by the bought-andpaid-for vote of a fringe party from Northern Ireland . weak Bizarrely that have see Europe rush to prop her up too because they would rather see her in power , however weak , than try to deal with something even bad in the shape of Boris Johnson or David Davis . the Brexit Secretary himself crown another week of triumph by insist that the @card@ in depth report on the impact of Brexit he have be boast about since the summer do not , in fact , exist . he ' s never read them , because they be never write even though he say they be . and anyway , they be not assessment , they be analysis - but they do n't exist . only people who could make themselves believe that this stuff add up could also believe that agree to another ten year of possible intervention from the European Court of Justice be ` ` take back control ' ' . and only those people could believe that pay £1,400 per household for the possibility of secure a trade deal with Europe worse than we ' ve get now could possibly make any sense .
chop Basket SHOPPERS be set for a Brexit bonanza with the cost of food and clothes plunge , a study say . it could mean massive saving if minister can strike tariff-free trade deal with country outside Europe . the economist ' report estimate household will be up to £40 a week well off once Brexit be finalise . price would tumble as tariff be cut or axe on good include booze , electrical and car import from non-EU country . Tory MP Charlie Elphicke say : ` ` we can get rid of these ridiculous charge and cut the cost of a weekly shop . ' ' Nike TANJUN TRAINERS NOW : £59.99 BREXIT £49.85 T5 Down £10.14 TOMATO KETCHUP NOW : £1.45 £T Down 15P BREXIT £1,30 PEANUT Butter NOW : £2.49 £BREXIT £2.17 T down 32P NEW Zealand Butter NOW : £1.50 £BREXIT 69P T down 81P
HAMMOND : I ' LL Phil My Boots ; Budget Warning To EU ; he grab £27bn for Brexit war chest Philip Hammond have warn EU leader he be build a multibillion pound Brexit fight fund to hit back if Britain be refuse a good deal . the Chancellor reveal he will not spend an expect £27billion windfall from a strong economy to be unveil in Wednesday ' S budget . instead , he will bank it to ensure the UK have ` ` reserve in the tank ' ' as exit negotiation pan out . Mr Hammond say : ` ` we expect to do a deal with the EU that will allow us to continue trading together . ` ` if there ' S anybody in the European union who think if we do n't do a deal , Britain will slink off as a wounded animal , that ' S not go to happen . ' ' be £27bn for a Brexit fund worth ` ` a Brexit war chest could be use to fund corporation tax cut to keep Britain attractive to business under hefty tariff on EU trade . @card@ @card@ Better Call on DAB , the talkRADIO or talkradio . a spending splurge may also be need to protect live standard if the economy see a Brexit wobble , the Chancellor admit . he also warn the UK still have debt of £1.7trillion and the deficit must still be tackle . Mr Hammond say Britain will pay an EU ` ` divorce bill ' ' despite be under no legal obligation . but he dismiss a threaten £50billion figure as ` ` prenegotiation positioning ' ' . Mr Hammond have warn MP that Wednesday ' S budget , his first as Chancellor , will be a small one than usual . it ? @card@ Paul his refusal to dip into increase tax revenue have spark fear he would instead raise stealth tax . App www.co.uk but he be ban from hike income tax , VAT or national insurance by a Tory election manifesto promise .
Juncker be a clown to tag Brexiters ' racist ' he have use the tragic murder of Polish worker Arkadiusz Jozwik to make a bizarre claim that all Brexit voter be racist . it be very sad that Juncker be use such a tragedy to try to make political gain but he have just show himself up . Keith Laing Edinburgh why be I not surprise at Juncker ' S statement ? the man will say anything to try to damage Britain after the Brexit vote . do he think anyone be listen to him ? Diana Murray Stirling Juncker be in a league of his own as a sore loser over Brexit . he stupidly use the murder of Polish worker Arkadiusz Jozwik in Britain to label Brexit voter as racist . the man be an idiot who , like many Remainers , ca n't - or wo n't - accept the wisdom of our leave the EU despite increase evidence of Britain have make the right choice . Mick BIDEWELL by email I vote for Brexit but I be wait to hear what our plan be . there do not seem to be any concrete plan yet . Sarah Young Dunfermline I DO not understand why John Hinckley be a free man . he injure President Reagan in @card@ . he mean to kill him . that should be enough to keep him in jail for life . I wonder if the judge who rule he ` ` no longer pose a danger ' ' would like him as HIS next door neighbour . amber JACOBS by email it be bad enough find out that Tony Blair get us to invade Iraq in dubious circumstance . now we find out that David Cameron have no idea what he be do when he order us to bomb Libya . why be n't Prime Ministers hold to proper account for their half-baked overseas invasion and for put the life of serve army personnel at risk ? Stephen Mccarthy Glasgow Sir Philip Green , picture , say he be work on a ` ` daily basis ' ' to rectify the pension problem at BHS . he should just write out a cheque to cover the half a billion he take out of BHS , then he can carry on his endless holiday . Trevor Richardson by email
final OK for BREXIT Bill A Tory revolt be quash by Theresa May last night to finally pass a law authorise Brexit after a five-week battle with Parliament . the Commons throw out two major condition slap on the bill by the Lords last week . and Labour peer late last night back down and agree not to tamper with the landmark power - order by the Supreme Court - a second time , end the constitutional stand-off . the victory mean the PM will be free to formally trigger the start of two-year Brexit talk as soon as the Queen give it Royal Assent . Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson call it a pivotal and exciting moment . eleven Tory MP who campaign for Remain defy the PM ' s three-line whip to abstain over the issue of whether to give Parliament a veto on the Brexit talk ' outcome . the government win the Commons showdown by @card@ to @card@ , a majority of @card@ . Mrs May ' S number be boost by six Brexit-backing Labour MP , ten Ulster Unionists and Ukip ' s only MP voting with her . the Commons also throw out a second Lords amendment to grant the 3.2million EU citizen already live here immediate residency right when we leave the EU , by @card@ to @card@ . we WO N'T Fall Off A Cliff - Matt Ridley , page ten be it time we all get Brexit ? behind Better Call Paul @card@ @card@ @card@ on DAB , the TALKRADIO App or www.talkradio.co.uk
Labour risk crisis if it vote Remain ON Monday at midnight , Jeremy Corbyn ' S Labour Party will make its first big post-election mistake . its MP will be whip to vote against the EU Withdrawal Bill . up to now , Labour have manage to have its cake and eat it on Brexit . at the last election , Labour MP in Brexit-backing seat could say their party be n't against it , that it have vote for Article @card@ . meanwhile , in Remain-voting area , Labour hoover up vote from those angry about Britain leave the EU . this strategy enable Labour to keep hold of nearly all of its seat in heavily Brexit area while at the same time get prosperous metropolitan voter , who would be hammer by Corbyn ' s tax policy , to vote for them in a Brexit protest . remarkably , @card@ per cent of Financial Times reader vote Labour despite Corbyn ' s hostility to the City and high earner . but by oppose the withdrawal bill , Labour be endanger this coalition . as one excited Tory tell me , they will now be able to attack Labour for vote against leave the EU . a significant number of Labour MP with Brexit-backing constituency be worry about this . the Tories who liaise with Labour Brexiteers think as many as @card@ Labour MP could defy their leader on Monday . so why be Labour take this risk ? the first reason be that this be a great opportunity for them to cause trouble for the government . with several Tory MP unhappy about bit of the bill , they have a chance of defeat the government on at least some amendment . secondly , there be those on the Labour side who think this bill simply give the Tory government too much power . but the third reason be the most important . they do n't want a new pro-European , pro-single market party to be form . with the Tory in turmoil , perhaps the big threat to Corbyn ' s chance of make it to No10 be the creation of a new centre party . it would draw more vote from Labour than from any other party . this new party would have no trouble raise money - some deep-pocketed individual have privately make clear they would be prepare to support it . but no politician have be prepare to make the leap . Corbyn and his team want to deny pro-single market Labour MP an excuse to jump - hence the party ' s softening position on Brexit . but with the Brexit talk turn nasty , Labour ' S position be a risk . the EU side be ramp up the rhetoric - note their distinctly undiplomatic attack on David Davis this week . if this continue , the public will likely side with their own government rather than an EU that look like it be try to bully Britain into hand over ten of billion of pound . one minister closely involve with the withdrawal bill tell me : ` ` I want Barnier and Juncker to keep do what they be do . ` ` it will either force Merkel and the other to make Barnier and Juncker move or shore up support for no-deal at home . ' ' at the heart of government , they remain confident there will be a deal in the end . one well-place source predict the EU will ultimately adopt a more reasonable position on the so-called divorce bill ` ` because some money be good than no money ' ' . yet this approach underestimate the risk of human error - that both side miscalculate and expect the other to back down , with the result that the talk collapse . for this reason , the government must make Britain as ready as possible for a no-deal scenario . James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator .
give us Brexit we vote for Philip Hammond say we do n't vote to become poor in the EU referendum - but that be exactly what we do . we be tell in no in uncertain term by the Chancellor and his Remainers that , if we vote leave , we would be poor . and we do so know we may be bad off . people like Hammond will stop us make a clean break and leave us half in and half out , which be not what we vote for . john Allison Fareham , Hants Chiefs of industry , politician and the Bank of England bang on about Brexit this , Brexit that , and how it will affect thing . I vote leave . and you know what , it be n't go to matter two fig to me what sort of deal we get . I have n't have a pay rise in age and I doubt if I will get one any time soon . so just get on with it . stop give me rubbish prediction that will be wrong anyway . Simon Thompson Broadstairs , Kent Prior to the referendum , Philip Hammond and the Bank of England ' S Mark Carney state Brexit would be disastrous for this country , job would be lose and we could n't survive without the EU . now they claim we do n't know what we vote for . it ' s time they stop try to change what the UK choose . it be a democratic vote and they lose . David Pearson Rotherham , South Yorks I be feed up with reading about MP whose ego be so big that they think they be above democracy . they win their seat on first-past-the-post , yet think that the vote on Brexit do not apply to them . will they vacate their seat ? no , but they think it be OK to ignore the referendum vote . they be employ by the people to act on behalf of the people , not in their own interest . gill Risley Wellingborough , Northants PITY Mrs May do n't win more seat in the election , as the Remoaners be all come out the woodwork again . if Philip Hammond ca n't deliver the hard Brexit we all vote for , just resign and let us have a Chancellor who will . as for Mark Carney , let him quit too and stop damage our economy with doom and gloom . Ricky Hart Scunthorpe , North Lincs THE EU chief negotiator ' s claim that the member state will decide whether or not there have be ` ` significant progress ' ' on a Brexit deal be nonsense . Germany will decide and the rest of them will do as they be tell . john Collins Chelmsford , Essex the fickle public just love to moan . if we all want strong EU negotiation , we should have give Theresa May a strong majority . if you believe the negotiation have start poorly , imagine what a Labour government would have do . Steve Turner Truro , Cornwall Theresa May would normally be safe for the duration of this parliament , even with a minority , because the DUP will do everything to keep Jeremy Corbyn out and Sinn Fein will never swear allegiance to the Queen . her problem will come through treacherous backbencher who would happily bring the government down to serve their own self-interest . she must come up with some good policy , call another General Election , win an overall majority and then tell the turncoat to go to hell . Brian Alden Bristol I be amaze at the way Theresa May be be ask to go by Labour ' S Jeremy Corbyn but even more amazed at the call for her to step down from member of her own party . she Won the election , even if her majority may not be the one she be hope for . the Tory MP who have turn tail and call for her to go should be ashamed for play right into the hand of the opposition . jean Norfolk Knottingley , West York THESE be test time as our democracy come under attack from those hell-bent on anarchy . now the ballot box have not temper their discontent , we must all stand strong . anarchist must not be allow to triumph over democracy . Ronald Moore Lewes , East Sussex TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply I do N'T believe anyone would have a problem pay an extra £1 a week on National Insurance if it be use for the NHS only . and for use at ground level , not on senior management . Ivan FELGATE PLEASE , let ' s stop bash Theresa May . she need us now , more than ever . David King , East Sussex A Poll suggest drive test for over-75s . how many at this age be catch drink or drugdriving or use mobile at the wheel ? perhaps no one under @card@ should drive ? it would be safe . G Frayne , West York email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
DOOMSMAY ; DEMAND By Top Tories PM ' must go in June @card@ ' new leader ' after Brexit ' pressure be grow on Theresa May to announce she will step down as Prime Minister in June @card@ . Senior Tories want her to spell out a departure timetable at the October Conservative conference . they say make it clear she will stay in power until after Brexit - due at midnight on @card@ March @card@ - would strengthen Britain ' s negotiate hand . EU leader would know they have to deal with Mrs May and do not have the option of wait for a successor . but the senior Tory want Mrs May to trigger a nine-week Tory leadership contest as soon as Brexit be achieve - so her replacement would have time to prepare for the next General Election by @card@ . one senior minister say : ` ` we need the certainty of Theresa stay until Brexit to stand a chance of get a decent deal . ` ` she have to make it know publicly she ' s go nowhere until then for the Europeans to believe it - and conference be the time to do that . ` ` go at that point mean she can soak up the toxicity over Brexit so the new leader get a clean sheet . ' ' one of the PM ' S few remain loyal supporter also point out that serve just short of three year in the nation ' s top job would mean Mrs May beat Gordon Brown ' S tenure . the ex-Labour Premier do two year and ten month before be oust in @card@ - make him the shortestserving PM since Sir Alec Douglas Hume in @card@ . before the election , Mrs May say she would serve at least five more year in no @card@ . but since throw away her majority the PM have say nothing about her future publicly , only tell Tory MP at a @card@ Committee showdown she would carry on ` ` for as long as you want me ' ' . Tory backbencher Tim Loughton describe Mrs May @card@ when Mrs May ' S replacement would face national poll
Carney : leaving will not be easy foreign Secretary Boris Johnson have face a twopronged attack on his claim that Brexit will lead to a booming Britain . Mr Johnson have say that Britain could ` ` have its cake and eat it ' ' as it go ahead with leave the EU . but Bank of England governor Mark Carney cast doubt on Mr Johnson ' s claim in a speech at Mansion House in London . Mr Carney say the uncertainty over Brexit mean it be too early to raise the Bank ' s base interest rate . but he say it would not be long before we see if Brexit be a ` ` gentle stroll along a smooth path to a land of cake and consumption ' ' . he also warn of sluggish wage growth and ` ` mixed signal on consumer spending ' ' . Mr Johnson ' s own deputy Alan Duncan also blast his boss ' S view . he say to pretend Brexit ` ` be go to be plain sailing be such a knuckle-headed lunacy that make one wonder why anyone who think that be in politics ' ' . and he tell documentary Brexit Means Brexit : the unofficial Version that he could not see ` ` any route to a pain-free exit ' ' . Sun City - Page @card@
bulge Britain ; Population ' will leap 12m by @card@ if no hard Brexit ' immigration will fuel a UK population rise of 12million by @card@ unless we opt for a hard Brexit to stem the influx , a think tank claim . the surge - from 65million to 77million - will be the equivalent of take in every citizen from Bulgaria , Latvia and Lithuania combine , accord to Migration Watch . the figure be base on trend under current EU freedom of movement rule , which Brussels will insist we continue to obey if we want to stay in the EU single market . that option - dub soft Brexit - would mean ` ` a relentless increase in our population ' ' , accord to the think tank ' S Alp Mehmet . he say that three-quarter of the extra people live here will be immigrant and their child . the figure come in a report by his organisation that predict Britain will continue to be a magnet for migrant after Brexit because of high wage and a strong economy . Mr Mehmet say a soft Brexit would have ` ` very serious consequence for our society ' ' . he add : ` ` an increase of anything like 12million in just @card@ year be , quite simply , unacceptable to the British public and certainly not what they vote for in the Referendum . ' ' the report come a day after the Sun reveal Jeremy Corbyn ' S leave wing pressure group Momentum be behind a bid to let more migrant into Britain .
Clegg in die off taunt at Leavers Nick Clegg be blast yesterday by say Brexit will be reverse because leave voter be die . the ex-MP say : ` ` the last vote be a photo finish with only @card@ vote in it . I suspect the high point of the Brexit vote have already pass . ' ' he say young people who have to live with the result of the referendum ` ` overwhelmingly support something different ' ' . ask if he mean to say Brexit voter be die off , the ex-Lib Dem leader reply : ` ` the old vote for Brexit - the young do the opposite . ' ' but Brexit backer say Mr Clegg lose his own seat thanks to student angry over tuition fee .
Bord Bia Brexit bid Bord Bia be set to embark on a Brexit Roadshow over the next few week to measure the potential impact on food exporter . Minister for Agriculture , Food and the Marine Michael Creed TD launch the initiative yesterday , which will see @card@ Bord Bia manager travel across the country to talk to people about the likely impact of Brexit on business . Minister Creed say : ` ` with the trigger of Article @card@ in sight it be timely that I launch this new Brexit support initiative , which I encourage all food exporter to engage with as much as possible . ' '
Theresa MAYBE ; BREXITEERS Near TEARS PM refuse to confirm if she ' d vote for Brexit now the PM spark anger last night when she refuse to say if she would vote for Brexit in a new referendum . Theresa May , who back Remain last year , say she would come to a ` ` judgment ' ' after weigh up all the fact . her admission horrify Brexiteers , and spark question about whether she believe leave the EU be the right course for the country . Mrs May refuse four time to say which side she would back in a new referendum when quiz by LBC radio host Iain Dale . she say : ` ` You ' re ask me to say how would I vote now against a different background . a different international background , a different economic background . circumstance move on . I think we should all be focus on deliver Brexit . ' ' but one pro-Brexit minister tell the Sun : ` ` oh my God . that ' S the easy question to answer . I just want to cry . ' ' leave campaign boss and former Labour MP Gisela Stuart say : ` ` the duty of the government be to implement the decision of the referendum . ` ` it would have be more helpful if she have say she believe in this . ' ' Pro-EU supporter also blast the PM . Labour MP Chris Bryant say : ` ` this make her hard Brexit policy all the more irresponsible . ' ' it will place Mrs May under renewed pressure follow her disastrous conference speech last week . during the live phone-in , she also refuse to give a guarantee to all 3.2million EU citizen in Britain that they could stay on if there be no Brexit deal . quiz by one worried European living in the UK , Mrs May would only say : ` ` we do n't know what ' s go to happen . ` ` we be work on it , but I want EU citizen to stay - we wo n't be throw EU citizen out in future . ' '
time for Lords to be send packing ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter the House of Lords be an unelected bunch try to prove they be worthwhile - but they be not listen to the will of the people . we need them to act on Brexit so that we can get a deal and start a new life away from the bureaucracy . harry Miles Edinburgh the unelected House of Lords be try to dictate what the Prime Minister have to do over Brexit . well , Mrs May , either tell them to back the majority of the people who vote for you to get Brexit right or let ' s have that second referendum they want and vote to abolish the Lords . Ricky Hart by email I be all for the Brexit deal , be scrutinise but the House of Lords seem to be try to derail the process . that be not democracy . olive Hayes Aberdeen Other country in the EU must be laugh their head off at us . the UK give them the impression that democracy start here yet the democratically elect House of Commons be thwart by an unelected chamber of old fossil . how do you explain that , yes we elect people , we have a referendum give people a vote on Brexit but the Lords can try to over-rule it ? Stewart Mann Glasgow if the late WikiLeaks report on the hacking of Samsung TV and turn them into super spy be to be believe , then another frightening dimension have be add to international espionage . we know clandestine intervention be necessary for the security of a nation , but the belief that our home can be invade on a personal level and at will by an outside body be mindboggling . the fact that it have now be expose be small comfort . Francis QUITHER Bellshill , Lanarkshire So the CIA can hack into our smartphones , computer and car . I have nothing to hide in my life but I still think it be an invasion of privacy . I understand the CIA be deal with dangerous terrorist all the time and think this be a way they can get more information . but to turn our smart TV into living-room spy be not something I want . Adam Barnes by Email AFTER David Walliams ' abysmal performance on ITV ' S the Nightly Show , John Bishop , picture , be struggle and not much well . with more big name line up , be the money too good to refuse ? les Holt by email
Banana split it be n't too long ago that Ruth Davidson be berate the Scottish government for waste its time over independence instead of fight to keep Scotland in the European Single Market . Prime Minister Theresa May have announce a farewell to the Single Market , but Ms Davidson be still castigate Nicola Sturgeon ' s government over indy . in a speech yesterday she say opt for independence because of Brexit would be like chop your own foot off because you ' ve stub your toe . in fact , Brexit mean we ' ve decide to go on hunger strike because of a straight banana . the Tory leader say the SNP be ` ` weaponising Brexit ' ' to boost support for independence and ` ` crank up the grievance machine in an attempt to push people towards the exit door ' ' . in another speech - also in London - Labour leader Kezia Dugdale say Brexit represent a failure of politics , and govern party have fail to take heed of the message from the voter . maybe so , but almost two-third of Scot vote to stay in Europe . ng uld to the she ca n't accuse the SNP of ignore those voter and , before the Nat could weaponise Brexit , the weapon have be place in their hand . it be Conservatives who do that . ng she ur- . Ruth Davidson use to think leave the EU would be disastrous . now say we have to suck it up . Nicola Sturgeon say Scot should have a choice . whatever happen , it be go to be choice between the lesser of two evil e a vils be the and both those lady in London right - the SNP have take its eye off ball on key issue like education . an they do n't need any help find excuse for a grievance . ng n't ully the Tory Government be provide plenty of those and Ms Davidson do n't help her own cause by be wilfully blind to them . ond ust ent but if the SNP be to succeed in its second bite at the independence cherry , it must get back on track as a competent government first .
yes WE Carne ; BOOST for UK Economy ' Mr Doom ' BACKTRACKS Project Fear CRUMBLES BANK of England boss Mark Carney declare Britain will cope with Brexit - as it be claim the economy will grow faster than forecast this year . the governor say the nation ' s ` ` flexibility and dynamism ' ' would help it adjust to change in the relationship with Europe . he speak out as the International Monetary Fund say Britain be perform well than expect after last June ' s Brexit vote . the IMF expect the economy to grow @card@ per cent this year , the same as Germany ' S . the @card@ per cent jump on its forecast last October be mostly on account of betterthan-expected performance late last year , it say . separately , Mr Carney say : ` ` household appear to be entirely look through Brexit-related uncertainty . ` ` the saving rate have fall towards its pre-crisis p S low , and consumer borrowing have accelerate notably . ' ' Mr Carney , blast for his ` ` Project Fear ' ' comment over Brexit , speak of recent sign of ` ` solid consumer momentum ' ' at home and a good outlook for global growth . in a speech in London yesterday , he say the UK be ready and able to deal with Brexit . he say : ` ` the flexibility and dynamism of this economy will help it adjust as its relationship with the EU become clear and new opportunity with the rest of the world open up . ' ' Mr Carney say interest rate could go either way depend on the how the economy fare , although analyst interpret his speech as an indication it will remain at @card@ per cent for the rest of @card@ and beyond . he defend rise price , say a little inflation ` ` grease the wheels ' ' of the economy . inflation hit @card@ per cent in November . the Bank ' S target be for @card@ per cent . price be due to rise this year due to the weak pound push up import cost . yesterday , it hit a 31-year low against the US dollar .
Clegg in ' die off ' taunt at Leavers ; Brussels Row @card@ Nick Clegg spark fury yesterday by say Brexit will be reverse because leave voter be die . the ex-MP say : ` ` the last vote be a photo finish - there be only @card@ vote in it . Actuarially , I suspect that the high point of the Brexit vote have already pass . ' ' he say young people who have to live with the result of the referendum ` ` overwhelmingly support something different ' ' . ask if he mean to say Brexit voter be die off , the ex-Lib Dem leader reply : ` ` the old voter vote for Brexit - the young voter do the opposite . ' ' but Brexit backer say Mr Clegg lose his own seat thanks to student angry over tuitiion fee .
Brexit hit to growth Scotland ' S economy be be hamper by Brexit uncertainty , accord to research by PwC . the finance giant predict growth of @card@ per cent this year and @card@ per cent in @card@ - low than that project for the UK over the same period . PwC ' S UK Economic Outlook blame ` ` slow consumer spending growth and the drag on business investment from uncertainty over the outcome of the Brexit negotiation ' ' . a Scottish Government spokeswoman say : ` ` Brexit continue to cast a shadow over the economy . ' ' £85bn Brexit row - Page Four
Brexit ' be a spasm ' Chief Remainer Gina Miller claim people vote for Brexit because of an ` ` emotional spasm ' ' . the millionaire banker say voter ` ` wanted someone to listen to them ' ' . she tell a Westminster convention : ` ` they be cry out . it be an emotional spasm , Brexit . ' ' but Mrs Miller , who be join by luvvies include Bob Geldof and Jarvis Cocker , be accuse of be condescending . Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` it be n't a spasm but a tsunami . ' ' meanwhile , Tony Blair wade into Brexit negotiation by say it would be a disaster to have a hard border between Ireland and Northern Ireland .
Labour ' s EU plan be fishy be it any wonder lefty want to stay as long as possible in the European Union ? they have no one to lead their dysfunctional party , let alone a great country like ours . the people of this country say no to open border , no cash to the EU and they want to protect our fishing ground . if Europe want our fish , they can jolly well pay for it through our market , not pilfer it - and that include Ireland . john CATTAWAY Worthing , West Sussex why do we have to remain in the single market and the custom union ? we do not have to be in either to get a free trade agreement , as be prove by the recent Canadian and Japanese trade agreement . in fact , it be EU Commission policy to promote free trade worldwide , accord to its own website . David Davis be quite right to refuse to agree any financial settlement without negotiate future trading arrangement at the same time . Stuart Robinson Stratford , East London the word ` ` transition ' ' be never mention during the Brexit referendum . it be introduce by Chancellor Philip Hammond , who want to stay with the EU as long as www.possible.No matter who be Tory leader at the next election , the present government will be judge . any failure to deliver a satisfactory Brexit outcome will almost certainly lead to Jeremy Corbyn become PM . if Remoaners predict hard time after Brexit , just wait until the Labour Party get elect . Sean Spillane Luton you can always rely on Labour to pull an underhanded trick . its new proposal to keep us in the single market and custom union after Brexit be just that , particularly their announce it as David Davis be in Brussel for more Brexit talk . seventeen million people vote for Brexit and controlling immigration be a priority with the majority . unless we leave the single market , those people will have vote in vain . outrage and anger wo n't begin to describe their reaction if their will be ignore . and it ' ll be aim squarely at Labour . Sarah Osborne Newcastle upon Tyne Surprise , surprise - Katie Price be get divorce again . perhaps she should sit down and think why . of course she put the blame on all three of her husband . it ' s nothing she have do wrong , apart from flirt with everything in trouser . it would be interesting to read Kieran ' s side of thing . all these so-called star love to boast about their million-pound wedding , then when thing go wrong they love to wash their dirty linen in public . I wonder who hubby No4 will be . at least there will be no prewedding nerve on Katie ' S part . ted Clark Congresbury , Somerset I DOUBT if Katie Price be Mrs Perfect but why be she always be cheat on ? she should have kick Kieran out an age ago , then she would not have be humiliate time and time again . well she leave all man alone and enjoy all those lovely child and her horse . they will be faithful . Lyn Williams Manchester Katie need to realise she have child who be connect to her messy love life and start put them first . it ' s time she have a break from man because she clearly either pick the wrong one or have n't a clue how a two-way relationship work . it wo n't be long before her eldest daughter start give Katie boyfriend advice . Patricia Cordon Cheltenham , Gloucs Authorities place a five-year-old Christian girl with a Muslim family , who tell her that European be bad people and Christianity be a bad religion . if this be a white family behave in such a way to a Muslim child , they would probably be prosecute and bar from adopt for life . when will we stop pander to minority group and remember white indigenous British people be important as well ? Lauren Smith Bristol TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply foreign resident who do n't speak English already get translator , interpreter and double appointment for public service - now police priority . they choose to be ` ` vulnerable ' ' by not learn the language . DFC , Scarborough LORRIES drive in tandem ? ridiculous . how much money have be waste on this vanity project ? put more on the railway to cut pollution . MALC , Timperley , Gtr Manchester Security be such a joke we may as well have open border . victor Saxby email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
transition deal be not true Brexit ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think LEAVE mean leave . now we have to cater for big business and the City . this be what the transition be for , not the British people who have to fork out billion to the EU as well as the billion in foreign aid . little wonder the NHS be cripple , the police non-existent on the street , force cut , service cut - more austerity and tax on the way . these politician be a cancer on the democracy of this country - self-centered , out of touch and , sadly , in Westminster . Richard Knight by email it be obvious that the EU be out to make an example of the UK for dare to leave the club . they think the way to stop the mutiny be to shoot the www.ringleader.No amount of concession will please them . time for some stick . George Wilkinson by Email GET this apology of a PM off the stage - she ' S not get a clue what she ' S say what with more time and money for EU after exit the club and no positive talk of border control . we be suppose to be leave . not keep it go on and on . Hugh Campbell Coatbridge like it or not Theresa May sim-ply have to compromise over Brexit . those cloth-eared EU boss be determine they would n't bow to Britain ' s demand so Mrs May have pamper them with a sensible compromise . her decision on free movement will undoubtedly enrage brit for whom immigration be the key reason they vote for Brexit . but the day will come when Brexit , include a cap on immigration , will fall into place . without Mrs May ' s wise decision to help smooth the troubled water of the Brexit talk another stubborn stalemate would have be the inevitable outcome . carol DAVIES by email as Theresa May blunder her way through Brexit negotiation , Scotland ' S future seem to be in the hand of people who do not care whether Scotland prosper or fall . it seem to be only a matter of time before the people of Scotland be ask again if they want to remain part of the UK . Anthony Martin Glasgow BREXIT lurch from one crisis to another , and yet the Tories be hell bent on go ahead with it . it seem that any deal we get will be bad for Britain , and no deal will leave us at the mercy of the rest of the world in trade term . it ' S not too late to stop this ridiculous process . STEPEHEN Quinn Hamilton
EU hope on Brexit BREXIT could allow Ireland extra leeway on debt and deficit target , accord to European Commission vice president Valdis Dombrovskis . he write to Brian Hayes MEP say the effect of the brit exit the EU could be consider ' exceptional circumstance ' for us under fiscal rule . Mr Hayes say : ` ` Commissioner Dombrovskis have open the door for Ireland to be give flexibility on EU fiscal rule in the event that Ireland suffer from exceptional and short-term economic cost from Brexit . ` ` he describe Brexit as an ' important downward risk ' for Ireland . ' '
BREXIT Boom in @card@ SOARING belief in Brexit by top boss point to @card@ be a boom year for Britain . a new poll reveal business confidence have return to the level see before June ' s historic decision to quit the EU . six in ten boss be either ` ` optimistic or very optimistic ' ' about their prospect next year . and they far outweigh those industry chief who say they be still pessimistic since the vote to leave . the Institute of Directors say most of their @card@ business-owning member believe @card@ will herald high revenue and profitability , despite Brexit naysayer . just @card@ per cent of business expect their revenue to fall next year , compare with @card@ per cent who expect a windfall . the IoD poll see business confidence recover after dip in the immediate after-math of the Brexit vote . Simon Walker , of the IoD , say : ` ` while some speculate on what our relationship with Europe might look like in the year to come , employer be get on with the job . ' ' the lead business group do warn their polling show ` ` need for a long-term skill strategy and an immigration system that give business access to talent they need ' ' . the Sun say - Page ten
NAGGY NAGGY NAGGY ; Premier UNVEILS Her Euro Masterplan ; Theresa to launch triple Brexit blast Theresa May will unveil her secret masterplan for a ` ` swift and clean ' ' Brexit this week and declare : ` ` we ' re on our way out . ' ' the PM will show she mean business by announce a triple whammy departure from the EU to be trigger within @card@ day . it will take Britain out of the single market , out of the custom union and out of the control of European judge . Senior source promise she will ` ` nag and cajole ' ' our @card@ European partner to get the well possible deal for them and us . Mrs May ' S blueprint will end month of speculation about whether she plan a hard or soft Brexit . she aim to honour her ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' pledge by take the bold action need to win back power to control our border and set our own law . in a historic speech to assemble diplomat from around the world , she will announce her intention to quit the single market and withdraw from the European Court ' S jurisdiction . she be also expect to pull out of the custom union - give her minister freedom to strike trade deal with country around the world . Mrs May insist she will fight hard to keep trading with the EU but have no fear of walk away empty-handed if they refuse to play ball . she be expect to say : ` ` the overwhelming majority of people - however they vote - say we need to get on and make Brexit happen . ` ` Business be n't call to reverse the result but plan to make a success of it . and the House of Commons have vote overwhelmingly for us to get on with it too . ' ' her long-awaited speech , bill as the Plan for Britain , will also be use as a shop window for global representative wait to do business with the UK . Mrs May be ready to spurn Remainer warning of catastrophe if she break all existing export link with the EU . but she be not prepare to budge on end free movement as a price for stay in the trade club . a senior government source say : ` ` the EU be demand a high ransom to remain in the single market - the continua-tion of free movement . the PM be quite clear she be not prepare to accept that . ` ` it ' s look increasingly likely we ' ll leave the custom union too because membership would forbid us from hold bilateral trade talk with any other country . that would negate the whole purpose of leave the EU . ' ' she be expect to explicitly rule out stay in the single market in Tuesday ' S speech . leave the custom union hold no fear for her , as about @card@ per cent of the world economy will be outside the EU once Britain leave . one option be to offer the @card@ other EU nation a deal to carry on trading under the existing tariff-free deal . but if they refuse , aide say she be prepare to ` ` walk away ' ' . her move to quit the single market and custom union be back last night by former Chancellor Lord Lawson . he declare : ` ` this be not a hard Brexit . it be Brexit . ' ' he urge Mrs May to crack on with her plan and not allow EU stallers to ` ` spin out ' ' the Article @card@ departure talk . he add : ` ` Quite apart from the massive weekly cost of EU membership , a prolonged period of uncertainty be the bad possible outcome for British business and the economy . ' ' the economic argument for quit both EU trade group be also back by top economist Gerard Lyons and Liam Halligan . in a study for the Policy Exchange think tank , they warn long-winded talk over migration and single market access would lead to ` ` a disastrous stalemate ' ' . but last night Labour be plot to challenge Mrs May ' S clean Brexit plan in the Commons . Jeremy Corbyn will use the government ' s expect defeat in the Supreme Court this month to force her to give MP a vote on the final deal . the Labour leader plan to table an amendment demand MP get a veto on the PM ' s withdrawal term . should the move not win enough vote among MP , the party will use its position in the Lords to urge the government to make the guarantee . Senior Labour figure believe that because the European Parliament must vote on the final Brexit agreement - expect in mid-2019 - the House of Commons should also have a say . however , Eurosceptics say it could open the door to Parliament reject Brexit after year of negotiation , cause constitutional chaos . the government be also consider a new visa scheme to cut the number of worker enter Britain . minister want to extend the regime currently use to manage immigration from outside the EU , source reveal .
PM ' S £250M for BREXIT ' No Deal ' Theresa May turn on the spending tap yesterday in case of a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit as furious Tory accuse the Chancellor of refuse to act . the PM tell the Commons £250million be be hand to government department such as the Home Office and HM Revenue & Customs . and she vow : ` ` where money need spend , it will be spend . ' ' it come after Philip Hammond enrage Brexiteers by write in the Times that he would approve spending on a ` ` no deal ' ' only when it be ` ` responsible ' ' to do so . speak yesterday morning , he say he do not want to ` ` waste ' ' money when an agreement be still possible . he further stoke anger by say it be ` ` theoretically possible ' ' all flight between the UK and EU could be suspend on Brexit day . but Brexit-backing Tories say later that the PM have put the Chancellor ` ` in his place ' ' . Eurosceptic Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` the PM ' s clear statement clear up any ambiguity . ' ' Brexiteers have argue that Mr Hammond have be try to hinder Brexit , a claim he deny . game of EU half - Page @card@
I ' LL Be Hard TUSKMASTER ; BREXIT Warning To May PM tell talk on trade to only get tricky BREAKTHR-EU @card@ EXHAUSTED Theresa May be yesterday warn by Donald Tusk that Brexit talk will only get tough . the EU Council chief say thrash out the term of a trade deal inside ten month would be far harder than agree the ` ` first phase ' ' of talk . and he reiterate the UK would have to abide by EU rule , include unlimited EU immigration , in any twoyear transition scheme that run to @card@ . speak after the Brexit breakthrough in Brussels yesterday he say : ` ` break up be hard , but build a new relationship be hard . ' ' Eurocrats want the outline term of a trading relationship agree by October next year , five month before Brexit day at the end of March @card@ . only then could ` ` real negotiation ' ' over a trade agreement take place , they say . EU official add they have yet to see ` ` clarity ' ' from the PM over what she believe that future relationship should look like . minister be due to discuss their preferred ` ` end state ' ' on Tuesday , but this have now be delay by a week . meanwhile business group desperate for certainty celebrate the breakthrough , with the CBI call it an ` ` early Christmas present ' ' . Institute of Directors director general Stephen Martin say : ` ` we call on the UK and the EU to build on this positive momentum go into the New year . ` ` it be overwhelmingly in the interest of both side to begin work on our future economic relationship . ' ' discussion on a two-year ` ` standstill ' ' transition phase , give both side more time to hammer out the detail of a final trade deal , be expect to take place early in the New year .
UK HELL TAUNT ARROGANT Eurocrats spark outrage yesterday by try to bully the Brexit Secretary with tough talk and a ` ` welcome to hell ' ' greet at crunch talk over Britain ' S future . furious Tory tell Europe ' S leader to ` ` wake up ' ' after they insist Britain would never be able to change free movement rule - and would get only @card@ month to thrash out a deal . Brexit Secretary David Davis meet MEP Manfred Weber and Guy Verhofstadt , the Belgian lead the European Parliament ' s Brexit talk . German Mr Weber moan later it be still unclear if Britain want to stay in the single market and there be ` ` no idea ... what Brexit really mean ' ' . Mr Verhofstadt say the EU would ` ` never accept ' ' a deal that allow the UK single market access but compromise free movement . source insist his welcome to hell greeting be lighthearted . Mr Davis , leave , say the talk be ` ` very useful ' ' . Theresa May , meanwhile , tell Belgium PM Charles Michel that the UK ` ` intend ' ' to trigger Article @card@ to kickstart the EU divorce by the end of March .
LEO : we DID N'T Start THE IRE ; TAOISEACH ' S BLAST ; Varadkar say Border blame be on Brexiteers Leo Varadkar insist Brexiteers need to acknowledge that they be the one who create the difficult issue over the Border . the Taoiseach say that he be try to resolve those issue and ensure that the North can retain the ` ` peace and freedom of movement ' ' it have have for the last @card@ year . speak on his arrival at the European Summit in Brussels ahead of more Brexit negotiation , Varadkar say : ` ` my message ' reality ' ... Coveney to all of the people in Northern Ireland be , ' what we want to continue on the island of Ireland be exactly what we have for the last @card@ year ' - which be peace and freedom of movement and free trade between Northern Ireland and Ireland and indeed between Ireland and Britain . ` ` what ' S disrupt that be Brexit and I would hope some of the people who support Brexit and campaign for that would realise , or at least acknowledge , that they be the one who create this problem and I be one of those people who be try to resolve it , try to retain what we have have for @card@ year . ` ` that ' s what I be work towards . ' ' and the Fine Gael leader also say that he be happy with the ` ` maintain full alignment ' ' agreement that be make last week . he explain : ` ` in this backstop scenario the UK and Northern Ireland in particular would maintain full alignment with the rule and regulation of the internal market and custom union . ` ` that give us a very strong assurance that there wo n't be a hard border on the island of Ireland . ' ' the Taoiseach say that while there be those who want to ` ` spin ' ' what be agree for their own ` ` political reason ' ' , the language of the agreement be ` ` pretty clear ' ' . speak about the meaning of full alignment , he say : ` ` Our view be that ( the Joint Report ) be very strong language . maintain mean ' keep as it be ' , of course . full mean ' full ' not ' partial ' and alignment mean ' keep in line ' . ' ' Earlier , Foreign Affairs Minister Simon Coveney say that a Brexit transition period will need to be close to five year rather than the two that have be suggest by some . speak in the Dail yesterday Coveney insist that business need time to adapt to any new reality in the context of Brexit . he also say that , in his view , the commitment that the UK government have make to Ireland and the rest of the EU be ` ` cast-iron ' ' . the Tanaiste be refer to comment by UK Brexit Secretary David Davis earlier this week that the breakthrough Brexit deal be not legally binding , but rather ` ` more a statement of intent ' ' . @ IrishSunOnline
pm push for Brexit calm after hol return Theresa May move to calm Cabinet Brexit tension as she fly back from her three-week holiday yesterday . her return prompt a rare display of unity from Chancellor Philip Hammond and hardline Brexiteer Liam Fox . Downing Street get them to write a joint article declare the UK would n't be stay in the EU ` ` by the back door ' ' . but critic say it show Mr Hammond have lose a power struggle as he relent over his call to extend the exit process . the article come after week of public sniping about the stuttering EU divorce talk . Mr Hammond , who want a soft split , and International Trade Secretary Mr Fox say they agree a transition deal would further Britain ' s ` ` national interest and give business great certainty ' ' - but insist it would not derail Brexit . however , Lib Dem leader Sir Vince Cable say it be ` ` now painfully clear who call the shot in the Cabinet ; it be n't the Chancellor ' ' . it come as Brexit boss David Davis prepare to publish his set of negotiate position for the next Brussels showdown . Brexit Stage Fright - Page @card@
March at Stormont as border fear rise ANTI-Brexit campaigner march on Stormont yesterday to voice concern about the future of free border movement . the demo include the erection of mock custom checkpoint to highlight fear about a hardening of the Irish border when the UK leave the EU . the 300-strong protest come amid the post-election political crisis that have leave NI without a devolve government as the Brexit process formally commence . they chant ` ` no border , no barrier , no Brexit ' ' as the group make their way up the avenue to the step of Parliament Buildings . while Sinn Fein ' S Michelle O'Neill and the SDLP join the picket , elsewhere unionist welcome the trigger of Article @card@ . the majority of voter in Northern Ireland back Remain - @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent . the Stormont march be organise by campaign group Border Communities against Brexit . spokesman Declan Fearon tell the crowd PM Theresa May be not interested in their concern . he say : ` ` it seem she simply do n't care , maybe do n't know what the full implication be for the people who live along the border . our population here be less than three per cent of the UK so it seem we do n't matter when the big decision be be make . ' ' Fearon add Brexit be ` ` bad news ' ' for people in Ireland whether they be unionist or nationalist .
banish traitor Blair from the Brexit talk table why be the traitor Tony Blair allow back into British politics ? I ' m still amaze our government have n't charge this man with treason and war crime . take him back into politics will send the message that any traitor and war criminal can be a politician . Michael Hastie Glasgow why be I not surprise that we seem unable to get rid of this odious traitor , who keep come back like a cancer ? unfortunately , there be still some who would actually vote for this snakeoil salesman . Roger STILGOE Birmingham Tony Blair want to influence Brexit negotiation . for all our sake , keep him well away . this man and his cohort be why this country be in such a state . Alan Grundy Wakefield , W York Tony Blair be so desperate to get back into the limelight . as he try to worm his way into Brexit discussion , the more he open his mouth , the more people he will drive towards Brexit . Sean Spillane Luton So Tony Blair want to return to politics . this be the man who have destroy the way of life for million of brit with his open-door policy . he also bring terrorism to our shore with his meddling in the Middle East . be he determine to destroy Great Britain as his legacy ? Malcolm Flight Tenbury Wells , Worcs when I vote for Brexit in the referendum , I understand it be for a clean break , not a package deal . the last person I want negotiate be Blair . Michael Jeffery Wisbech , Cambs During the Falklands War , the Royal Navy boast @card@ frigate and destroyer , as well as two aircraft carrier . we stand proud and hold our own . now look at us . because of cut by successive government , we now have a fleet of approximately @card@ . we would be sit duck if our island be attack . David Webster Taunton , Somerset THE Croydon tram driver film doze show tram manufacturer should redesign the control so more pressure be need . the slight lack of concentration would bring the tram to a halt through the emergency break system . Raymond CROUZIERES Orpington , Kent I FIND it hard to believe that a High Court judge have grant the plea of a 14-year-old girl to be preserve and wake in the future because it be her die wish - yet they do n't allow a terminally ill person their wish to die with dignity . Michael Taylor Southampton what a disgrace . the Royal Family have use our historic building for many year and not have the decency to maintain them . they should learn to put their own toothpaste on the brush and run their own bath . then they could afford plumber , builder and electrician . Wendy Lively Hexham , Northumberland THE Queen do not own Buckingham Palace . it be hold in trust by the Crown Estate for future generation and as a London home for the sovereign . her majesty have work tirelessly as a servant of the UK for the past @card@ year . she be still work in her ninety and be respect in every corner of the world . it be horrible to imply she be not worth anything to us taxpayer . Maureen Bridge Tavistock , Devon TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply MY father would turn in his grave if he could see the state of the Royal Navy . if Argentina attack the Falkland , we could n't stop them . they ' d just walk in . Eddie , Herts So sorry and angry at the treatment of Strictly ' S poor Gorka Marquez , beat up by thug on Saturday . the show be brilliant and the dancer agree Blackpool Tower be a credit to the town . decent people here be disgust . POLLY , Blackpool Peter Kay , do n't you dare apologise over a joke on Strictly ! Dave , Staffs THANK you , the Sun , for the free Christmas tree ! my kid be so excite . Lauren , Essex CONGRATULATIONS , Andy Murray ! next step - Sir Andy . M Cook , Essex Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
Brexit really do mean Brexit , David the seemingly endless Christmas recess have do nothing for Brexit which continue to go as smoothly as a grand piano roll down a multi-storey car park . only last week Brexit Secretary David Davis be reveal to have write a very stiff letter to the Prime Minister , warn her that those flaming Euro-Johnnies be actually serious about do what they always say they would . show no shred of gratitude for all that our brave boy do to save them from themselves twice in the last century , the Europeans have actually be write to a range of British business , warn them of the impact of Brexit . this week she reveal she do n't like whisky and she have never drink Irn-Bru . Mr Davis whine : ` ` the EU have adopt a number of measure that put agreement or contract at risk of be terminate in the event of a no deal scenario and would require UK company to relocate to another member state . ' ' how bloody dare they ? Ms Marwick tweet proudly : ` ` Fizzy drink always give headache . be teenager before they fizzy drink . ' ' it must a blow when Louise ` ` that ' s what think . ' ' he add : ` ` some EU agency have publish guidance outline that the UK will become a third country when we stop be a Member State after @card@ . ` ` no wonder Mr Davis be disgust by this claim from the EU . the full horror of it can only be appreciate if you also understand that it ' S entirely true ! but it ' S even bad . the EU letter say that : ` ` compliance activity such as quality control of each batch of medicine before it be release on to the market would need to be base in the EU after exit . ` ` the Commission have issue similar unilateral statement on company law , civil justice , private international law , transport , and the breeding , transport and protection of live animal . ' ' to make a long story short , what the EU Commission have do be write to British business and tell them ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . it mean all that easy trading we have have for almost half a century be over . it mean that all the arrangement we have where a British driving licence be good in Portugal and Germany , or a British professional qualification would count in Latvia or a British aspirin could be sell in Poland be over . Holyrood Marwick , take to the but Mr Davis be not so much anger as disappoint by the fact that the EU say nothing at all about the fabulous deal we maybe , could , perhaps , theoretically , possibly get . this fabulous deal will so fabulous that all those arrangement will remain in place and we will continue to enjoy all benefit of be in EU while not be the EU . ` ` none of f have me my kid Mr Davis tell the Minister in his letter : ` ` these statement take account of the future relationship . ' ' well , be that really surprising ? after all , how many time have we hear that ` ` no deal be good than a bad deal ' ' ? how many time have we hear that Britain be ready to walk away alone into the wilderness rather than accept another moment of Euroslavery ? as the EU official spokesman ever have have be daughter reply : you comment : ` ` we be surprise that the UK be surprise that we be prepare for a scenario announce by the UK Government itself . ' ' but , to be fair , Mr Davis and his chum probably do n't realise that be what they have announce . they do now .
why be Royal Mail pander to the anti-Brexit bunch ? ; GIVE US A Stamp of APPROVAL ASKED if it would be issue a set of commemorative stamp to mark Brexit , the Royal Mail reply with a firm and distinctly snooty ` ` no ' ' . it have n't deign to give a reason . and yet the first new stamp it will issue in @card@ will commemorate Game of Thrones . a gripping television drama , to be sure , but also an American commercial product . after yesterday ' S outcry , with one senior Tory MP brand their decision ` ` inconsistent , irritate and annoy ' ' , many reasonable people assume Royal Mail would think again . how on Earth could the company justify its determination to ignore the large democratic vote in British history ? print a set would cost them no extra cash , and they have previously mark political event with commemorative issue . yet still , answer come there none . just a grim repetition of the original ` ` no ' ' . I think I know what ' s go on . like many creak British institution , Royal Mail - now private but infected from top to bottom with a public-sector mentality - be live in an escapist fantasy every bit as imaginary as the seven kingdom of Westeros in Game of Thrones . it ' S the parallel universe of the Remoaners , a ` ` safe space ' ' in which Brexit can be stop , even though the government have trigger Article @card@ , our formal notification of leave the EU . in well-heeled part of this country , university lecturer and yummy mummy rush to bookshop to buy how to stop Brexit by the freshly knight yesterday ' S man , Sir Nick Clegg . this silly book belong on the sciencefiction shelf next to author George RR Martin ' s game of Thrones novel . diehard Remainers , poor thing , really believe Clegg ' s claim that the referendum result can be sweep under the carpet . and they ' re encourage in this delusion by the yacht-hopping fantasist Tony Blair , whose grip on reality be become more tenuous by the minute . why be the Royal Mail - which have no problem decorate its stamp with Peppa Pig , Mr Men , ` ` sustainable fish ' ' or notable locomotive of Wales - pander to the doctrinaire anti-Brexit lobby ? no ! no ! no ! be it terrify of Twitter storm ? or be this just another symptom of its failure to engage with the modern world ? every time I go into my local Post Office I feel like I ' m visit a 1970s theme park , complete with eastern bloc-style queue and semi-comatose counter service . whatever the reason , Royal Mail need to change its mind . and there ' s still plenty of time - which be why the Sun be mount a campaign for stamp mark the Brexit we demand . you might ask : do it matter , give that we ' re definitely wave farewell to Brussels in March next year ? yes , it do matter . in @card@ the Royal Mail issue stamp to celebrate us join the common market , even though million of Briton oppose the move . as the referendum two year later - win by the Yes campaign with @card@ per cent of the vote - show , most people think the decision a necessary step in our national journey . now we be take another step - not in the opposite direction , but a step forward into a very different globalised world , in which we need the freedom to regulate our own business and negotiate our own trade deal . Foam-flecked Remoaners , who make up only a minority of those who vote to stay in the EU , will hate the stamp . well , tough . by the time we leave , we ' ll have have to put up with nearly three year of hissy fit , futile plot and crudely twisted reporting by the anti- Brexit BBC . but make no mistake about it : by then , the ` ` Stop Brexit ' ' movement will have fall apart , just as George Osborne ' s Project fear backfire and the news that blue passport come back cheer us rather than provoke outrage . when the Royal Mail do respect the will of the people and get on with print Brexit stamp , we will enjoy send them around the world to exhibit our pride in this great www.nation.No doubt some daft Remoaners will refuse to open their letter and create embarrassing scene in Post office , but let them enjoy their one last tantrum . like hyperactive child , they ' ll calm down when they run out of energy . the rest of us can afford to smile , not just at their antic but because we ' re begin an exciting new chapter in our island story . and that be indeed something to celebrate - by put the stamp of history on our mail . l Damian Thompson be associate editor of the Spectator . exciting new chapter
Tory blast at ' secret Nat talk ' on Brexit by Andrew Nicoll Nat Brexit Minister Mike Russell be under fire over a leak recording of his meeting with EU diplomat in Brussels . Tories demand he explain comment that suggest secret talk be under way with Spain over a separate Brexit deal for Scotland . in the recording , he tell official : ` ` we would not be talk in these term unless we be have conversation . ' ' Tory MEP Ian Duncan insist : ` ` he need to explain himself as a matter of urgency . ' ' but a spokesman for Mr Russell say : ` ` for the Tories to ask anyone else to clarify their plan for Brexit be like a burglar demand a homeowner clean up the house he have just ransack . ' '
sorry Theresa , you ' re Nat on Theresa May say the SNP must take its share of the blame for create the Brexit vote by leave ordinary people cut off from politics . the EU vote , she say , ` ` expose an underlie sense that people feel they have be ignore by politician , at Westminster and at Holyrood , for too long . ' ' it would be hard to imagine a more inept piece of buck passing or one that could so fearfully expose the Prime Minister ' s lack of understanding . maybe she forget , but Scotland vote to stay in the EU . if she ' S right and the Brexit vote come about because people want to have a kick at the government , the Scot choose not to have a kick at the government sit in Edinburgh . figure out last week show there be one place in the UK where race attack have go down since Brexit - and that ' s Scotland . and , accord to last week ' S polling , with five party to choose from , half of Scotland be still back the SNP after nine year in power . at Holyrood there be less than a handful of MSPs who speak out in favour of leave the EU and not one of them be from the SNP . the Brexit vote be cause by one thing only - David Cameron ' s ridiculous decision to put trouble inside the Conservative party before what he think be well for the country . in order to keep the lid on the European problem inside the Tory , he march the country to the top of a cliff and dare the voter to jump off . England crowd towards the edge . Scotland politely decline but Mrs May say , somehow , Brexit be the fault of the SNP . who do she think she ' s kid ? it ' s more than three month since the vote and we be not a day closer to know what Brexit mean for exporter , for travel , for immigration , for access to health service abroad , for the EU resident now live here or the brit abroad . maybe it ' s time for the PM to concentrate on her own job , instead of find somebody else to blame .
OSBO ' S EU-TURN To Back BREXIT ; Commons SHOWDOWN Project fear champion side with May George Osborne be last night prepare to back the government over Brexit in a Commons showdown . source close to the former Chancellor and pro-EU ` ` Project Fear ' ' mastermind say he be ready to side with the PM in today ' s Bill vote - after early claim that he could back rebel . an aide say Mr Osborne be satisfy minister have listen and would offer MP a clear say on the outcome of Brexit talk in @card@ . the source say : ` ` he expect them to say thing that will allow him to support the government . ' ' it follow early speculation he could join a so-called Gang of ten Tory rebel . one MP say Mr Osborne have encourage them to oppose the Bill , which his aide deny . baroness Karren Brady urge rebel MP to trust Theresa May . the Apprentice star , who vote Remain , say : ` ` we all need to get on with the job of leave the European union and establish our place in the world . ' ' the PM want MP to kick out two Lords amendment to the Bill today so she can trigger Article @card@ and formally launch the process of leave as early as tomorrow . Mr Osborne ' S support would be key in help Mrs may see off a revolt . it be understand Brexit Secretary David Davis would today look to head off opponent by pledge MP will be give a vote in early @card@ . it would cover the withdrawal and the UK ' s future relationship with the EU . that would stop short of a full veto but should be enough to see off a rebellion that could delay Brexit by week . Tory grandee Lord Heseltine yesterday admit that if MP boot out the amendment , peer be unlikely to oppose the bill any longer . Mr Davis urge rebel not to ` ` tie the PM ' s hand ' ' . the NHS face a fresh staffing crisis with @card@ worker plan to leave the UK after Brexit , it be claim . of the 1.2million staff , @card@ be from overseas , with @card@ from Europe .
shackle Come Off ; BREXIT OVERTIME BOOST Working limit end Exclusive British worker be set for an overtime bonanza after Brexit , be reveal last night . meit ht . rap the urs me Ministers want to scrap EU law which limit work week to @card@ hour - cost the average family £1,200 in lost pay . the move would also be aboost to industry which lose billion of pound bring agency staff to plug the gap . Brexiteers have gain widespread Cabinet support to axe the Working Time Directive afirst step when the UK free from Brussels . the Tories win an opt-in @card@ but Labour MEPs vote to end the UK ' s right break the limit in @card@ . Brexit-backing minister demand an end to the directive when the Brexit ` ` war Cabinet ' ' meet tomorrow to decide what to demand when trade talk begin next year . hen .ons they say it will give million of family the chance to top up their wage and help small firm eager to cash in on the new global trade market . a source say : ` ` this be what take back control be all about . it will put the power to decide how hard to work back it th h d fth l into the hand of the people who matter - the ordinary British worker . ` ` one or two Brexiteers have be push to scrap this daft directive and there be big support for it in Cabinet . ' ' one minister say : ` ` this will give employer the added flexibility they will need once we have leave the EU . and it will allow million of people to earn vital overtime cash . ' ' the directive have also pile extra cost on to cashstrapped public service , with hospital have to scrap Tory rebel Heidi Allen , weekend ` ` on call ' ' work ' ' . who help defeat the government in last week ' s commons vote be face a d l ti bttlde-selection battle . Ms Allen have be haul to a party meeting in South Cambs .
dup £435K DONORS TORY-LINKED GROUP an obscure group of tycoon bankroll the DUP ' s pro-Brexit campaign , it have emerge . the party be already reel from the botched RHI green energy heat Brexit ... Cook & Donaldson scheme that could cost taxpayer around £490million . the DUP yesterday confirm it receive a Brexit donation of about £435,000 from the Constitutional Research Council . the organisation , describe as a group of pro-Union business people , be chair by the former vice-chairman of the Scottish Tories , Richard Cook . around £425,000 be spend by the DUP on the Brexit campaign , include pro-Leave advertisement . one advert be an expensive four-page Vote to leave EU wrap-around in the Metro newspaper - a publication not even circulate in Northern Ireland . the DUP last night confirm the £425,000 spend but admit it be give more than it spend . the remain £9,000 be transfer to the DUP ' S coffer with the agreement of the CRC . but DUP MP Sir Jeffrey Donaldson defend the spending include the Metro ad , say : ` ` we want to be involve in the referendum at a national level . ' ' @ gmeneely
BREXIT Will SLASH MIGRANTS By 1.3M ; lOnly @card@ in a year lBut it ' ll cost month ' S wage AROUND @card@ million few migrant will come to Britain by @card@ if we quit the EU , a major study claim yesterday . lead international think tank the OECD predict Brexit would finally get number below @card@ a year . but it warn it could hit the UK like a tax and cost up to £5,000 per household - more than the average monthly salary for two people . it be the first major study to acknowledge leave Brussel be the key to curb immigration . the expert say the current @card@ people come in every year will plunge to @card@ from @card@ onwards under a Brexit . this would see a population fall of 1.3million by @card@ , the equivalent to city the size of Birmingham and Portsmouth add together . it be a boost to leave campaigner as they launch a fightback on the economic cost of Brexit . Employment Minister Priti Patel will today unveil Treasury research which find EU red tape could cost seven per cent of GDP . vote leave say it be equivalent to £4,639 per household , wipe out the loss predict by the OECD . Ms Patel last night accuse the OECD of talk down Britain . she say : ` ` despite it make every possible bad case assumption , it be still force to admit that the British economy will continue to grow if we Vote leave . it also acknowledge we will be able to cut net migration significantly . ' ' Ukip leader Nigel Farage dismiss the economic warning from major global body , say they be ` ` stuff full of overpay people who fail in politics mostly ' ' . yesterday rioting migrant set fire and throw rock at cop at a refugee camp on Greek island Lesbos .
pm : just BRELAX ; back from hols to calm Cabinet fear Theresa May move to calm Cabinet Brexit tension as she fly back from her threeweek holiday yesterday . her return prompt a rare display of unity from Chancellor Philip Hammond and hardline Brexiteer Liam Fox . Downing Street get them to write an article together declare the UK would not be stay in the EU ` ` by the back door ' ' . however , critic say it show Mr Hammond have lose a power struggle as he relent over his call to extend the exit process . the article come after week of public sniping about the stuttering EU divorce talk . Mr Hammond , who want a soft Brexit , and International Trade Secretary Mr Fox say they agree that a transition deal would further Britain ' s ` ` national interest and give business great certainty ' ' , but they insist it would not derail Britain ' s EU exit . meanwhile , Brexit boss David Davis prepare to publish paper set out his negotiate position ahead of the next round of talk with Brussels . and Mrs May face claim by senior Whitehall official that ` ` poor quality ' ' Brexit decision be be ` ` rush through ' ' over the summer . paper on the Irish border after Brexit and a potential custom arrangement will be publish this week follow criticism about a lack of clarity over the UK negotiating position .
it serve EU Right ; Britain BOUNCING Back ; Brexit doom-mongers defy Britain ' S vital service sector enjoy a soaraway summer - dash fear of a post-Brexit recession . a surge in export and tourism in August spark the big rise in monthly activity since current record begin in @card@ , figure reveal . Markit ' S figure send the pound to $ @card@ , its high level against the dollar for nearly seven week . and economist rip up doom-laden prediction of a deep recession . the service sector - which include everything from restaurant to financial service - generate around threequarters of Britain ' s economic output . it come as separate figure yesterday reveal car sale rise by @card@ per cent in August as the Brexit vote fail to deter buyer . former Justice Secretary and Brexit champion Michael Gove say the rally have leave doom-mongering International Monetary Fund boss Christine Lagarde with ` ` oeuf on her face ' ' . the Tory say : ` ` do this not confirm that @card@ million people who vote to leave know a darn sight more about economics than the so-called expert ? ' ' Brexit Secretary David Davis reply : ` ` much of the doom and gloom and fear mongering have be prove to be wrong . ' ' the figure come a week after consultant Markit ' S figure show Britain ' S manufacturing be on a march with the high activity level for ten month . cynic say at the time the service sector datum would provide a far good reading of the health of the economy . Markit say its service Activity Index jump from @card@ to @card@ in August after a flood of new business . economist warn the size of the bounce back be in part down to the slide in activity in July as firm cut back after the leave vote . Markit expert Chris Williamson add : ` ` it be too early to say whether August ' S upturn be the start of a sustained post-shock recovery . but anecdotal evidence indicate the shock of the vote have begin to dissipate . ' ' the Bank of England be still likely to cut interest rate to @card@ per cent in November . Scott Bowman , of Capital Economics , warn economic growth for the third quarter could be zero .
TARIFFIC ; Post BREXIT BOOST £40-a-week more per house cheap good and economy lift HOUSEHOLDS will be up to £40 a week well off once we leave the EU , top economist say yesterday . price will tumble as Britain import tarifffree good from round the world , while national output will rise . the Brexit boost - raise live standard , wage and employment - could be worth £135billion a year , accord to a glowing report by a group of @card@ lead economist . we would reap saving from cut immigration , slash EU red tape and halting Brussels contribution . Prof Patrick Minford , who help draft the 50-page report , declare : ` ` the government should embrace a clean , swift Brexit and embrace the opportunity . ' ' the study , to be publish in the autumn by economist for Free Trade , challenge Chancellor Philip Hammond over his insistence that post-Brexit Britain should follow the EU ' S high-tax , highregulation economic model . Prof Minford , of Cardiff University , warn : ` ` we would be throw away the very gain from Brexit . ' ' Roger Bootle , of research consultancy Capital Economics , say : ` ` this be a once-ina-generation opportunity to raise live standard . ' ' meanwhile , a study compile by Tory MP Charlie Elphicke show the EU will be hit twice as hard as us if there be no free-trade deal . tariff would cost EU country an extra £12billion to export good to us , while hit Britain for £6billion . Mr Elphicke say : ` ` it would be an economically illiterate act of self-harm for the EU to reject our proposal . ' ' International Trade Secretary Liam Fox will fly to Latin America today to announce hike in support for Brit business to build global link ahead of Brexit .
ultimate power ; the Sunday Issue SHOWDOWN COMING Soon To A Supreme COURT Near you ... the THRILLING Battle of BREXIT Britain ' S future will be in the hand of @card@ top judge this week as they umpire the battle of Brexit . they will decide whether the public ' s decision to leave the EU will stand - or if MP and peer will get the final say . government lawyer will go head-to-head with a crack legal team hire by a group of wealthy ` ` Wrexiteers ' ' out to stall the process . the four-day hearing will be the most crucial case in the history of the Supreme Court and be a mustwin for Theresa May . if the judge insist Parliament should have a vote , it could derail the PM ' s target of start the twoyear Brexit countdown by the end of March . the judge will be chair by Britain ' s most powerful judge , Lord David Neuberger of Abbotsbury . he have resist call to stand down from the hearing after his wife post anti- Brexit comment on Twitter . furious critic claim her remark could pre-empt the issue her 68-year-old husband must decide . next week ' s dramatic hearing come after last month ' S High Court ruling throw Mrs May ' s Brexit timetable into chaos . it spark fury that the decision of 17.4million brit could be betray by a tiny group of Remainers . Brexit Secretary David Davis be head the appeal but his case will be put by Attorney General Jeremy Wright . he will argue the authority of Parliament be cede to voter when MP vote @card@ to hold a referendum , and that it be now the government ' s duty to honour that . Mr Wright will take on top commercial lawyer Dominic Chambers , who will argue the case for the small group who fund the original action . the outfit , back by law firm Mishcon de Reya , include Guyanaborn investment fund manager Gina Miller , @card@ , and Brazil-born hairdresser Deir dos Santos , @card@ . Mr Chambers have argue that they be neutral on whether Britain leave the EU , say they be not try to prevent Brexit , merely to uphold ` ` the rule of law ' ' . he be regard as one of the top legal brain in his field and be sure to put up a formidable case for Parliament have great sovereignty than June @card@ ' S referendum . Remainers raise £170,000 online to launch the original High Court hearing , in which three judge rule the PM could not trigger Brexit alone via the royal prerogative . investment manager Mrs Miller ' S dad be Attorney General in Guyana . she grow up in Britain and attend the £27,000-a-year Moira House Girls School in Eastbourne . below , a member of Parliament ' S Brexit Select Committee give his view of the court battle ahead . what ' S it about ? the hearing be all about who decide when and how Britain leave the EU - the government , Parliament or the people . the public vote for Brexit in the referendum but High Court judge rule that MP and lord should get a vote before the PM can trigger Article @card@ , which begin our exit . the government be challenge that ruling . who ' S involve ? the original case be bring by an 11-strong group of Remainers lead by financier Gina Miller . her supporter raise £170,000 online to launch the hearing in October . tomorrow ' S appeal be a fight between lawyer for the government , lead by Attorney General Jeremy Wright , above , and the @card@ , who be represent by Dominic Chambers , QC . what ' s next ? the judge be expect to deliver their decision in the New year . if the appeal be allow , the PM can start the Brexit process before the end of March as plan . but if not , it will throw her timetable into chaos . if MP and peer start deliberately stall the process , she may have no option but to call a snap General Election . respect voter and sort this mess out by Dominic Raab This week the UK Supreme Court will hear its most controversial case ever - a three-way showdown and constitutional clash between the power of Government , Parliament and the court . minister be appeal against the shock High Court ruling which order the government to seek permission from Parliament before even begin the Brexit negotiation mandate by the voter in the EU referendum . beneath the tangled weed of complex legal argument , the power of the people be at stake . the High Court upturn a division of labour that most lawyer and politician have long take for granted : government negotiate international treaty with other government . Parliament pass the law of the land . beneath the sophisticated constitutional argument on both side , many view this as a case that should never have make it this far - a raw battle of will between a government try to give effect to the will of the people and a judiciary with the reputation for be pro-EU . our judge be among the fine lawyer in the world . yet , as a group , their overall political attitude be widely regard as submissive to Brussels . how much this matter when they decide this case be open to question . but the more they be see to frustrate the referendum verdict , the loud the voice will grow , call for the learned - but unelected - noble lord to be subject to great democratic accountability . concern about the ` ` politics of the judiciary ' ' be magnify when the wife of our most senior judge tweet that the Brexit referendum be ` ` mad and bad ' ' . then the No2 at the Supreme Court , Lady Hale , give an ill-advised speech summarise the case , which invite people to speculate that she harbour pro-EU view . the legal profession dash to defend them . but have n't they always preach that impartiality require not just that justice be do , but that it be see to be do ? fat chance , if people have an inkling that the judge in a case may be bias . Dominic Raab be MP for Esher and Walton , and sit on Parliament ' S Brexit Select Committee . rule of law
Brexit will wreck footie ? it ' S never be so exciting when I be a nipper , there be two day in the year that be glaze with magic - Christmas and the first day of the new football season . even in my dotage , these two special day still get my blood pump with excitement , anticipation and undiluted joy . the man who be tire of Christmas and the first day of the new football season be tire of life . so you can imagine my distress when we be solemnly assure that vote to leave the European Union would destroy the Premier League . it be like hear that a vote for Brexit would mean that Christmas would have to be cancel . our post-Brexit nation would resemble Narnia , where it be always winter but never Christmas and never Match of the day . passionate Remainers from Forbes financial magazine to the chairman of the Premier League all look the British people in the eye and swear that leave the EU would be a killer blow to our football , cross their heart and hope to die . ` ` Anthony Martial , the £36million Manchester United striker , or N'Golo Kante , the midfield sensation at champion Leicester City , would almost certainly have be refuse entry if not for EU-specific regulation , ' ' insist the Independent . the Remain camp imply that the only foreign player in post-Brexit Britain would be from Glasgow and Cardiff , TV revenue would evaporate and a weak pound would make every English club the plaything of any pass Russian oligarch or oil-rich Sheik . and it all turn out to be a pack of lie . for here we be on the opening weekend of the most exciting football season for year , possibly decade , while at the same time head for the exit door of the European Union . what happen to all those dark warning of Brexit destroy football ? they turn out to be cheap , nasty , ham-fisted propaganda , just like the fib about economic collapse and World War three - more rubbish we decline to swallow . when be our football ever this exciting ? envy of the world the most expensive player in the history of the sport , £89million man Paul Pogba , above , have arrive in Manchester when they would have sell their granny to sign him in Madrid or Barcelona . the race for the title have never be so wide open . when be there ever this many club who fancy their chance ? so many club be under excitable new management - Antonio Conte ' s Chelsea , Pep Guardiola ' S Manchester City , Jose Mourinho ' S Manchester United and Jurgen Klopp still only ten month into his new job at Liverpool . so many club have so much at stake - resurgent West Ham in their magnificent new stadium , Spurs still try to overtake arsenal and champion Leicester City the scalp that everyone will want to take . nine month from now , nobody know who will be the top team in Manchester , Liverpool or London , let alone the country . our football , like our proud , independent nation , be the envy of the world . and as I take my seat at the Emirates Stadium for Arsenal v Liverpool this afternoon , I will feel like a kid on Christmas Eve . from where I be sit , our football look as though it be set for breathtaking new height .
Brexit betrayal last night ' s Brexit defeat be a bitter humiliation for the government and a moment of shame for the Tory ` ` rebel ' ' . they have utterly compromise their own leader and Prime Minister , just day after her breakthrough last week and on the brink of the EU summit . and they have hand a victory to all those still bent on overturn the big democratic mandate in our history . the PM must find a solution . she and David Davis have to be able to negotiate our historic trade deal without fear Remainers in Parliament will kill it . but Brussels now know that europhile MP and peer , and an entirely self-interested Labour Party , be wait to pick any deal to piece and send the government back to try again . Britain back Brexit . MP vote overwhelmingly to carry it out . it should fall to the PM and Brexit Secretary to drive as hard a bargain as possible . but Brussels will now effectively be negotiate not with them but with the war faction of our Parliament . that ' S an impossible farce . Remainers dress this up as a battle for democracy . for most the real goal be to delay or halt Brexit or , fail that , ` ` soften ' ' it to meaninglessness . some EU nation be already champ at the bit to give us a tailor-made deal . we should be capitalise on that . but how can the government negotiate it with any focus now , while live in fear of more Remainer rebellion back home ?
' Customs Part of EU Security ' Customs control be part of the EU ' s border management , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator say . and Michel Barnier insist that the measure protect the single market , food safety and standard . but he promise to help avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic after Brexit . speak in Dublin where he meet Taoiseach Enda Kenny , he declare : ` ` we have a duty to speak the truth . the UK ' s departure from the EU will have consequence . ` ` Customs control be part of EU border management . they protect the single market . they protect our food safety and our standard . ' ' business and politician in the Republic and Northern Ireland want to avoid the restriction on movement of the past . Brexit Secretary David Davis have say the UK would adopt technology to cover the transport of good between north and south . the British Government want a ` ` frictionless ' ' arrangement , to avoid a return to the border of the past when the area be heavily militarise because of the IRA threat .
Bleu Monday ; LEADERS ' BREXIT SHOWDOWN ; May demand ' grown-up ' talk with First Ministers Theresa May be demand ` ` grown-up ' ' talk on Brexit during a showdown with Nicola Sturgeon tomorrow . the PM will press for unity after summon the First Ministers of the devolve government to Downing Street tomorrow . on the crunch meeting with Ms Sturgeon and her northern Irish and Welsh counterpart , Arlene Foster and Carwyn Jones , Mrs May say : ` ` I want it to be the start of a new , grown-up relationship between the devolve administration and UK Government . ` ` we be much more than the sum of our part . ` ` as we move into this new chapter , we must seize the opportunity ahead . ` ` we will achieve far more together than we could ever do apart . ' ' Ms Sturgeon have insist Scotland must be treat as an ` ` equal partner ' ' in Britain ' s Brexit negotiation with Dig ... Ms Dugdale the EU . but Holyrood Brexit minister Mike Russell warn last night it remain to be see whether the view of Scot will be heed . he say : ` ` four month on from the referendum , we ' ve yet to see a proposal from the UK government on how the view of people in Scotland will be take into account . ` ` the Scottish government be increasingly concern the UK be head for a hard Brexit with all the damage that will bring to the economy . ` ` the Prime Minister must use the time before trigger Article @card@ to leave the EU to engage properly with the devolve administration . ' ' the Joint Ministerial Committee will meet at least once a year and draw up plan to spread wealth , job and opportunity evenly . Scots Labour leader Kezia Dugdale say : ` ` Nicola Sturgeon must speak for the whole of Scotland , not just the minority who support independence . ' '
BREXIT Strategy ; Nic ' S INDYREF2 VOW AS SHE REVEALS EU WISHLIST she call for Norway style deal but Ruth say it ' s set up to bomb Nicola Sturgeon last night round on critic who accuse her of deliver an impossible wishlist of Brexit demand in a bid to secure another indy vote . rival claim the SNP ' s complex plan for Scotland ' s future place in Europe have be deliberately design to fail so the party could push for a second referendum . the First Minister want a Norway-style agreement where Scotland could stay in the single market if the rest of the UK leave . she admit secure a Brexit deal would be no simple task . but she vow to do whatever it take to get Scotland ' S voice hear during EU split talk . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` Everything about Brexit will be difficult and unprecedented . ` ` the negotiation ahead will be characterise by a need to find practical solution to a range of complex issue . ` ` it be in that spirit that we seek to find solution that will respect the voice and protect the interest of Scotland . ` ` Prime Minister Theresa May pledge to consider the proposal we bring forward when she come to Scotland . ` ` she repeat that commitment when I speak to her on Monday . I hope she honour that commitment in full . ` ` the UK Government response to these proposal will tell us all we need to know about whether we be , in reality , a partnership of equal . ' ' but Tory leader Ruth Davidson accuse Ms Sturgeon of use the EU talk as way to secure another chance of independence . she say : ` ` it ' S hard to escape the conclusion the SNP ' s Brexit plan be set up to fail - all so Nicola Sturgeon can find a reason to break up the UK . ` ` she talk about compromise , but in black and white in her own report be her true intention - independence in Europe . she have be use the Brexit issue to get to that point all along and the people of Scotland can see her manoeuvre for what it be . ` ` if she truly want the good Brexit deal , she should be pull together with other part of the UK , not try to split the country up . ' ' Lib Dem leader Willie Rennie brand the SNP ' s EU plan ` ` Christmas window dressing ' ' . he add : ` ` the only option the First Minister really want to succeed be Scottish independence . she be wrong when she claim this document be a compromise as the threat of independence be still front and centre , as it have be for her whole political life . ' ' and Labour chief Kezia Dugdale say : ` ` the most important single market to Scotland be the UK . the SNP ' s own figure confirm that remain part of the UK single market be more important for Scotland ' s economy than even be in the EU . ` ` if Nicola Sturgeon really want to unite the country , she should take this opportunity to rule out another independence referendum . our country be divide enough alreadout seek even further division . ' ' Talready without the First Minister unveil her shopping list of Brexit demand yesterday . under the plan , power over key area like agriculture , food and drink , fishing , the environment , family and international criminal law would be return from the EU and automatically hand to Holyrood . there would be new health power , allow EU citizen to use the NHS and Scot to access European service . and there would be continue cooperation over education and research . Ms Sturgeon want Holyrood to have control over employment law , union law , health and safety and consumer protection . but to stay in the single market , Scotland would have take over responsibility for freedom of movement , immigration , competition law , and social security so EU national could claim benefit here . and everything from financial service to phone , post and transport would have to be control by Holyrood so they could be guarantee to fit with EU requirement . the big problem be how Scotland could allow free movement of good and people without a hard border with England . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` the UK Government already appear open a flexible approach to different sector of the economy , to Northern Ireland and Gibraltar . there be no reason why such flexibility should not apply to Scotland . ' ' the green claim the SNP wishlist do not go far enough . MSP Ross Greer say : ` ` these plan be the maximum limit of compromise . ' '
' Brit border plan just unbelievable ' ; Ahern Warns of BREXIT FALLOUT ; Westminster TOLD : former taoiseach Bertie Ahern have slam as ` ` unbelievable ' ' a suggestion that Irish port and airport could become a ` ` frontier ' ' for British immigration check . he dismiss the idea float in recent week , with Northern Ireland Secretary James Brokenshire say government in London and Dublin would work to strengthen the Republic ' s external border post-Brexit . Mr Ahern tell a House of Lords EU Select Committee in London : ` ` I quite frankly just find that unbelievable . ` ` to put that suggestion forward be a total lack of understand of how people think , north and south , of either tradition . ' ' another former taoiseach , John Bruton , warn the same committee that Brexit could increase smuggling along the border . in response to a direct question on whether Brexit could be abuse and become a smuggler ' charter , Mr Bruton say : ` ` Yes be the answer to that question . ' ' the opinion of the former taoisigh be seek as part of the Westminster committee ' s inquiry into the impact of Brexit on UK-Irish relation and the peace process . it be also look at the possible return of a hard border and how the common travel area between Britain and Ireland could be affect . Mr Ahern say he have huge concern about a border be create which would hit the free movement of people . he say : ` ` I really think that us open up a border , and if we have custom and tariff , that ' s bad enough . but if we start build it around people in any form you can see the difficulty . ` ` that would be a huge concern I ' d have in what be a good peace process , but how you could start undermine that . ' ' Mr Bruton and Mr Ahern raise concern about the cost of increase trade tariff for business on both side of the Irish border with about ( Euro ) 1.6billion of good go back and forth a year . they also discuss the importance of the good Friday agreement which create the condition for powersharing at Stormont . Mr Ahern say : ` ` all of these uncertainty ( surround Brexit ) ... I ' m not suggest they lead to disorder or community trouble or anything like that , I just do n't see that . ` ` but it do lead to tension within the Executive , the Assembly , north and south . ' ' Mr Bruton say question remain over whether disadvantaged community in Northern Ireland could suffer from a fall in funding agree with Europe under the peace process after Brexit .
Brexit as ' lethal as partition ' BREXIT be the most ` ` dangerous thing for Northern Ireland since partition ' ' , the SDLP boss have warn . Colum Eastwood tell a UTV pre-election debate that any attempt to introduce a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic would be ` ` economically and politically damaging ' ' . he say : ` ` we have a lot of work to do to defend Northern Ireland , to defend our citizen against the ravage of what be fast become a hard Tory Brexit . ' ' the DUP ' S Arlene Foster admit that her party receive donation after register as one of the party campaign to leave the European Union . she say the donation ` ` have be give to the electoral commission ' ' . when push for more detail , Foster would only say that they be ` ` from an organisation in England that want to see the Union keep and make sure we can have a United Kingdom ' ' . meanwhile , Sinn Fein leader Michelle O'Neill describe Brexit as be ` ` absolutely catastrophic for the island of Ireland ' ' . the big debate - Page @card@
Quick Brexit will stem migrant flow ; Scottish Sun
a master stroke to deliver on EU vow Theresa May deliver her ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' vow last night by hand the Foreign Office to Boris Johnson . she couple the daring move with the appointment of Thatcherite eurosceptic David Davis as the new Secretary of State for Brexit negotiation . they will work in harness with another lead Brexiteer , former Defence Secretary Liam Fox , as International Trade Secretary . it be a master stroke in balance a divide Tory party and the people over the future of Britain in Europe . the appointment provide a stark warning to Brussel that Mrs May intend to make Brexit work in the British national interest , not Europe ' S . in another show of strength , the new PM boot George Osborne out of the Treasury . he may have terrify referendum voter with his economic warning , but she have lose a big beast in the Cabinet . Osborne be replace as Chancellor by Phil Hammond , who be the rich man in the Cabinet with a £10million fortune . the Essex boy infuriate fellow eurosceptics by turn turtle and join David Cameron ' s Remain campaign . but he be one of the first to back Mrs May and as a former Shadow Treasury Chief , he will fit quickly into the role . he will be hold the purse string as Britain forge its future as a sovereign trading nation - and will start with big cut in corporation tax to lure foreign investor . Mrs May move Amber Rudd into her old job as Home Secretary . but it be her sensational promotion of Boris , who she always treat as a buffoon , that come out of the blue . the Old Etonian must mastermind Britain ' S complicated EU divorce . the role involve detailed negotiation with @card@ European counterpart , a major test for Mr Johnson ' S notoriously short attention span . he be likely to face some awkward meeting with world leader , include us presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton , who he call ` ` a sadistic nurse in a mental hospital ' ' .
PM PUTS Her Foot Down ; May GIVES BREXIT BLOCKERS A BLAST ; she warn opponent : accept vote Fearless kitten-heeled Theresa May have stamp down the Brexit blocker and declare : ` ` do n't stand in my way . ' ' MP and peer determine to stop Britain leave the EU yesterday get a tonguelashing from the Prime Minister , who vow to quit on her own term . Mrs May issue a stern warning to those Europhiles refuse to back the July @card@ referendum result , tell them to ` ` accept what the people decide ' ' . she warn opponent : ` ` while other seek to tie our negotiate hand , the government will get on with the job of deliver the decision of the British people . ` ` it be MP who overwhelmingly decide to put the decision in their hand . the result be clear . it be legitimate . ` ` MP and peer who regret the referendum result need to accept what the people decide . ' ' she urge Europhiles to stop ` ` re-fighting battle of the past ' ' and focus ` ` on how we can come together to ... forge a bold , confident , global future for Britain ' ' . Mrs May ' S intervention follow Thursday ' S High Court ruling that Britain can not begin the official Brexit process without the backing of Parliament . she be determine to trigger Article @card@ and begin the two-year divorce process from the EU by the end of March . No10 be set to appeal the ` ` important principle ' ' of democracy within week , but if that fail pro-EU MP could add a series of amendment to new Brexit legislation before give approval . Mrs May speak with European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker and German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Friday , tell them that the formal process for leave remains on track . she also hit back at those who demand she give a run commentary on Brexit negotiation . ' the result be clear . it be legitimate ' she declare ` ` now we need to turn our mind to how we get the good outcome for our country ' ' . she say : ` ` that mean stick to our plan and timetable , get on with the work of develop our negotiate strategy and not put our card on the table . ` ` that be not in our national interest and it wo n't help get the good deal for Britain . ' ' Mrs May ' S attack come after prominent Remain campaigner take advantage of the confusion to plot a second referendum . former Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg warn that his party would refuse support in the commons unless the government commit to a public vote on the final term of the Brexit deal . the ex-deputy PM also say the Lib Dems could use their army of peer in the unelected House of Lords to block any agreement they do not like . Tory peer Baroness Wheatcroft say trigger Article @card@ by the end of March now look ` ` an impossible target ' ' . she say peer may delay until they have a ` ` clear idea ' ' of what Brexit will entail . Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon have already reveal that her @card@ MP at Westminster ` ` will not vote for anything that undermine the will or the interest of the Scottish people ' ' . meanwhile Brexit-backing Tory MP Stephen Phillips , who quit on Friday over Mrs May ' s ` ` lurch to the right ' ' , say his main angst be the government ' s ` ` failure to appreciate the constitutional necessity of properly consult Parliament ' ' over the EU . and yesterday Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn demand that the PM spell out her Brexit strategy ` ` without delay ' ' . he say : ` ` there must be transparency and accountability about the government ' S plan . I suspect the government oppose democratic scrutiny of its plan because , frankly , there be n't any , beyond the hollow rhetoric of ' Brexit mean Brexit ' . ' ' Mrs May will use a three-day trip to India this week to lay the groundwork for an ` ` ambitious ' ' trade deal , despite EU rule ban bilateral agreement . she will join @card@ global company in an effort to ` ` reboot an age-old relationship in this age of opportunity ' ' , which could see deal seal to create @card@ job in the UK . Mrs May say Britain ' s relationship with India can turn into the ` ` partnership of the century ' ' . official say the establishment of new UK-India urban partnership could unlock opportunity worth £2billion . Mrs May say she would ` ` seize the opportunity of leave the European Union ' ' . but she will face pressure over the availability of UK visa for Indian worker and student . it come amid unease over high salary threshold for skilled worker which be announce by the Home Office as part of effort to cut non-EU migration . Indian tech body Nasscom have call for a high-skilled worker mobility deal with the UK . yesterday it emerge that pro-EU campaigner Gina Miller , behind the victorious High Court legal battle for parliamentary approval of Brexit , plan to report online troll to the police . detail just some of the vile comment receive , Ms Miller , @card@ , say : ` ` I should be behead , gang rape , I ' m not even human , I ' m a primate , I belong in a kitchen - that ' S the nice of some of them . it be unbelievable . ' '
HAMMOND : I ' LL Phil My Boots ; Budget Warning To EU ; he grab £27bn for Brexit war chest Philip Hammond have warn EU leader he be build a multibillion pound Brexit fight fund to hit back if Britain be refuse a good deal . the Chancellor reveal he will not spend an expect £27billion windfall from a strong economy to be unveil in the Budget this week . instead , he will bank it to ensure the UK have ` ` reserve in the tank ' ' as exit negotiation pan out . Mr Hammond say : ` ` we expect to do a deal with the EU that will allow us to continue trading together . ` ` if there ' S anybody in the European union who think if we do n't do a deal , Britain will slink off as a wounded animal that ' S not go to happen . be £27bn for a Brexit fund worth ` ` the British people have a great fight spirit and we will fight back ' ' . @card@ @card@ Better Call on DAB , the talkRADIO or talkradio . a Brexit war chest could be use to pay for cut to corporation tax to keep Britain attractive to business under hefty tariff on EU trade . a spending splurge may also be need to protect live standard if the economy see a Brexit wobble , the Chancellor admit . he also warn the UK still have debt of £1.7trillion and the deficit must still be tackle . Mr Hammond say Britain will pay an EU ` ` divorce bill ' ' despite be under no legal obligation to do so . it ? but he dismiss a threaten £50billion figure as ` ` pre-negotiation positioning ' ' and suggest it will fall significantly . @card@ Paul App www.co.uk Mr Hammond have warn MP Wednesday ' S budget , his first since be make Chancellor , will be a small one than usual . major tax change will be hold back until the autumn .
be May look to get us off the book ? and so the curtain fall on another party conference season . I ' m less and less clear in my own mind what these jamboree be about . certainly if the First Minister and her chum be say the sort of thing in Holyrood that they say at the conference in Glasgow last week , I doubt if many of my chum would bother to write it down . we ' re tell the SNP ' S conference be the large of any in the UK which be an indicator of the size and enthusiasm of Nicola Sturgeon ' S supporter . and just like all the other conference , Brexit hang over this one like a brood shadow but the contrast with what have go before could hardly be more clear . where the conservative decide that Brexit present an ideal opportunity to make official list of foreigner and ` ` shame ' ' business which employ them , Ms Sturgeon stress that those who choose to settle here be welcome and value . be the difference in tone be just one symptom of the Brexit division - an extra edge to the weapon which the SNP will use to revive their independence campaign . call me an old cynic if you like , but be it possible Prime Minister Theresa May be try to help the SNP out ? look to get have she write the jock off ? be she look for a way to get us off the book now that the oil have all but run out ? off I only ask because it book ? seem as if the UK Government be go out of its way to offend the Scot over Brexit . the Prime Minister say Scotland will be fully involve in prepare the Brexit negotiating position . but her Cabinet sub-committee on Brexit have no seat for David Mundell . you ' d think he might be qualify to represent Scottish interest - he be the only Scottish Tory MP and also , he be the actual , real-life Scotland Secretary . the Scotland Office website say he ` ` ensure Scottish interest be fully and effectively represent at the heart of the UK Government ' ' . but not in this case . Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson boast she have easy access to Brexit Secretary David Davis . his door be always open . he ' S ready to engage with the Scot . just not with David Mundell . and then there ' s Sunderland , home of the giant Nissan car plant which rely heavily on sale into the EU . it be the most efficient and productive plant the company have and hopeful that it might be choose to produce the new Qashqai . Sunderland vote to get out of the EU by @card@ per cent , virtually a mirror image of the Scottish vote . but , not to worry . last week Mrs May have Nissan boss round for a cup of coffee to assure them they would be ` ` shield ' ' from any impact of Brexit . it ' S not yet clear what she have in mind . there have be talk of the taxpayer picking pay any additional EU trade tariff on car from Sunderland . it ' S the lunatic position of a government determine to get out of the single market , pay an international corporation to keep job they would happily maintain for free if we be in the single market . Sunderland could even be give a new status as a kind of ` ` bonded warehouse ' ' , a little bit of the EU in the North East of England . Sunderland could become the colonial Hong Kong of Tyne and Wear . that ' s their reward for vote to leave Europe but Scotland , which vote to stay , be get no special deal . ` ` Brexit mean Brexit , ' ' say Mrs May . ` ` we will negotiate as one United Kingdom and leave as one United Kingdom . ' ' except for Sunderland , obviously . and this uncertainty go further than industry . just a month after the EU vote , the Home Office launch a new visa scheme for foreign student . Masters Degree student from abroad will be able to stay on an extra six month in order to find a job in the UK once their course be complete - but only if they study at the University of Oxford , the University of Cambridge , the University of Bath , or Imperial College London . may us the do you notice anything about those respected educational institution ? something they have in common ? like where they be on the map ? those university be select because of the ` ` consistently low level of visa refusal ' ' for student seek to study there . maybe it ' s different for St Andrew and Glasgow and Edinburgh . maybe lot of potential illegal immigrant pretend to be rocket scientist at Scottish university . it would be stupid to pretend Brexit have not exacerbate the political divide between Scotland and England . look at the map with every single council area in Scotland voting for Europe and hardly any south of that very firm border . Nicola Sturgeon ' s decision to make ` ` inclusion the guiding principle of everything we do ' ' while the conservative want to make list of foreigner , could hardly be more starkly divide . so far it have n't impact on support for independence . with a @card@ split the late poll say we be exactly where we be two year ago . but Nicola Sturgeon be come back for another go . it take a lot of effort to hold off the last independence campaign two year ago and Mrs May should be careful not to give the other side any more ammunition this time round . unless she really want to lose , of course .
Big two in Brexit turf war a Whitehall turf war have break out between Philip Hammond and Liam Fox over Britain ' s post-Brexit trade policy . the Chancellor challenge the International Trade Secretary ' s department to assess whether new free trade deal with non-EU country will compensate for leave the custom union . it be see as a ploy by Mr Hammond , who want a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit , to keep Britain tie to the EU ' S custom union to avoid disrupt business . but it be oppose by Brexit supporter who say it will restrict any chance of an independent international trade policy . as EU rule bar member of the custom union from striking bilateral trade deal , it would make Dr Fox ' s job all-but redundant . he win a Cabinet battle to get a Trade Bill include in the Queen ' s Speech - enable Britain to conduct its own independent policy . the Sun say - Page ten
Un READY BREX ; Survey Delay Row Rudd : @card@ too soon for migrant control HOME Secretary Amber Rudd last night risk a Brexit backlash by signal immigration curb will not be ready by @card@ . she say a committee would spend a year look at immigration from Europe to see how the economy would be hit by a cut in number . the Migration Advisory Committee , which already set limit for non-EU migrant , will not report back until September @card@ . that be just six month before Britain leave the EU . and Ms Rudd say there would be an ` ` implementation period ' ' for any new control after Brexit in March @card@ to prevent spark recruitment crisis for major employer . business group welcome the announcement but hardcore Brexiteers warn against backtrack on repeated promise to cut immigration . there be already an estimated 2.3million EU citizen work in Britain . but the food , hospitality and construction sector be among those warning that tight control would leave them short-staffed . Ms Rudd ' S announcement come after Environment Secretary and Brexit-backer Michael Gove admit free movement be likely to continue during a transitional post-Brexit deal with the EU . the Engineering Employers ' Federation say it be the ` ` first time ' ' the government have acknowledge migration control would be implement ` ` in a measure way over a period of year ' ' . federation of small business chairman Mike Cherry say it would ` ` be welcome by many small business as a sign of much-need stability ' ' . but just @card@ hour earlier , Nigel Farage have accuse Theresa May of a great ` ` Brexit betrayal ' ' . he say : ` ` apart from a few delusional Westminster MP , everyone know that the issue which win Brexit be open-door immigration . ` ` the irony be that the government ' s decision to keep the border open come as the migrant crisis in Italy be intensify . ' ' separately yesterday , Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson insist the government do not want to see a fall in the number of migrant come to work in the tech sector . visit entrepreneur in Sydney , Australia , he say minister want to ensure that ` ` people who have energy and talent and idea can still come to the UK ' ' .
Big demand Nicola Sturgeon be go on holiday to Portugal later this week . but before she jet off to the Algarve , she will leave Scot in no doubt about which direction we ' re heading . in a speech today , she will list the key demand of Scotland ahead of talk about the UK ' s Brexit settlement . Ms Sturgeon ' S wishlist be to be expect . after all , Prime Minister Theresa May have make it clear she want to agree a ` ` UK-wide approach ' ' to Brexit talk with Europe before she launch them . but the PM look to be store up trouble with her pledge . put simply , it ' S hard to see how Ms Sturgeon ' S demand can be satisfy unless the UK stay in the EU . but that horse have bolt , and Brexit mean Brexit , as Tory minister keep tell us . Ms Sturgeon ' s insistence on guarantee over freedom of movement , farming and EU grant be awkward enough for Mrs May . but the First Minister also want us to retain influence over the rule of the single market . and how can you do that unless you ' re an EU member ? it ' s begin to look suspiciously like the SNP supremo have set the bar impossibly high . her first demand be that the democratic wish of Scotland be respect . the only way of do that - after we vote @card@ in favour of Remain - be to stay in the EU . so it look increasingly like we ' re head towards a second independence referendum , with Brexit the justification . but as Ms Sturgeon pack her sun lotion , she might want to think about the comment of her MEP Alyn Smith - a highly respect figure within the party . he warn yesterday that Brexit do not guarantee independence . and he ' S right . the constitutional chaos cause by the EU leave vote last month might be enough to justify a second referendum . but the Nat should be careful not to put their egg in one basket . as Mr Smith say , when it come to the crunch , Europe be just ` ` one issue among many ' ' . and not the silver bullet .
EU ' LL do it May Way ; Theresa BLASTS Brussels PM : we ' ll call the shot over Brexit trade deal Theresa May yesterday slap down snipe EU leader and insist they will do a deal with Brexit Britain - or it will cost them a fortune . in a Thatcher-style blast after a weekend of threat , the PM say that the @card@ member state know it make economic sense to work with the UK . on Friday EU official warn Britain may not even be able to access the single market if it rip up free movement rule . Slovakia ' S PM Robert Fico threaten to veto a Brexit deal and yesterday signal that the EU should punish Britain for leave . but after arrive in New York yesterday , Mrs May say : ` ` look , the @card@ will sign up to a deal with us . ` ` we will be negotiate with them and as I say , we will be ambitious in what we want to see for the UK . ` ` but I think a good deal for the UK can also be a good deal for the other member state . I believe in good trade relation . I want the UK to be a global leader in free trade . ' ' the Prime Minister will back up her boast today by defend the Brexit vote result in her maiden speech to the UN General Assembly . she will say that the vote to leave do not mean that brit want to ` ` walk away from our partner in the world ' ' . once Britain trigger form Article @card@ , formally serve notice that it want to leave the EU , the government will have two year to thrash out a new trade relationship . Mr Fico yesterday claim that Britain be ` ` bluff ' ' in talk up its Brexit prospect . and Hungary have reiterate its plan to veto any deal that curb its people ' s desire to work in the UK . but speak from Dubai , Trade Secretary Liam Fox insist Britain be well-place for economic success . he add that give the amount import from nation such as Germany , France and Italy , it be ` ` very much in the interest of other EU state that Britain and they make a success of Brexit and our new relationship ' ' . Brexit Secretary David Davis last week warn that the negotiation over the separation could prove to be the most complicated ` ` of all time ' ' .
Leo ' S in Control AS May FALTERS TAOISEACH Leo Varadkar have really hit his stride on the Brexit issue in a forceful way that ' S win him deserve plaudit at home . last week he troll the Tory with a Winston Churchill quote . he be at it again this week , tell reporter at the EU summit : ` ` I would hope that some of the people who support Brexit and campaign for it would realise , or at least acknowledge , that they ' re the one who create this problem and I ' m one of the people who be try to resolve it . ' ' this be a sharp rebuke to unionist who refuse to be draw on how the Border will fare after Brexit , say that it ' S the Republic ' S problem and that we should pay for new Border check if they ' re ever require . their stance be as preposterous as their support for the leave campaign . but have take their ill-judged position , they be loathe to change tack . Varadkar must be eternally grateful to the unionist and Tory for make such a hash of the Brexit strategy , as it rescue him from his low ebb after the Tanaiste emails crisis . nothing make a leader look more competent than other ' incompetence . Leo have do well on the Border issue and on Brexit in general . however , he now need to use this currency to solve some of our big problem at home , if it ' S ultimately to be of any benefit to all .
queen DISMAYED By PM ' S BREXIT SECRECY THE Queen be frustrate by Theresa May ' s failure to share Brexit plan in her first Balmoral stay , it be claim . she be ` ` disappointed ' ' the PM do not give a briefing during her overnight trip to Scotland in September . the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh be reportedly look forward to receive more insight into Britain ' s European exit , accord to the Times . but Mrs May stick to her ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' line , allegedly leave the Queen miff . the PM ' s two-day visit to Balmoral be part of an annual fixture for every Prime Minister . despite the alleged disappointment , it have be suggest Mrs May and the Queen ` ` get on famously ' ' on a personal level . the Queen also reportedly get on well with David Cameron . a source close to Mr Cameron when he be still PM reveal : ` ` they have a very nice and good relationship . ' ' Downing Street would not comment last night . a royal spokesman say : ` ` we never disclose discussion between the Queen and her prime minister . ' ' a Poll have reveal that @card@ per cent of brit want a speedy Brexit , include a quarter of Remain voter .
up YOURS EU Laws ; BREXIT Trade DEALS Begin Davis tell Brussel where to go DEFIANT Brexit Secretary David Davis last night vow to ignore EU rule on make trade deal , say : ` ` what be they go to do , throw us out ? ' ' Britain have already start talk with at least @card@ major nation in preparation for an economic future outside the EU . International Trade Secretary Liam Fox have begin a frantic round of globetrotting , which will take him to America this week . in a tone echo the Sun ' s famous up yours Delors front page of @card@ , Mr Davis say the aim be to create a ` ` very , very large ' ' trade area ` ` ten time the size ' ' of the EU . it come as the Tory veteran also vow to ` ` control the border ' ' as he plan our departure from Brussels . set out the UK ' S aim , the former SAS reservist say he want tariff-free access to the single market - a major boost for British firm . he suggest any EU national who ` ` surge ' ' to the UK before Brexit in search of full right to live and work here could be kick out . and he hit back at suggestion from Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon that she have a ` ` veto ' ' over Brexit after Scot vote to remain in the UK . Mr Davis tell Sky News : ` ` they ca n't have a veto because there be 17.5million people who have give us a mandate . they have tell us what to do - we ca n't disobey it . ' ' Mr Davis , appoint to the Cabinet by new PM Theresa May last week , say he plan to trigger the EU ' s Article @card@ ` ` early next year ' ' . that will kick-start two year of formal departure talk , with a full exit from the EU expect in @card@ . he claim that would force Brussels ' leader to ` ` make sure free trade work ' ' as they depend ` ` more on us than we do on them ' ' . Australia , India , China , Japan and Canada be among the nation push for agreement with Britain . meanwhile , Mrs May will travel to Wales today to discuss leave the EU and save the steel industry with First Minister Carwyn Jones . former PM David Cameron ' S kid Nancy , @card@ , Elwen , ten , and Florence , five , leave a ` ` welcome ' ' note on Mrs May ' s desk at No10 .
martin blast ' RIGHTWING ' UK ; ' Brexit be backward-looking nationalism ' Micheal Martin have accuse Britain of adopt a ` ` backwardlooking nationalism ' ' over its decision to pull out of the EU . call for an urgent national plan to deal with Brexit , the Fianna Fail leader also demand that the EU suspend state aid rule for worst-hit industry . he say : ` ` we be not go to join the English in their desire to repeal the 20th century . ` ` we will not join them in their right-wing ideology of trade rule with no social dimension and no enforceable law . ' ' Martin say Ireland desperately need a new urgency and ambition in government to deal with the fallout of Brexit and other rise threat internationally . speak at a commemoration of Sean Moylan , an IRA commandant in the 1920s and a cabinet minister , Martin say : ` ` Britain have take the route of a backward-looking nationalism , suspicious of outsider and commit to the historically false idea that you do n't need strong international body to secure lasting cooperation and prosperity between nation . ' ' he add : ` ` in the five month since the UK ' s Brexit vote , the only thing which be clear be that their policy be a shambles and that it be already cause real damage on this island . Brexit be not something which be happen in two year , it be happen now . ' ' Martin say Ireland urgently need a strategy to mitigate the impact of ` ` the hard Brexit which be already under way ' ' . opposition leader Martin then add : ` ` the unprecedented decline in sterling may soon be follow by new barrier to trade . we ca n't stand by and let this slow-motion crash happen . ' ' meanwhile , the Queen will invite US President-elect Donald Trump for a state visit to Britain next year to try to cement close tie between the two country . cite two minister and a senior official close to Downing Street , the Sunday Times report that discussion between British official and Trump ' S team would start soon to ensure that a date could be agree for June or July next year . Britain be keen to reinforce its ` ` special relationship ' ' with the United States as the government of Prime Minister Theresa May prepare for a hard Brexit from the EU . Trump invite May to visit him as soon as possible during their first telephone call since his election victory , her office have say . aide for the prime minister have say as yet there be no date for the trip . the British government hope that an official state visit will be its ` ` secret weapon ' ' for cement tie after Trump meet lead Brexit campaigner Nigel Farage earlier this month - the first British politician to do so . it be also report that the president-elect tell May during their phonecall last week that his late Scottish mother be a ` ` big fan ' ' of the Queen and ask the prime minister to pass on his good wish to her . @ IrishSun Online
Theresa MAYBE ; Tories in Euro Split Shock ; PM refuse to confirm if she ' d vote for Brexit now the PM spark anger last night when she refuse to say if she would vote for Brexit in a new referendum . Theresa May , who back Remain last year , say she would come to a ` ` judgment ' ' after weigh up all the fact . her admission spark question about whether she believe leave the EU be the right course for the country . Mrs May refuse four time to say how she would vote in a new poll when quiz by LBC radio host Iain Dale . she say : ` ` You ' re ask me to say how would I vote now against a different background . a different international background , a different economic background . circumstance move on . I think we should all be focus on deliver Brexit . ' ' but her reply horrify Tory Brexiteers . one minister say : ` ` oh my God . that ' S the easy question to answer . I just want to cry . ' ' leave boss and ex-Labour MP Gisela Stuart say : ` ` it would have be more helpful if she say she believe in this . ' ' Pro-EU supporter also blast the Prime Minister . Labour MP Chris Bryant say : ` ` this make her hard Brexit policy all the more irresponsible . ' ' it will place Mrs May under renewed pressure follow her disastrous conference speech last week . during the live phone-in , she also refuse to guarantee all 3.2million EU citizen in Britain could stay on if there be no Brexit deal . meanwhile , EU Council boss Donald Tusk , leave , last night put a December deadline on a Brexit breakthrough or planning would start for a ` ` no-deal ' ' scenario . Mr Tusk , leave , who represent all EU leader , add : ` ` we be negotiate in good faith . ' '
Leo ' S HOPING for BREXIT TAKE-BACK Leo Varadkar have reiterate his hope Britain will ditch Brexit and stay in the EU . the Taoiseach insist the good outcome for Ireland , Northern Ireland and Britain would be stay in the custom union and single market . he be ask during a job announcement in Waterford yesterday if there be any possibility of Brexit not go ahead . the Fine Gael leader say : ` ` well , I still hope that it wo n't happen . ' ' the Taoiseach add Brexit ` ` be a British policy , not an Irish one ' ' . he say : ` ` when it come to my work in Brussels , work with other European prime minister and president , it ' s part of my remit to keep the door open , not just to the European Union but also to the single market and also to the custom union , should they decide to go that route . ` ` that , I think , would be the good outcome for Ireland and Northern Ireland and Britain . ' ' Relations with Arlene Foster ' s Democratic Unionist party in the North have sour over the issue of a post-Brexit border . Fine Gael Senator Neale Richmond say yesterday : ` ` the DUP ' s whinge do n't hide their political impotence . ` ` they would be far good off seek to influence their government partner in Westminster and work to get the Executive back up and run to give Northern Ireland a strong voice . ' ' Mr Richmond be respond to recent DUP accusation about Fine Gael ahead of any election . dup deputy leader Nigel Dodds have say : ` ` what ' s go on be pure politicking for their own domestic market . let no one pretend otherwise . ' ' Mr Richmond say the government and the EU ` ` can not be expect to provide all the solution ( in relation to Brexit ) , especially on area like a propose border which run contrary to the aim of the government or indeed the good Friday Agreement ' ' .
the Sun ON Sunday SAYS @card@ @card@ @card@ the gulf in credibility between the Tory and Labour leadership have rarely be great . Theresa May vow today to stick to her timetable to deliver Brexit on behalf of the majority who vote for it . she ' S now off lead a trade mission to secure a vital new deal with India . you may not like her , or Brexit . but that be indisputably what leadership look like . Jeremy Corbyn , by contrast , threaten to force an election if Brexit be not on his term . but earlier , when gently ask if he fancy a snap poll , he bolt like a startle hare - squeal he be be ` ` harass ' ' . Corbyn himself be now a pitiful irrelevance . more troubling be his MP ' plot to negate the referendum verdict . Labour ' S oh-soplausible Brexit spokesman Keir Starmer insist he accept it . other MP say the same . Starmer be still pay by a legal firm that help delay Article @card@ last week . labour plotter and on Wednesday @card@ Labour MP lap up a speech by Tony Blair ' S ex-guru Will Hutton in which he claim , incredibly , the ` ` overwhelming majority of British people ' ' want to reaffirm our EU membership . he urge MP to fight to overturn the June @card@ result . the delusion and arrogance of this ruling elite be off the scale . yet these be the true motive of some Labour MP and of Lib-Dems include Nick Clegg and many of his party ' S peer . their dangerous attempt to negate Britain ' s big ever democratic vote will go on until Article @card@ be trigger . if the Supreme Court rule against her , the PM must force a bill through without delay . PM must crush the Labour plotter
BREX Symbol ; @card@ MSPs Vote ' No ' To Euro Split Nat hail fight to ' make Scot hear ' on EU HOLYROOD yesterday vote to oppose the UK trigger Brexit in a desperate bid to send a message to Theresa May . the non-binding motion be carry by @card@ vote to @card@ with only the Tories and Labour rebel Neil Findlay , Richard Leonard and Elaine Smith reject it . but the Nat - who grant MSPs a say despite Supreme Court judge rule last month that Holyrood ca n't block Brexit - insist it be more than just a cheap stunt after Scotland ' s Remain vote in last year ' S referendum . the party ' S Brexit Minister Michael Russell say : ` ` this vote be more than symbolic . ` ` it be a key test of whether Scotland ' S voice be be listen to . ` ` this debate give MSPs the opportunity to speak loudly and clearly , to reaffirm the vote that be so conclusive last year and to say to the UK , to Europe and to the world that we oppose the catastrophic hard Brexit now be pursue . ` ` but time be run out . vote to reject the trigger of Article @card@ be now the only way to remind the Prime Minister of her promise , and of the disastrous consequence of the path she seem set on . ' ' the motion say that ` ` the decision to proceed do not respect the majority vote to remain part of the EU that be return in every council area in Scotland ' ' . Labour ' S Lewis Macdonald claim leave the EU would be ` ` a sombre day ' ' . and he blast the PM for turn the process into a ` ` disaster ' ' . he say : ` ` Theresa May would rather hold hand with Donald Trump than work hand in glove with Angela Merkel . ' ' Ross Greer of the green say the northsouth Brexit split leave voter with a choice . he say : ` ` the time for compromise have almost pass . it be time for all of us to choose between a Brexit Britain , tilt towards Trump , or an independent Scotland in Europe . ' ' but Tory John Lamont slam the SNP ' S tactic . he say : ` ` they have be on the lose side of two recent referendum , and seem unable to accept the result of either . ' ' Theresa May see off a revolt by top pro-EU Tories last night in a major challenge to her authority . the PM face a demand that she get MP ' approval before walk away from a bad Brexit deal . but the government win the knife-edge vote @card@ to @card@ .
it ' S YOUR Right To CHOOSE Future Monday ' S announcement certainly seem to have catch the Tory government flat-footed - but that just show how badly out of touch they be with the mood in Scotland . last summer I welcome Theresa May ' s assurance that she would seek agreement with the devolve administration on a UK-wide approach before trigger Article @card@ . but nine month on from the Brexit vote , the language of partnership be go . it have become clear that the Tories be intent on pursue a hard Brexit no matter what the consequence be for job , the economy and livelihood . and no matter what the people of Scotland think . the people of England and Wales vote leave , and I fully respect that . but nothing we be propose will prevent them from leave the EU . people in Scotland vote by a 24-point margin to Remain - and our voice count too . at time like these , it ' s more important than ever to have a clear plan for the way ahead - to try , as far as be possible , to be in control of event and not just at the mercy of them . we believe that you , the people of Scotland , should have a choice about our future . with the approval of the Scottish Parliament , we will open discussion with Westminster about hold a referendum - give you a choice between the hard Brexit or to become an independent country . for the Tories to try to block this referendum would be completely and utterly untenable and indefensible - and privately they know this . at last year ' S election , the SNP win the high constituency vote share of any party in the history of the Scottish Parliament . our manifesto state : ` ` the Scottish Parliament should have the right to hold another referendum ... if there be a significant and material change in the circumstance that prevail in @card@ , such as Scotland be take out the EU against our will . ' ' well , that be exactly the situation we ' re now in . and with the support of the green , there be a parliamentary mandate to hold a referendum . it would also be untenable for the Tories to try and rig the timing of the referendum . if the Tories ' argument be that another referendum add to the uncertainty cause by Brexit , then delay it beyond Brexit would only add to the uncertainty . the UK Government concede that the last referendum must be ` ` make in Scotland ' ' , and they must honour that principle again this time - there should be no string attach , no block mechanism apply and no Downing Street diktat . some people have say Brexit uncertainty mean that voter will be ' voting blind ' - that they wo n't have the right information to make an informed choice . but here ' s the key point : we be not propose that the referendum be hold until autumn @card@ at the early . it be between then and spring @card@ that the shape of the UK ' s Brexit deal will have become clear . so by that stage there will be clarity about what the term of Brexit will look like - but also clarity about independence . that be therefore the right time to choose the future of Scotland . and we trust you , the people of Scotland , to make that choice . 6It ' s clear Tory be intent on hard Brexit7
blah BLAH Blair ; HI Guys ! look who ' S Back ; Brexit block bid blast ; HOT Blair @card@ Tony Blair be blast for show contempt to voter as he launch a new bid to block Brexit . the ex-PM say brit be wrong to want to leave the EU and call for a movement to ` ` rise up ' ' and reverse the vote . but Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson say Mr Blair be try to undermine democracy with his speech in the City of London yesterday . Mr Blair claim voter do not know the ` ` true term of Brexit ' ' , that PM Theresa May do not have a mandate to push through ` ` Brexit at any cost ' ' and leave win by ` ` hideously abuse ' ' patriotism . Mr Johnson - who lead the Brexit campaign - label the ex-PM ` ` condescending ' ' . he add : ` ` we hear these argument last year . not a thing have change . ` ` it be insult the intelligence of the British people to say they get it wrong . ' ' Fellow Brexiteer Michael Gove say : ` ` Tony Blair have his say during the referendum . he should now respect the fact that the British people vote to leave . ' ' and Tory MP Dominic Raab call the comment ` ` the height of arrogance ' ' . Mr Blair also slam the Labour leadership , say the ` ` debilitation of the party be the facilitator of Brexit ' ' .
dup clash with party on judgment the DUP and nationalist party clash over the Brexit ruling . Brexit-backing DUP chief blast the Supreme Court ruling that the British parliament must vote on whether the government can start the Brexit process . dup MP Sammy Wilson claim it ` ` have give the ability to those anti-democratic loser within the Remain camp to conduct a parliamentary guerrilla warfare against the decision by the people of the UK to leave the EU ' ' . Wilson welcome the ruling that Stormont and the Scottish and Welsh devolve institution could have no veto over Brexit . but SDLP leader Colum Eastwood say that judgment ` ` significantly undermine the value place on the democratic mandate of our Assembly ' ' . he add : ` ` Northern Ireland vote to remain in the EU , yet the Northern Ireland Assembly be be deny any role or right in the upcoming negotiation with the EU . the SDLP be now the only party standing by the will of the majority of people in Northern Ireland at Westminster . we will be the only voice of the @card@ per cent who vote Remain . ' ' Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams claim Brexit ` ` will undermine the institutional , constitutional and legal integrity of the Good Friday Agreement ' ' .
may ' S TRIPLE EU Blow ON BREXIT Theresa May be freeze out in Brussels yesterday in a triple Brexit blow . she be ignore on arrival at a crunch EU summit , with footage show her have to shuffle her paper as leader greet each other at EU HQ . it come hour after revelation that Britain ' s EU ambassador to Brussels Sir Ivan Rogers have warn her in October that Eurocrats believe a Brexit deal could take @card@ year . the PM be tell she would not be welcome at a work dinner at the EU Council . the @card@ other leader talk Brexit for just @card@ minute over coffee as international crisis take priority . insider rush to Mrs May ' S defence and say she chat to German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other . No10 say it be confident a ` ` quickie ' ' Brexit divorce be possible . the PM ' s official spokesman say Mrs May want to agree the term within the time allot by EU rule . he say : ` ` we we want this to proceed as swiftly as possible . ' ' source claim Sir Ivan ' s private comment may have be leak to damage his position . after meeting Mrs May , European Parliament chief Martin Schulz say Brexit would ` ` undoubtedly ' ' weaken the EU .
no block Brexit , Blair So Tony Blair want people to vote for MP who do not support Brexit . his policy be the reason the country be in the state it be in - and why the work class have to work longer to fill the hole in the pension pot . the country have wake up to self-interested rich people like Mr Blair who have have their snout in the EU trough . he should respect the democratic process over Brexit . Ian Ashcroft Ashton-In-Makerfield , Lancs Tony Blair want voter to back any party which be against a hard Brexit . he claim a small group of people with a strong ideology be hijack Britain . that ' s strange , Tony . I seem to recall that happen in @card@ when you and your own ` ` small group of people ' ' hijack Parliament and take us into an illegal war which cost many life and spawn the current Middle East chaos and terrorist atrocity across Europe . you be yesterday ' s PM . let the current one get on with her job . Jim Sokol Banbury , Oxon it now seem there be a plot to unseat Brexit MP . the Remoaners still do n't get democracy . so I shall no longer be vote in any local or general election . stuff the lot . die Marris Doncaster THE Labour Party ' s position on the last year ' s EU referendum in the UK be quite obvious . they want to seem sympathetic to the wish express by the people to leave the EU - but in such term as to make it impossible to deliver any sort of solution compatible with the poll ' s majority result . john Collins Chelmsford , Essex So Gina Miller have launch a protest party against Brexit . her Best of Britain group , with its tactical voting initiative , be her late attempt to stop the democratic will of the people - follow the court case she bring . another rich luvvie with no idea about life . Andy AILTON Grantham , Lincs I Hope people vote Conservative at the upcoming General Election to show Blair and Co that we know what we be vote for with Brexit . MP can not understand why so many people be in poverty . I can - cheap labour and zero- hour contract . beryl Dolphin by Email Labour ' S bonkers Brexit sabotage plan would leave us stick in the middle with the EU - neither in nor out , voter shake their fist at the plotter with rage . Jeremy Corbyn would make Britain a paradise for Eastern Europeans on benefit and sink the economy faster than the Titanic . Anthony Rodriguez Staines , Surrey I do N'T want a gung-ho Prime Minister - but I do n't want a gun-shy PM like Jeremy Corbyn would be . Syd Vaughan Birmingham WE be tell Jeremy Corbyn be a threat to security - but our government have make massive cut to the Armed Forces as well as the police . David Rose Linton , Cambs what do we do now ? how can we vote for any of the current political party and their ludicrous policy ? I ' m very disappoint in Theresa May , who look as if she want to lose the General Election . and can anyone honestly see Jeremy Corbyn talk his way though a Brexit deal ? Ukip be www.non-existent.No use voting at all . pat Drew Darlington it ' S typical of an energy firm bigwig , SSE chief executive Alistair Phillips-Davies , to claim an official cap on energy price would stifle competition . what competition ? as one firm announce a price rise , the other follow . where ' s the choice ? Mick May Laindon , Essex Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
give it US Hard ; Shock Poll BACKS TOUGH STANCE Pro-EU vote shift away from ' soft Brexit ' NEARLY seven in ten voter now back a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit with full border control , a study reveal yesterday . it show brit have ` ` accepted ' ' the decision to leave the EU , say researcher . they say @card@ per cent favour modest tariff and contribution to Brussels against the ` ` soft ' ' option of free movement and ongoing payment . more than half of Remain voter support take back control of our border and leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . nearly @card@ per cent of them back pay no ` ` divorce ' ' settlement to quit the EU - almost as many as the @card@ per cent of leave voter . the research also find that Remainers feel that preserve free movement and full access to the single market would not respect last year ' S EU Referendum result . the London School of Economics ( LSE ) and Oxford University come up with the finding after present almost @card@ voter with various scenario relate to Brexit . LSE associate professor Thomas J Leeper tell the Sun : ` ` you might have think Remain voter would have preferred staying as close to the status quo as possible . but what we have find be that Remain voter be fall towards be more pro- Brexit than may otherwise have be expect . ` ` this suggest that , by and large , the British public have accept the Brexit result and be prepare for some kind of deal . ' ' Tory backbencher Jacob Rees-Mogg tell the Sun : ` ` the British people have a love of democracy the metropolitan elite ca n't cope with . ' '
PENPUSHERS ' BREXTRA pay ; BUST-UPS Over BREXIT ; more work for civil service , union whine Senior civil servant have demand a pay rise because of the extra work need to deliver Brexit . the FDA trade union say a decade of pay restraint and staff cut have leave the civil service ` ` demoralise ' ' at a time it face its big challenge in a generation . in a demand to the Senior Salaries Review Board , the union say Brexit have spark workload ` ` unprecedented in peacetime ' ' . the anti-austerity FDA represent some of the high paid civil servant . those in Whitehall take home more than £77,000 on average , but more than @card@ senior mandarin earn above the PM ' s £149,440 salary . leave MP Douglas Carswell , right , blast the penpushers for treat Brexit as a ` ` bonus opportunity ' ' . civil service pay rise be cap at one per cent by ex-Chancellor George Osborne as part of his deficit reduction plan . but union boss Dave Penman appeal to Mr Osborne ' S successor Philip Hammond to take a more ` ` realistic position ' ' . he say more cash be need and not a ` ` neverending series of temporary fix dream up on the hoof that end up cost the pub-lic more than before the pay restraint begin ' ' . Mr Penman add : ` ` Fresh from reduce the size of their department , the Senior Civil Service be now task with implement Brexit on top of all of the government ' s existing priority . ' ' he claim some member have have no pay rise for a decade and all have see their pay cut by around a quarter in real term . ha de th qu mH ae hub t r qSt St th h but Brexit-backing Tory Steve Baker be outrage at the plea . he say : ` ` people on ordinary wage will be astonish that the FDA think they be due a pay rise . ' ' or Oi ish th h
HESS-HESS-GB ; Heseltine : Brexit vote like let Germany win war Lord Heseltine provoke fury yesterday after he claim voting for Brexit be like let the Nazis win World War Two . the veteran Tory Europhile say Britain have ` ` abandon the opportunity to influence Europe ' ' . and he claim quit the EU will now allow Germany to dominate European politics . the peer , @card@ , rant : ` ` Germany lose the war . we ' ve just hand them the opportunity to win the peace . I find that quite unacceptable . ' ' he moan that Brexit mean we have lose the ability to represent the Commonwealth in Europe and predict our special relationship with the US would end . the peer , sack as a government adviser for rebel over the Brexit Bill , claim PM Theresa May could lose the next General Election because of the ` ` bitter fury ' ' of Remain voter . but angry MP last night hit back at the former Tory Deputy Prime Minister . Ukip ' S Douglas Carswell say : ` ` Poor Hezza . ` ` his political career be define by try to ensure we have more EU . and now he ' s be prove wrong . ` ` it be all in www.vain.No wonder he sound a little dotty now . ' ' and Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` I be surprise by his hostility to the Germans who be our friend and ally . ' ' Recent TV drama SS-GB be set in an alternative timeline in which the UK be occupy by the Nazis .
rebel ' Delay Bid ' Labour MP and Tory rebel be accuse yesterday of plot to delay Brexit by ask the government to spell out its demand in the Commons . Brexit Secretary David Davis be ask @card@ time to publish a White Paper . he be urge to introduce it with the ` ` Brexit Bill ' ' where the government will ask Parliament for approval to trigger Article @card@ . it be claim up to @card@ Tory MP could join Labour and the SNP to back an amendment demand such a move before they let the PM launch negotiation . Shadow Brexit Secretary Kier Starmer say : ` ` we need something on which to hold the government to account . ' ' Tory backbencher say it be a bid to delay Brexit .
take first Brexit ; BELEAVE in Britain THE Sun CABBIE Grills RIVALS EU be cheat US WITH SHODDY Deal LEAVE To REGAIN MIGRATION Control Boris Johnson have call on Sun reader to vote for Brexit to punish the EU for cheat us with a shoddy new deal . in an interview with the Sun Cabbie , the former London Mayor say other European leader refuse to listen to Britain ' s desperate appeal for tough immigration control . Boris tell London taxi driver Grant Davis - who be still undecided about how to vote on Thursday - that Remain campaign boss be use doomsday scare tactic because they now fear defeat . grant : if we come out , do you think the rest of Europe - the people of Portugal , Spain - would demand a referendum ? BORIS : I think it would be a massive signal to the rest of Europe now be the time for change . they try to get away with cheat us . they try to get away with zero change in negotiation . they try to fob us off and it have not work . it will strike a blow for freedom and democracy if you vote ( Brexit ) on Thursday . G : it be all get a bit personal , be n't it ? Amber Rudd say on telly you be the life and soul of the party but she would not like you to be drive her home . what do she know about you ? you be not a pervert , be you ? b : no ! no ! we be in a situation we ca n't control . it be as though I have get in an unlicensed minicab , and the guy do not know his way , he do not speak good English , and we be go to a destination I ca n't control . G : why do you think David Cameron say we could survive outside and now he say we ca n't ? b : because I think they be panic about people look up , lift their eye to the horizon and feel a sense of confidence and excitement about what Britain can do . G : John Major have call you a court jester . be that deserve ? b : people will try to reduce this debate to personality when we need to focus on the fact . G : how do you feel about them try to give you a kick ? b : as we say in Brussels , ` ` Donnez moi a break ! ' ' G : sound like something out of only Fools and Horses . what do that mean ? b : Gim me a break . it do n't matter what people say , provide we get the fact over and give people the choice . this be about the people of this country finally have a choice . they be come centre stage now . G : if we leave the EU , what guarantee can you give me and the Sun ' s reader you can get immigration down ? b : what we can guarantee be we can bring in an Australian-style point system . at the moment people can stand up and say they be go to cut immigration to the ten of thousand when they do not have the legal ability to do that , and that be ridiculous . G : what do you think about people say if you be an Outer you be a closet racist ? b : it be incredibly offensive . G : be xenophobia creep into the Out campaign ? b : absolutely not , because what we be call for be a balanced policy . at the moment you could argue the EU policy be incredibly discriminatory against people who do n't come from Europe and I think that be unfair . I think actually we be the antiracist side of the argument . G : people in the cab have say to me this be about Boris want to be in No10 , be PM . b : absolute rubbish . it suit people to try to turn it into a conversation about personality . G : you think Remain be lose the argument , Boris ? b : I do . I think that what we have see in the last few day in particular be more and more panic by the in camp and I think they be less and less confident about the outcome , so they be really try to scare people , which be totally wrong . G : it have come to my attention that you dye your hair . be it true ? b : it be not . unfortunately I think the journalist in question be be ironic , so I give what I think be an ironic answer . G : I think you say you reach for the platinum blond bottle . b : no I do n't . I would n't . I never have do . tnd @ the.sun.co.uk Co Sun CABBIE ' S VERDICT Boris be say that if we leave EU , it will be the promised land on everything . but be he right - be that really go to happen ? I like Boris and I want to believe what he say , but I just do n't know . what will we be leave with if it all do n't come true ?
fox glove be off in BBC FIGHT ; Pair ' S SHOWDOWN TALKS ; Brexit bias row Liam Fox have demand a showdown with BBC chief over its ` ` bias ' ' Brexit coverage . the International Trade Secretary fire off a letter of complaint to Director General Lord Hall . in it Dr Fox claim reporter have persistently bury good news about the economy since the leave vote . he accuse the BBC of ditch positive Brexit story for doom-laden interview with pro-EU commentator . Dr Fox , see battle Lord Hall in our mock-up , above , declare : ` ` I can not recall a single time in recent time when I have see good economic news that the BBC do not describe as ' despite Brexit ' . ' ' in his letter , which have be see by the Sun on Sunday , he claim there be a ` ` clear pattern of unbalanced reporting of the EU economy ' ' and the work of his department . he cite case where he say the BBC have ` ` wilfully ' ' ignore upbeat announcement or economic stat , undermine his effort to strike trade deal . Dr Fox tell MP : ` ` it do feel like some element of our medium would rather see Britain fail than see Brexit succeed . ' ' Other MP have accuse the BBC of become a cheerleader for the EU and Remainers . the Beeb hit back say : ` ` no organisation take coverage of the economy more seriously . ` ` we do not recognise the characterisation of our coverage outline in the letter , but the BBC be always happy to talk with politician as we always do on a regular basis . ' '
Rockall ' N ' roll ; Brexit spark a new battle over Atlantic island a Tiny islet off the Co Donegal coast could rock Brexit negotiation over fishing right . Rockall be 423km from Tory Island and just 25m wide and 31m long - but be at the centre of ownership row for decade . the rock be claim for the British crown in @card@ , and Irewaters land give up its own claim when its sovereignty be finally settle in Scotland ' s favour in @card@ . Eamon O Cuiv , Fianna Fail ' s island affair spokesman , say : ` ` in the event of a hard Brexit , there be a strong desire by many in the UK fishing industry to ' pull up the drawbridge ' and push for a ban on non-UK fishing fleet fishing in UK so that the currently share fishing zone will be the UK ' S alone . ' ' Sean O'Donoghue , CEO of the Killybegs Fishermen ' s Organisation , say ownership of the rock would not be in dispute but Brexit would create an access issue . he say : ` ` we can fish at the minute in Rockall as we have fishing right there but when the UK leave they will no longer be part of the Common Fisheries Policy and there will have to be some detailed discussion around the fishery which be very difficult to resolve . ' ' Fewer than @card@ people be believe to have even set foot on the desolate rock , which be inhabit by periwinkle and seabird .
power shower ; Sturgeon BLASTS BREXIT Bloc Nic say Tories plan devo attack she fear plot to weaken parly Nicola Sturgeon last night accuse the Tory of use Brexit as a ruse for a Holyrood power grab . the First Minister claim Westminster be plot to snatch control of devolve issue once Britain leave the EU . and she warn Theresa May ' S government that would make a second independence referendum ` ` almost necessary ' ' . she say : ` ` the Brexit process have embolden a powerful Westminster faction , which never accept devolution and see it as a way to claw back ground . ` ` the Tory be threaten to strip the devolve administration of some power . even element of farming and fishing policy , which have be wholly Clash ... PM & Davidson devolve from day one , now risk be take back to Westminster . ' ' she say Scotland be stand at a Brexit ` ` crossroad ' ' with a re-run of the @card@ indy vote potentially offer ` ` the only way ' ' for its voice to be hear . she tell the David Hume Institute in Edinburgh : ` ` the UK Government still have an opportunity to change course . ` ` but if it do n't , propose a further decision on independence would n't simply be legitimate - it would almost be a necessary way of give Scotland a say in our own future direction . ' ' Scots Tory leader Ruth Davidson brand Ms Sturgeon ' S comment ` ` hyperbole ' ' . a No10 spokesman insist : ` ` no decision currently take by Holyrood will be take away . ' '
legal battle over Brexit Scotland Secretary David Mundell be refreshingly honest in his assessment of the Brexit process yesterday - and remarkably consistent in his view of relation with Holyrood . the SNP Government have be furious all week because the UK Supreme Court refuse to back their claim that Holyrood should be allow to vote on Article @card@ before the Brexit process can begin . Holyrood minister say Brexit will change the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament and that ca n't happen without a Legislative Consent Motion . but judge say , quite rightly , that it be not a decision for them and the working of the LCM process be not a matter for the law to decide . yesterday Mr Mundell stick by his position . the EU be not a devolve issue , so Brexit do n't need an LCM . but he be equally firm when he say that change the law in Scotland be a devolve issue and it do need an LCM . Holyrood be hold the whip hand that means abolish EU law and write it into the statute book for Scotland ca n't go ahead without approval from Holyrood . this be a huge opportunity for the Scottish government . when power come back to the UK from Brussels - power over key area like environmental protection , consumer right , fishery and agriculture - they will affect a range of devolve area . now the fight be on to see whether all those power in devolve area come straight to Edinburgh , or whether Westminster cherry pick the good of them . Holyrood be hold the whip hand . MSPs can throw an enormous spanner in the Brexit work if they do n't get a deal that suit them . without a Legislative Consent Motion , there be a risk that all the EU law that now govern our life could be abolish with nothing to replace them - and nobody want to see that happen . on the other hand , it will be a grim moment for ardent Brexiteers when they finally realise that every single one of the EU law they hate so much will still be in place the day after we leave the EU .
pm : I ' LL Be DERAILED ; May BLASTS DOUBTERS Brexit ' be duty ' vow Exclusive DEFIANT Theresa May hit back at the Brexit wrecker yesterday and vow : ` ` I wo n't derail . ' ' the PM hail her success in the first phase of EU talk and insist would see the process through to the end . she claim credit for silence the doubter and rebel out to thwart her . in message to the @card@ million brit who vote for Brexit , declare : ` ` I will not be derail from my duty to deliver your democratic decision . ' ' her confidence be bolster by an exclusive poll forSun on Sunday which show six in ten people want her stay on to see Brexit through . she brush off all the row and clash of the past week as background noise by those wish to ` ` talk Britain down ' ' . her comment come ahead of a crunch week as the Cabinet meet to discuss their term for the final departure from the EU . she speak out as Boris Johnson call on her to strike a trade deal that give Britain power to ditch European l H h d law . he echo warning by fellow Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg that fail to do so would turn Britain into a ` ` vassal state ' ' of Brussels . but Mrs May respond : ` ` amid all the noise , we be get on with the job . in the face of those who want to talk Britain down , we be secure the good and most ambitious Brexit deal for the UK . ' ' Mrs May state that she ` ` stick resolutely ' ' to the task of protect the right of UK citizen abroad . she add : ` ` Brexit allow us to seize the exciting opportunity outside the EU - with Britain in control of our border and set our own law . ' ' BRITS be set for an overtime bonanza after Brexit . minister want to scrap EU law limit the work week to @card@ hour - cost the average family £1,200 in lost pay .
no MAYTES ; Premier FROZEN Out ; Brexit triple blow at crunch EU talk Theresa May be freeze out in Brussels yesterday in a triple Brexit blow . she be ignore on arrival at a crunch EU summit , with footage show her have to shuffle her paper as leader greet each other at the EU HQ . it come hour after revelation that Britain ' s EU ambassador to Brussels Sir Ivan Rogers have warn her in October that Eurocrats believe a Brexit deal could take ten year . the PM be also tell she would not be welcome at a work dinner at yesterday ' S EU Council . the @card@ other leader talk Brexit for just @card@ minute over coffee as international crisis take priority . insider rush to Mrs May ' S defence and say she chat to German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other . No10 say it be confident a ` ` quickie ' ' Brexit divorce be possible . the PM ' s official spokesman say Mrs May want to agree the term within the time allot by EU rule . he say : ` ` we ' ve be clear we want this to proceed as swiftly as possible . ' ' source claim Sir Ivan ' s private comment may have be leak to damage his position . after meeting Mrs May , European Parliament chief Martin Schulz say Brexit would ` ` undoubtedly ' ' weaken the EU . he add : ` ` there be the second large economy in the single market leave . ' '
peace offer WITH the Brexit deadline get closer , peace seem to be break out between Holyrood and Westminster . Scottish Brexit minister Michael Russell certainly change the tone of his statement to MSPs yesterday . he make it clear he wo n't back the Brexit Bill or ask colleague to vote it through . that mean there will be no ` ` consent ' ' from Holyrood for Westminster legislation which interfere with Scottish Parliament power . without it , the UK Government would have to bash on regardless , change the law here despite what the Scottish parliament say . but , while Mr Russell be firm , this be nothing like a declaration of war . he hold off on reveal the list of @card@ power and responsibility that wo n't come to Holyrood because of Brexit . and it seem clear that the Tories in Holyrood be ready to act as honest broker in a deal with the UK Government . after eight month with no meeting between the UK Government and devolve partner , it be a shift in tone . it ' S remarkable that it be only now , with the process on the brink , that Westminster have begin to pay attention . and remarkable that the London Government seem to be rely on Holyrood Tories to channel these approach . there should be enough respect between Scotland ' S two government to keep these relationship open . voter deserve that much from those elect to serve them .
No10 in Labour EU PLOT ; Pro-Brexit MP talk minister be in secret talk with pro-Brexit Labour MP to help defeat Conservative www.rebels.No @card@ want to see off any bid to enforce condition on Theresa May ' S article @card@ negotiation this week . there will be a series of crunch vote lead up to Wednesday as the Bill to begin Brexit talk enter its final commons hurdle . a bid to force Mrs May to ask for MP ' approval before she walk away from a bad EU deal be shape up to be the tight fight . but Downing Street be confident that it can win with the backing of a handful of pro-Brexit Labour MP . a Labour MP say : ` ` there be conversation across the floor . any amendment will have the effect of delay or obstruct Brexit . ' ' Tory Eurosceptic MP Steve Baker claim yesterday up to @card@ pro-EU colleague be plan to side with Labour on Wednesday .
judge ' Saw BREXIT Vote AS FOOTNOTE ' ; Law chief warning to court judge have be accuse of ignore the will of the people by dismiss Brexit as a ` ` footnote ' ' . the attack will come in the government ' s appeal to the Supreme Court over its ruling that Theresa May must give MP a say before start divorce proceeding from the EU . judge spark anger last month by issue the decision over trigger Article @card@ , which will set the clock run on Brexit . the government ' s top legal officer say the judge be ` ` divorce from the reality ' ' of how modern state operate . Attorney General Jeremy Wright say the High Court have be ` ` wrong to relegate , almost to a footnote , the outcome of the referendum ' ' . Mr Wright say the case could not ` ` be resolve in a vacuum , without regard to the outcome of the referendum ' ' . there be fear the judgment could end up delay Brexit - and Mr Wright will warn that if the original decision be uphold it would undermine the ability of the government to sign treaty . eleven Supreme Court judge will hear the government ' s appeal over four day from Monday , which be due to be televise in full . but no final decision on the case , say to be the most important in Britain for a generation , be expect until the new year . the original case be bring to the High Court by businesswoman Gina Miller follow the referendum result . she argue the Prime Minister should not be able to invoke Article @card@ without Parliament ' s agreement because , by leave the EU , Briton would lose out on right which have be pass by Parliament . the three High Court judge , include the Lord Chief Justice , rule in her favour .
a borderline issue ? Brexit may well hurt peace in this land This week the British Prime Minister Theresa May finally confirm when she will formally trigger the Article @card@ process of leave the European Union . the UK will begin by write to the President of the European Council Donald Tusk on March @card@ . despite clarity emerge on the date , the confusion and disunity which have become the hallmark of the UK government since last June be once again on show over the past few day . as I mention in this column last week , Nicola Sturgeon manage to upset the apple cart by announce her intention to hold another referendum on Scottish independence . this be the beginning of a collision course between May ' s inner circle in government and the devolve government - who feel increasingly ignore by the power that be in London . the response of the PM to the Scottish demand be to dismiss the prospect of the referendum before the conclusion of the Brexit negotiation . not surprisingly , Sturgeon respond by suggest the PM ' s willingness to refuse a referendum be ' undemocratic ' and proof that the Tories fear the verdict of the Scottish people . this be just the beginning of their problem with the devolve government . one of the first mistake after notify Tusk of her intention to trigger Article @card@ on March @card@ be to ignore the UK ' s joint ministerial council and go straight to the press . in fact , the first many senior politician hear of the decision be via the various media outlet . the Scottish parliament ' s minister on the Brexit Joint Ministerial Council , Michael Russell , tweet : ` ` thank you @ BBCNews for let JMC member like me know that # Article50 be to be trigger next week . @ GOVUK somehow forget to inform us . ' ' this be perhaps not the smart way to kick off proceeding , immediately alienate important stakeholder in the UK ' S future . it seem it ' s not just the Scot who be angry with May ' s approach to Brexit and the future of the UK . despite voting in favour of leave the EU along with England , the Welsh be now feel alienate from the process and this week add their voice to the warning come from Scotland and the North . the Welsh First Minister Carwyn Jones accuse May of have a ' tin ear ' when it come to issue concern the Welsh assembly . he seem to be look for some sort of reward for Wales in recognition of voting in favour of Brexit , but he warn that people ' S sense of disillusionment , currently direct at Brussels , may soon target London . he say : ` ` if they ' re not careful , people ' S sense of disengagement with Brussels will simply attach itself to London . ` ` we need to see there be a dividend in be a devolutionist government that support the union and we do n't see that dividend . ' ' the absence of an Executive in the North have , perhaps for now , cause the response lf b ted how from Belfast to be more muted . however , there be plenty of political activist more than willing to jump on the Brexit turmoil in London in order to pursue the nationalist agenda of a unite Ireland . as in Scotland , a majority of voter in the North dissent from the decision to leave the EU . while May be about to embark on a tour of the four nation of the United Kingdom , and have refer to the UK as the ` ` precious union of nation ... the most successful the world have ever know ' ' , there be undoubtedly many across the North who disagree . Brexit have give those with dream of a unite Ireland a fresh impetus . they see an opportunity now to refocus on pursue a different path . a flashpoint issue in the North , in the context of Brexit , will be the issue of the Border . this be a tangible and imminent change face the North , which do not appear on the horizon for Scotland or Wales . it could become a dangerous trigger point in two year ' time if the issue be not deal with by Brexit negotiation . both government in Dublin and London say they be commit to maintain an ' invisible border ' with no obvious change to it from April @card@ , once the UK leave the EU . our own government have be lobby for agreement at EU level that the border issue can be resolve directly between the UK and Ireland . I ' m not convince this can or will happen . all of the claim about maintain the status quo in relation to the Border seem to ignore the fact that the UK will leave the EU , include the Single Market and the Customs Union . assume the UK insist on this form of ' hard Brexit ' , then it be unavoidable that new custom control will have to be introduce between the UK and the rest of the EU , include the Republic of Ireland . there may also be the introduction of tariff on good be sell into and out of the UK . if this be the case , an invisible border be impossible . the impact of such a development on political stability in the North can not be underestimate . there be a risk that the re-introduction of a border between the North and South will lead to a rapid escalation of call for a unite Ireland . it be impossible to predict whether this could irreparably damage the peace process in the North , but it be certainly likely to have an impact .
@card@ peer in EU ' S POCKET ON BREXIT ; Lords ' ' VESTED Interest ' but they ' re not oblige to say so in vote debate BREXIT-bashing peer be pocket generous EU pension which depend on them fly the flag for their Brussels paymaster . but they will not be require to declare their goldplated income if they speak in this week ' s crucial debate on Britain ' S withdrawal . the EU fork out over £500,000 a year in pension to @card@ former MEPs and official in the Lords . they include seven ex-European commissioner who swear an oath of loyalty to Brussels that mean they risk lose their pension if they attack their old institution . it would take a combined pension pot of £10million to provide retirement income for the ex-EU peer on the same scale in the private sector . last night a senior MP claim they have a vested interest in frustrating Brexit and urge them to disclose their index-linked benefit before they speak . Tory MP Dominic Raab , an exjustice minister , say : ` ` Lords with generous EU pension pot should this when they speak in declare Parliament on Brexit . ` ` the public would be rightly outrage if peer vote to protect their Brussels bonus rather than respect the referendum result . ' ' Lord Kinnock , former vicepresident of the Commission , receive an estimated £87,000-ayear EU pension . Lord Patten receive an estimated £3,800 for his five year as a commissioner . Lord Tugendhat , commissioner from @card@ to @card@ , have an estimated pension of £41,000 . and former Trade Commissioner Lord Mandelson be due to receive a pension of £34,600 . other who swear the EU oath be Baroness Ashton and Labour pair Lord Clinton-Davis and Lord Richard , with a combined EU pension payment of £90,000 a year . many of the other EU pension recipient be also die-hard Remainers who have blast the referendum result . in the past week , supporter of the Change Britain think-tank have be emailing peer urge them to declare a financial interest and vote in favour of the Brexit Bill . the Sun on Sunday say - Page @card@ Tony Parsons - See Page @card@ £500K EU ' s annual pension bill for British peer
rebel alliance ; BREXIT TALKS STAND-OFF ; lRogue Tory group to back SNP & Labour ; lMay face a backlash on EU deal vote Tory rebel be threaten to team up with Nat and Labour to stop Theresa May walk away from EU divorce talk without a deal . up to a dozen conservative be poise to back their rival ' amendment to the Brexit Bill allow the Commons to veto the ` ` cliff-edge ' ' option . the defiant MP include ex-Chancellor Ken Clarke , above leave . the backlash emerge after the PM warn EU leader last ` ` no deal for Britain be good than a bad deal for Britain . ' ' month : te er it @card@ dn . ' ' last night , the SNP signalledwas up for an unlikely alliance with the Tory dissenter . c ce Pus P Pu NP pu citizen other currently a spokesman say : ` ` the SNP will of course welcome any support for our detailed and serious amendment to the Brexit Bill - aim at prevent the increasingly right-wing Tory from take us- asak-aa us over the hard Brexit cliff edge . ' ' the Nat have already table plan to revert to the status quo if negotiation fail . but a fresh amendment could be lodge by rogue Tory as the next stage of the debate on trigger parlia-Article @card@ talk begin in parliament today . Tory Neil Carmichael say it be illogical for MP to get a vote on the final Brexit package but not on what happen if there ' s no deal . he say : ` ` Parliament must have a final say when we get to the end game . we could be face with the prospect of leave the EU by ' fall off a cliff ' - as some have describe leave with no deal - with potentially disastrous economic consequence . ` ` to argue that MP can have a say if we achieve a deal - with all the safeguard imply by it - but no say if we walk away with none of these defy all logic . ' ' Fellow rebel Tory Anna Soubry add : ` ` if there be no deal then I think it should come into parliament . I do n't know why people be so fearful of that . ' ' a rebellion would not derail Brexit but would overturn the Tories ' commons majority of just @card@ and impose the condition . but a senior Downing Street source say that would be suicide for the UK ' s bargaining position . they say : ` ` if we tell the EU we will walk away if they do n't make concession , but they know parliament can make us go straight back again , it give us zero leverage . ` ` this be just another obstacle put up by people unable to accept that Brexit mean Brexit . ' '
tusk : no Brexit still possible ; BREXIT @card@ EU boss Donald Tusk have ignite a fresh row with Theresa May by say she could still stop Brexit . the European Council president be a strong ally of the PM in negotiation , last week slap down European Commission claim of deadlock . but the former Polish leader clash with Mrs May by reopen the possibility of her halt the Article @card@ process for Britain to leave . address MEPs , Mr Tusk say : ` ` it be up to London how this will end . with a good deal , no deal or no Brexit . ' ' he insist failure to reach a deal would be a ` ` defeat ' ' for the EU as well as Britain , warn : ` ` Ahead of us be still the tough stress test . ' ' No10 hit back : ` ` Brexit will not be reverse . ' '
deal Or No Deal ; Tory ' S BREXIT KO Warning ; ' EU exit dead ' without Bill change a Senior Scots Tory warn Brexit ` ` ca n't happen ' ' if No10 do not make change that MSPs be demand . Adam Tomkins insist Holyrood ' s consent for the EU Withdrawal Bill be a ` ` political requirement ' ' under devolution rule . and he admit he be ` ` deeply frustrated ' ' his Westminster colleague fail to make promised amendment before the Bill be pass to the House of Lords . the Tories ' constitution spokesman say yesterday : ` ` the political price of enact legislation without consent might be quite significant . the stake be really quite high . ` ` this legislation be need in order to deliver a legally secure Brexit . ` ` Brexit ca n't happen unless this legislation , or an equivalent , be pass . ' ' Nicola Sturgeon have say she be oppose to the bill as it stand , claim it be a ` ` power grab ' ' on Holyrood . her government table @card@ amendment and Scots Secretary David Mundell appear to promise change would be make in the Commons . but the deadline for MP to do that have pass as peer prepare to scrutinise the legislation . Mr Tomkins say ` ` everyone in the Scottish Parliament ' ' agree amendment be necessary but insist the UK Government have not change its policy . the MSP say : ` ` we ' re still commit to do it but we ' ll have to do it in the House of Lords now . ' ' he add that it be a ` ` constitutional principle ' ' that Westminster wo n't legislate on matter devolve to Edinburgh ` ` without the Scottish Parliament ' S consent ' ' . it come as Ms Sturgeon claim yesterday there could be a Commons majority for stay in the EU single market after Brexit - if ` ` Labour get its act together ' ' . the First Minister blast Jeremy Corbyn for fail to ` ` decide where he stand ' ' . she say : ` ` most of his supporter will be deeply disappoint he appear to be only slightly less in favour of a hard Brexit than the Tories be . ' ' a UK Government spokeswoman say : ` ` we want to achieve consensus for this essential piece of legislation that will deliver continuity and certainty . ' ' meanwhile , ex-Labour minister Andrew Adonis urge Ms Sturgeon to use her ` ` powerful voice ' ' to force PM Theresa May to agree to a new referendum on the departure deal .
fib on show when Michael Gove be lead the Brexit campaign he say that there would be a bumper bundle of power come to Holyrood after Brexit - and he include immigration in that . the First Minister dismiss that as ` ` a fib and a half ' ' . last week Scotland Secretary David Mundell rule out any chance of immigration power come to Holyrood after Brexit . immigration , he say , be not devolve . Mr Mundell could not even give any guarantee about thing that be devolve - area such as fishing and agriculture . the EU responsibility on those area might not be automatically devolve to Holyrood , he say . and that mean all or part of those power - such as control over fishing quota in the North Sea - might be retain at Westminster . despite that , Nicola Sturgeon will come forward tomorrow with a wish list of demand for a post-Brexit Scotland . and at the top of that list will be immigration power , along with a lot of other stuff which the First Minister say be all a fib just six month ago . the First Minister and her Brexit adviser have work long and hard on this stuff . they have work out the building block that must be put in place if Scotland be go to get something close to what Scotland vote for - a place in the UK and a place in the EU . the chance of that happen be about as slim as the UK Government ' s ` ` have our cake and eat it ' ' plan . as far as be part of the UK be concern , in mean in and out be out . same for Europe - as Theresa May be already discover . it ' S beyond unlikely that the UK Government will adopt the Scottish plan as its official Brexit negotiate position and go to Brussel ask to take England out of Europe but plead for Scotland to stay half-in . but the First Minister will demand that her plan be debate in public and , if it be dismiss by Westminster , it will have to be dismiss in public . Ms Sturgeon do n't expect to succeed . she want the ` ` fib and a half ' ' on show for all the world to see .
the Sun SAYS Labour betrayal so that ' S that . Labour be now the anti-Brexit party . we be tell this week it want to stay in the Single Market and Customs Union during a long transition period . but deputy leader Tom Watson have now blurt out its real intent . he say a Labour Government might aim to make all that permanent . which mean we would still be control by European judge , still pay our huge subscription , still be bar from trading independently and still have no control over immigration from the EU . for ever . only a fantasist would consider that ` ` Brexit ' ' - or indeed think ` ` soft Brexit ' ' have any meaning . however much Watson wish to continue dupe voter , he be simply describe ` ` no Brexit ' ' . Jeremy Corbyn once talk a good game about see Brexit through . but if you be a Ukipper who have return to Labour , you have be con .
ham betray us over Brexit ;
Blair ' S BREXIT Exocet ; Bid to derail talk Tony Blair will attempt to derail Britain ' s Brexit negotiation next week by meet EU chief Jean-Claude Juncker . the Europe fanatic will have talk in Brussels at the same time as Brexit Secretary David Davis and opposite negotiator Michel Barnier be expect to hold a press conference . Brussels official insist the pair be meet because they be ` ` good friend ' ' - despite clash several time in @card@ when Mr Juncker be Luxembourg PM and Mr Blair be in No10 . a European Commission spokesman add : ` ` the president ' S door be always open and he look for a timing which work for both of www.them.No conspiracy there , I ' m afraid . ' ' but the timing of their first know meeting since the Brexit process begin raise eyebrow in Westminster . negotiation will hit a crucial stage next week when Mr Davis and Mr Barnier have a third round of crucial talk . aide say Mr Blair and Mr Juncker would discuss European politics and the Middle East but ` ` refuse to give any further detail . Mr Blair have repeatedly urge the government to promise a second referendum in a bid to block Brexit .
Sun THE SAYS Brexit buckler Labour ' S Keir Starmer would ` ` negotiate ' ' Brexit by surrender to every EU demand . he ' s fine with EU citizen have more right here than brit , for example . why ? because he want European court to have power over ours after Brexit . the Shadow Brexit Secretary be at the epicentre of Labour ' s hopeless confusion over the big issue Britain face . he want some sort of single market membership , while insist free movement must end - a fudge already reject outright by the EU . he be at odd with Jeremy Corbyn and his colleague , all hope voter do n't notice their contradictory position . Starmer be a diehard Remainer feign interest in Brexit . his heart be n't in it .
May ' S resolution must be resolute THERE be three new year resolution that Theresa May need to make . she must be decisive on Brexit , Bold on housing and , to top it all off , Fix social care . if Mrs May can do these three thing , @card@ will be a far good year for her than @card@ be . but none of this will be easy , and it will all be make harder by the mistake she make last year . on Brexit , Mrs May have yet to say what she think the UK ' s final deal with the EU should be . this be a problem for several reason . if you be not certain about what you be aim for , it be very hard to succeed in a negotiation . secondly , until the PM have decide what she want , it be very difficult for the government to make the positive case for Brexit - to explain what the UK will be able to do differently once we have leave the European Union . electoral poison in the run-up to Christmas , the inner Cabinet and the Cabinet both properly debate the Brexit ` ` end-state ' ' for the first time . cabinet source tell me that these discussion have not move forward over the holiday . but time be of the essence . the sooner the Cabinet agree a position , the sooner the government can start prepare its negotiate strategy for the next round of the Brexit talk . what Mrs May must remember be that there be little point in leave the EU if Britain do not have the ability to do thing differently afterwards . Mrs May have start the year by reiterate her desire to be the Prime Minister who fix the housing crisis . but if she be to do this , then she be go to have to be a lot bold than she have be to date . she will have to confront an uncompetitive construction sector and a planning system that do n't allow enough house to be build where people want to live . in the run-up to the most recent Budget , Mrs May even veto a plan that would have let house be build on green belt within half a mile of station in area of high demand . she will have to shed this caution if the decline in home ownership , which be so lethal to the Tories ' electoral prospect , be to be reverse . this week , Mrs May have be apologise to NHS patient who have have their operation cancel . but prevent this from become an annual occurrence will require sort social care . the Tory be understandably nervous about this issue . it be , after all , their botched social care reform plan that make their manifesto such electoral poison and set in train the sequence of event that end with Mrs May lose her majority . there be , though , a solution to this problem that be politically doable . it would involve the government cap social care cost and require the over-40s to buy insurance . if Mrs May can get these three thing do in @card@ , she will have go a long way to undo the damage do by the disaster of last year ' S General Election campaign . but if the Tories ca n't make progress on these front in the next @card@ month , then Jeremy Corbyn will be that much close to Downing Street . lJames Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator .
wall TO pay for ; Hoey want to make Republic fund border BREXIT News @card@ MP Kate Hoey be compare to Donald Trump after demand the Republic cough up for any hard border . the pro-Brexit Labour member , originally from Mallusk , Co Antrim , say the UK will not be erect-ing any infrastructure when it quit the European Union . she say : ` ` we ' re not the one who be go to be put up the physical border . ' ' and she add if no agreement be strike with London and Brussels on trade rule , the Irish ` ` will have to pay for it , because it do n't need to happen ' ' . historian Mary Beard draw comparison with the US president ' s demand that his nation ' s southern neighbour should fork out for a border wall . she say unionist Ms Hoey ` ` sound to me dangerously like Mr Trump and Mexico ' ' . and former Secretary of State for Northern Ireland Peter Hain , also of the Labour Party , say : ` ` Kate Hoey seem to have be take diplomacy lesson from Donald Trump . ` ` it really be astonishing how much damage Brexit be already do to our country ' S reputation . even our close friend , Ireland , be now the target of unhinge attack from hard Brexit cheerleader . ' ' the row over how to maintain a ` ` soft ' ' border be a key sticking point in the Brexit talk .
Brexit reality as Holyrood Ministers travel to London today for the late in a series of Brexit talk , the time have come for a reality check . in spite of everything that Theresa May say this week , SNP politician be cling blindly to the notion that there may yet be some kind of separate deal for Scotland . Nicola Sturgeon ' s plan for Scotland to keep one foot inside the single market be far-fetched at good but it can not survive the shock of Mrs May ' s Brexit statement . the Prime Minister have make it clear there will be no special treatment for Scotland , the Chancellor have say as much and the message be hammer home yesterday by Scotland Secretary David Mundell . he say : ` ` I have not see evidence which would persuade me that there be a need for a Scotland-specific solution in relation either to market access or in relation to issue around migration . ' ' and , at the same time , Mr Mundell assure the Scottish Government : ` ` we be look at their proposal carefully ' ' - in the same way a parent say ` ` that ' s the good paint I ' ve ever see , ' ' when a five-year-old bring his late picture home from school . yet SNP minister remain wed to the idea that somebody might be listen to them . surely today ' s Brexit meeting in London must mark the end of that notion . surely , when that meeting finish , grown-up in both government be go to have to admit the obvious truth - that England vote for Brexit and Scotland be just go to have to suck it up . we need some responsibility from our politician now . we do n't need sneer and namecalling and Little Britain insult fling across the House of Commons . we need clarity and truthfulness and fact because that ' s the only way we will be able to plot a course forward through this mess . it ' s time to wake up and smell the Brexit .
the future be n't orange ... it ' S green ; May ' S N.I . deal PUTS Ireland in Charge of BREXIT Policy when the DUP be negotiate its £1billion pay off from Theresa May in exchange for keep her in power , party leader Arlene Foster say : ` ` the future ' s bright . ' ' memorably , her DUP colleague Ian Paisley Jr add : ` ` the future ' S orange . ' ' but yesterday , Foster help to engineer a Brexit that be decidedly green . the Brexit deal announce yesterday - bring about only because the DUP scupper the last one - have put Ireland , and not the UK , in charge of the nation ' s Brexit policy . a year and a half after the Brexit vote , the UK side manage to come up with a deal which actually recognise the existence of a land border with an independent EU neighbour . and the deal agree to keep Ireland sweet commit the entire UK to be inside the Single Market and the Customs Union for the foreseeable future while also insist that we ' re not . the key passage in Theresa May ' s statement yesterday be this : ` ` the United Kingdom will maintain full alignment with those rule of the internal market and the custom union which , now or in the future , support North-South co-operation , the all-island economy and the protection of the @card@ agreement . ' ' it ' S the ` ` in the future ' ' bit which count . it mean that every change in EU rule which take place in the Irish Republic must be slavishly copy in Northern Ireland . and , since the deal do not single Northern Ireland out , but apply across the whole UK , those rule will be copy across the whole UK ` ` in the future ' ' . but there ' S more . Mrs May ' S statement not only promise no barrier to trade in Ireland ` ` north-south ' ' she also say that would apply ` ` east-west ' ' . Britain ' s trade with Ireland and Ireland ' s trade with Britain will have to be carry on inside the same arrangement we currently use for the Single Market and the Customs Union ` ` in the future . ' ' Earlier this week the DUP refuse to allow any kind of differentiate Brexit policy for Northern Ireland . they insist it have to leave Europe on exactly the same term as the rest of the UK and our own Ruth Davidson back them to the hilt . it have n't happen . instead , what we ' ve got be the UK leave Europe on the same term as Northern Ireland . as well as have Brexit policy decide by ten MP from a party believe in dinosaur , a party nobody on this side of the water can even vote for , now have our trade policy fit to the single market whatever Dublin do . that ' S Brexit . that ' s ` ` take back control ' ' . that do n't norty de an we de he by lin xit . cka e. on d-a for Scotland it ' s surprising outcome . Nicola Sturgeon have be demand Scotland get a special deal to keep the country inside ep de the Customs Union and the Single Market only to be tell that it be out of the question . now the whole of the UK be leave both while , at the same time , ` ` maintain full alignment with the rule of the internal market and the custom union . ' ' ` ` it seem as if the SNP have get what it want but , naturally , they be not content . Thehe First Minister say the deal have shoot down for good any notion of border post at Gretna Green if Scottish independence ever happen . and , without actually address whether that ' s true or not , Ruth Davidson take a pop at the FM for raise independence yet again . the FM be two step ahead of herself . the border question really only arise if Scotland for independence another referendum and then gain admission to the EU . land vote udL Ro Let ' s cross those bridge when we come to them . in du adbr cothe im to sh sea ca an po the wh ru ha pr I e mha anoeh uar in the meantime there be more important question consider - like shoe and ship and seal wax and cabbage and king and how we can possibly be outside Single Market while adhere to its rule and pay handsomely for the privilege .
Boris ' S BREXIT Red Line ; WARNINGS To PM ON TRANSITION Deal Boris Johnson have lay out his four red line for Brexit , insist the transition period must last ` ` not a second more ' ' than two year . all his demand go further than the agree Cabinet position , hammer out after a summer of infighting . the Foreign Secretary also use a pre-Tory conference interview with the Sun to reflect leave voter ' anger over the transition period during which the UK will still be govern by all the EU ' S rule . but his fresh Brexit intervention will anger Theresa May and risk reopen the feud among her senior minister . the PM use her speech in Florence last week to call for a changeover period from March @card@ to break the Brexit talk ' deadlock and win busi-nesses time to adapt . there be no Cabinet agreement on how long it should last , with Mrs May suggest ` ` exclusive by ` ` around two year ' ' . but Boris last night say anything longer than @card@ month - effectively to March @card@ , @card@ - would be a mistake that would leave Brexit voter feel betray . talk to the Sun in his vast room in the Foreign Office , overlook St James ' s Park , the 53-year-old Tory big beast say : ` ` I get that from my own talk to people . very strongly . ` ` what that teach me be that really be it . Rien ne va plus . Finito la Musica . then we come out . there can be no monkey around . ` ` be I impatient about it , do I want to get it do as fast as possible ? yes , absolutely . do I want the delay to go on long than two year ? not a second more . ' ' Boris list three other condition that he want the PM to agree to for the transition period : l Britain must refuse to accept any new EU rule or euro judge ' ruling make during the transition period . quiz on whether a status quo transition mean agree to new Brussels diktat , BoJo argue : ` ` you hear the Prime Minister say very clearly in Florence that she envisage the transition period be run under existing arrangement - that be the phrase she use , ' the exist rule ' . ' ' there must be no further payment to Brussels at all for single market access when the transition period end . Boris explain : ` ` what I have always say be that we will pay for thing that be reasonable , scientific programme . ` ` but when it come to pay for access to the market , that wo n't happen any more than we would expect them to pay us for access to our market . ' ' the final post-transition deal must also not see the UK shadow Brussels rule to ensure easy access to the single market . BoJo insist : ` ` there be no point in come out of the EU and then remain in rotational orbit around it . that be the bad of both world . you have to be able to have control of your regulatory framework . ' ' he concede that a transition be also necessary for the government , as some department may not be ready to deal with Brexit on March @card@ , @card@ , the day the UK formally leave the EU . he admit : ` ` I be afraid the truth be that there be government department that , at the current rate of fire , be go to need to get ready . ' ' but by lay down fresh demand , Boris will again be see as establish himself as the defender of the true Brexit faith . it emerge yesterday that he be the top choice among Conservative member to succeed Theresa May . a YouGov poll of activist show he be back in favour after be see to challenge Mrs May ' S authority , with his 4,300-word article lay out his Brexit vision . May in Florence but BoJo insist it be not a pitch for party leadership , say speculation about his intention have be ` ` massively ' ' overdo . instead , he issue a slapdown to Brexit doubter , say : ` ` the crucial thing I want to get over to Sun reader about Brexit be that it be go to be great and we need to believe in ourselves and believe we can do it . it be unstoppable . ai n't no stop us now . ` ` there be a disjuncture between the debate in Westminster and the London bubble and where a lot of people be in the country . ` ` most people ca n't understand what this conversation be all about . we leave . we vote for that last year - so let ' s get on with it . ' '
PM JEZ..HEZ He LOST THE PLOT ? ; MP ' Fury AT REMAIN FANATIC ; Tory prefer Corbyn Govt to Brexit Tory Lord Heseltine be call a dinosaur after claim a Jeremy Corbyn government would be less damaging than Brexit . he say Labour would eventually adopt a policy to stay in the EU . the arch-Europhile claim that would come about because Brexit would become ` ` more unpopular as people realise what it ' S all about ' ' . and he suggest the ` ` shortterm pain ' ' of a hard-left government would be worth the hit if it mean Britain stay in the EU . speak to the pro-EU Limehouse podcast , Lord Heseltine say : ` ` we have survive Labour government before . their damage tend to be short-term and capable of rectification . Brexit be not shortterm and be not easily capable of rectification . there will be those who question whether the shortterm pain justify the avoidance of the long-term disaster . ' ' but Tory MP Nigel Evans say : ` ` only a Euro fanatic of the pedigree of Michael Heseltine could believe a Venezuela-loving Corbyn government would be preferable to leave his beloved EU . ` ` a run on the pound and Statecontrolled industry of the 60s would inflict immense damage . Theresa May be deliver what the UK vote for without irrelevant intervention of the Jurassic Park era . ' ' Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg add : ` ` it show how deep-seated his love for the EU be that he would bankrupt the nation than leave it . ' ' matt.dathan @ www.the-sun.co.uk
pay the Field ; Tories ' BREXIT Farm Cash TALKS MSPs lobby Gove on Agri payout plan Exclusive WORRIED Tory MSPs who have make a fortune in farm subsidy be lobby Michael Gove over their payment after Brexit . the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs confirm it have have talk with member who have agricultural interest . but it refuse to disclose what have be discuss , claim that release the info would hamper the UK ' S negotiation to quit Europe . Holyrood member Edward Mountain , Peter Chapman , Donald Cameron , John Scott and Alexander Burnett all list farm and land income on their official register of interest . Defra have guarantee subsidy will continue until @card@ but warn that funding after that be a ` ` live policy consideration ' ' . an SNP spokesperson last night accuse ` ` Tory toff ' ' of back Brexit as long as it do n't cost them money . they say : ` ` they be relax about Brexit chaos until they see it might hit their pocket . ` ` they should come clean on whether they use their parliament seat to lobby for t t Th t b their estate . there must be no cover-up . ' ' the cash be crucial to Scots farmer as our agriculture get @card@ per cent of UK subsidy despite Scotland make up eight per cent of the population . the meeting with Defra , head by Environment , Food and Rural Affairs Minister Mr Gove , be reveal under freedom of info . record of farm payment show that holding link to T M M ti n Tory MSP Mr Mountain get support from the EU worth more than £358,000 between @card@ and @card@ . Mr Chapman ' s farming company benefit by more than £277,000 , Mr Cameron ' s land interest receive £130,000 and Mr Scott ' S farm rake in over £207,000 . meanwhile , the family farm head by the father of Mr Burnett get more than £73,000 . the MSP have already be publicly discipline by Holyrood ' S Standards itt f ki g d d C Committee for ask parliamentary question that affect his business without declare an interest . the payout mean Tory MSPs with land concern have share in agriculture support cash total more than £1million . four of Scotland ' S @card@ MP have also benefit from farm interest , make a combined total of £2.25million subsidy . a Tory spokesman last night accuse the Nat of ` ` make thing up ' ' .
kiss ' N MAYKE-UP ; PM ' s drive to unite feud Cabinet over Brexit Theresa May will today bid to unite her feud Cabinet as she declare a ` ` new sense of optimism ' ' on Brexit . the Prime Minister will tell MP she be confident Euro leader will confirm later this week that trade talk can begin . and in pointed remark to her own war minister , Mrs May , leave , will say the eventual agreement be not about a ` ` hard or a soft Brexit ' ' but give and take on both side . she will say : ` ` I have always be clear that this be never go to be an easy process . but there be a new sense of optimism now in the talk . ` ` we can move on to build bold new economic and security relationship that can underpin the new deep and special partnership we all want to see . ' ' it come after Friday ' s breakthrough agreement on the EU divorce - and a weekend of Tory in-fighting over the nature of Britain ' s future relationship with Brussels . the government ' s pledge to ` ` align ' ' itself with the EU to protect the status of Northern Ireland raise fear of a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit among hardline Leavers . they say it could stop minister from striking trade deal with the rest of the world . but Brexit Secretary David Davis yesterday insist Friday ' S agreement mean the odd of a ` ` no deal ' ' in @card@ have fall dramatically . and he claim a free trade deal could be strike within the space of just one year . he say he would seek the good element of deal the EU have with Canada , Japan and South Korea - ` ` and then add to the bit miss ' ' .
Lords & SNP bid to hijack Brexit ; BREXIT HIJACK Bid Lords , pro-EU MP and even the Scottish Parliament be last night line up to halt the PM ' s raft of new Brexit law . Theresa May unveil eight bill in the Queen ' s Speech yesterday to pave the way for Britain ' s EU divorce . with a series of other Tory pledge dump after the election fiasco , the annual address confirm Brexit will overshadow everything else in Westminster for the next two year . Mrs May extend a fresh appeal to rival MP to help her pass the law , tell the commons : ` ` we will do what be in the national interest , and we will work with anyone in any party who be prepare to do the same . ' ' but in a controversial move , the Lib Dems declare their @card@ peer in the House of Lords will not honour the long-standing Salisbury Convention , where they agree not to block manifesto promise . the party ' s chief whip Alistair Carmichael tell the Sun that Brexit bill will be ` ` fair game ' ' , add : ` ` the government ' s go to have one hell of a job get its business through the House of Lords . ' ' Downing Street later insist the convention should be respect if the government pass the Queen ' s Speech in a crunch vote next week . Mrs May also concede the Scottish Parliament will have to consent to the great repeal bill , set to shift EU legislation into UK law . it could see the SNP-dominated chamber vote down major element apply to Scotland . up to @card@ Tory MP be say to be ready to vote with Labour to stop Mrs May from walk away from Brexit negotiation without a deal . BREXUAL HEALING - Pages @card@ & @card@
we ' re bitter off without political pygmy Juncker if it be not for the blood sacrifice of the British in two world war , then Jean-Claude Juncker would be slur German as his first language today . so show some respect to this country , you half-cut , puffed-up political pygmy . we do not expect Brexit to be greet with a stand ovation by that clapped-out , job-destroying , anti-democratic gravy train , the European Union . but we DO expect Brexit talk to be conduct with civility , decency and common sense on both side . we will not tolerate our democratic decision to leave the EU be treat as a crime against humanity . we will not tolerate European politician and bureaucrat who care nothing for our nation call Theresa May ` ` delusional ' ' and ` ` live in another galaxy ' ' for simply implement the will of the British people . we will not tolerate our Prime Minister be ridicule , insult and brief against by sloshed Euro boss Jean-Claude Drunker , above , and his eye-swivelling German henchman , Martin Selmayr . ` ` Brexit can never become a success , ' ' sneer Herr Selmayr , Juncker ' s chief of staff . ` ` it be a sad and sorry event . ' ' but the British , whatever way they vote in the EU Referendum , ca n't afford for Brexit NOT to be a success . because it be our future . it be happen . and we have to make it work . it be routinely suggest that a civilised divorce be inevitable because there be so many German car manufacturer , French wine maker and Italian fashion designer who happily sell their lovely product to this country . but no divorce can be civilise when one side be totally consume by bitterness . our former master in Brussel just want to give Britain a punishment beating for dare to leave . Juncker and the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , Michel Barnier , show every sign that they would love Brexit talk to collapse . they want to see the British people suffer because we have have the nerve to leave their failed institution . and they do n't give a damn if it hurt the European businessman who simply want to trade with our country - in or out of the European Union . Juncker , Barnier and the rest of the Little Europeans be not businessman . they be fanatic . we vote to leave . so we be leave . and they ca n't process that simple fact because continental Europe , with its tragic history of Fascism , communism and invader in jackboot , believe that bully win . but they be wrong . the British people have stand up to big , badder bully than the European Union , include Nazi Germany , Napoleon Bonaparte and the Spanish Armada . and look what happen to them . one hundred billion euros to leave the EU ? for more than once , set Europe free from tyranny when Europe could not do the job itself - there ' s no charge , Mein Herr .
PM Rolls Out THE Barrow ; EU QUITTER be REPLACED Sir Tim be wily behind scene fixer Downing Street have rush in a replacement diplomat to lead Brexit negotiation . Sir Tim Barrow , a wily behindthe-scenes fixer with a web of contact , be yesterday give Britain ' s top job in Brussels . he take over from Sir Ivan Rogers , who quit as EU ambassador on Tuesday just @card@ day before the PM ' s deadline to trigger Article @card@ . Sir Tim , @card@ , be say to be well-like by Theresa May , Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and Brexit Secretary David Davis . his nickname be ` ` Deep State ' ' , after the conspiracy theory that a shadowy cabal secretly control world power . meanwhile , a row rage yesterday over who be to blame for Sir Ivan quit . accord to Brussels source , his relationship with No10 be say to have break down over fear to @card@ ) someone be to be parachute in above him . the pro-Brexit senior official would then lead exit talk once Article @card@ be trigger , leave Sir Ivan ` ` mind paperclip ' ' . senior leave campaigner insist Sir Ivan step down after lose Downing Street ' S trust . he be suspect of talk down Britain ' s political leader in Brussels . Ex-Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith yesterday accuse ` ` pompous ' ' Sir Ivan of ` ` a case of sour grape ' ' for be exclude from Brexit plan . he also blame him for a leak email in which the mandarin warn Brexit would take a decade . but former senior diplomat slam the attack as ` ` a smear ' ' . and Tory MP Alistair Burt , a onetime Foreign Office minister , hail Sir Ivan as ` ` a very senior patriot ' ' . in a farewell email to staff Sir Ivan accuse the government of ` ` muddle thinking ' ' over Brexit . Labour have call on minister to make an urgent commons statement when MP return on Monday last night No10 say : ` ` we be delight Tim Barrow be take up this role . he be a seasoned and tough negotiator with extensive experience of secure UK objective in Brussels . ' '
scrambled CLEGG ; he admit Lib Dem ' fight Brexit ' pledge be worthless Nick Clegg have be catch concede that Remainers will never be able to block Brexit . the former Deputy PM ' S admission come despite a Lib Dem pledge to obstruct our departure from the EU . speak candidly to party activist just day before Thursday ' S crunch Richmond by-election in South West London , he blame Labour for give the government a ` ` blank cheque ' ' on when to trigger the official two-year departure process . and he say : ` ` the bad news be Article @card@ be go to go through . ' ' his party ' S candidate Sarah Olney have previously say she would see a victory over former Tory Zac Goldsmith as a ` ` personal mandate to oppose Brexit ' ' . last night the muddle be blast by Tory Dominic Raab , who sit on the Commons ' powerful Brexit Select Committee . he accuse the Lib Dems of ` ` take the public for fool ' ' and say : ` ` the Lib Dems yet again look tricksy , campaign against something even Nick Clegg think be inevitable . ' ' meanwhile Labour refuse to rule out back a second referendum . Shadow Foreign Secretary Emily Thornberry say on the BBC ' S Andrew Marr Show the party should take the Brexit process ` ` step by step ' ' . the vote in Richmond Park and North Kingston be spark by Mr Goldsmith resign from the Tories over Heathrow expansion .
PM ' SLAPS ' BOJO ; Boris blast for claim UK ' out of EU in 2yrs ' BREXIT Shock @card@ Theresa May rap Boris Johnson last night for claim the UK will be out of the EU within two year . No10 say the PM alone will decide Brexit ' S timing . a source say : ` ` the decision to trigger Article @card@ be hers . she will be do it at a time when she believe it be in the good interest for Britain . ` ` the Prime Minister ' S position have not change . ' ' Foreign Secretary BoJo say last night he expect Mrs May to trigger the official exit process ` ` in the early part of next year ' ' and sort it out by @card@ . he tell Sky News : ` ` I do n't actually think we will necessar-ily need to spend a full two year . but let ' s see how we go . ' ' it be see as the first public confirmation by a senior minister of the PM ' s Brexit timetable . and one of Mr Johnson ' S minister declare Boris do not want Britain to quit the EU . he be also say to be ` ` bumble ' ' and clueless after the shock Brexit vote . Sir Alan Duncan make the claim in the BBC documentary Brexit : a Very British Coup ? in footage film the day before the vote , Sir Alan say : ` ` I ' ve always think that Boris ' S wish be to lose by one so that he could be the heir apparent without have all the ... s**t of clear up the mess . ' ' he say that by champion Brexit , Boris - who later quit the race to replace David Cameron as Tory leader - could become the ` ` darling of the activist ' ' . Shadow Brexit Secretary Emily Thornberry say she be appall by the revelation .
Ger want some ? ; May CLASH WITH Merkel HARDBALL BREXIT TACTICS the world ' S two most powerful woman clash for the first time last night , vow to play hardball over Brexit . Prime Minister Theresa May dine with Angela Merkel after travel to Berlin to try to start thrash out how Britain ' s EU walkout will work . the German Chancellor tell Mrs may she be prepare to wait for Britain to trigger Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty to start the process . but she also refuse to take part in ` ` any formal or informal negotiation ' ' until Mrs May reveal exactly what Britain want from Brexit . in a warning of the tough barter to come , Mrs Merkel insist : ` ` I promise you from the German side we will certainly stand up for our interest - just as Britain do for its own citizen . ` ` it be up to the British government to define how it wish to see its future relationship with the EU . ' ' Mrs May , who have earlier call on Mrs Merkel to ` ` talk frankly and openly ' ' , hit back over immigration . she say : ` ` it ' S very clear to me that one of the message the British people give be they want to see control bring into the movement of people from the EU to the UK . ` ` that be one of the issue that we as a government will deliver on . ' ' the Prime Minister go on to say she will not trigger Brexit ` ` before the end of this year ' ' . she explain : ` ` I understand this timescale will not please everyone but I think it be important to provide clarity on that now . ' ' Mrs May and Mrs Merkel ' s bond dinner of tuna and veal be due to last only an hour and @card@ minute . but the PM seem confident of eventually reach a deal because ` ` we have two woman who can get on with the job and deliver the well possible result ' ' . she go on : ` ` I have be clear that Brexit mean Brexit . but I also want to be clear we be not walk away from our European friend . ' ' Mrs May reveal she be give up Britain ' S forthcoming EU presidency stint as a gesture of goodwill . the UK be due to take over the six-month role in July next year . but other leader fear the presidency , with significant power to set the 28-state union ' S agenda , could be use as a Brexit bargaining chip . a Brussels source insist Mrs May be leave with no choice . the source tell the Sun : ` ` there be no way that the UK would be allow to have the presidency , it make no sense logistically or logically . ` ` you could have a situation where the UK would be chair discussion on its own exit from the EU . ' ' Russia yesterday accuse Mrs May of foreign policy ignorance after she use the debate on renew Trident nuclear sub to warn of the ` ` real ' ' danger pose by Moscow . President Vladimir Putin ' S spokesman say : ` ` obviously , the madam PM have not receive a full account of international affair yet . ' '
cake MY day ; Downing Street LOVE-IN ; Tusk : door be open to a Brexit deal b D ld Euro boss Donald Tusk declare the door open to a Brexit breakthrough yesterday - then take a dig at Boris Johnson ' s ` ` have your cake and eat it ' ' catchphrase . after talk with Theresa May at No10 , the EU Council chief say concession in the PM ' s Florence speech mean a deal be now doable . and in a swipe at BoJo , he say Mrs May ' S speech indicate ` ` this philosophy of have a cake and eat it be finally come to an end ' ' . the Foreign Secretary use the phrase in his campaigning during the Referendum . Mr Tusk say he still regret Brexit but be ` ` cautiously optimistic ' ' that an end to the deadlock be in sight . Mrs May say it be ` ` important for EU negotiator to now respond in the same spirit ' ' to her speech in Italy last Friday . but Dig ... BoJo d it th i l t despite the progress , isolate Mrs May be alone in think the Brexit impasse will be solve by October , the Sun can reveal . the PM ' S official be not expect trade talk to begin until December . insider say it be now widely accept that next month ' s crunch meeting of the full EU Council will not discuss the UK ' s future relationship with Brussels . British focus have now shift back two month to the December meeting of the @card@ EU Premiers , where it be hope phase two of the Brexit process will get the green light . a source say the Council will take its cue from European chief Brexit negotiator Mi h l B i Th Michel Barnier . the source add : ` ` bar something dramatic at this week ' s round of talk it ' s look increasingly unlikely to be October . ' ' talk in December would leave just @card@ month to hammer out a deal before Britain leave the EU in @card@ . a No10 spokesman say Mrs May and Mr Tusk have ` ` welcome the good progress ' ' on stick point such as citizen ' right . Boris Johnson , on the Romanian leg of his eastern European tour , stress Britain be play ball , claim : ` ` we be put some money on the table , we be say we will continue our commitment . ' '
how Brexit could chop food bill ; price WOULD Drop WITHOUT EU Tariffs Family shopping bill could plummet after Britain leave the EU , it be reveal yesterday . hundred of pound a year may be wipe off the cost of a household ' S food and clothing , the study by Brexit campaign leave Means leave report . saving would come as tariff on a wide range of good import from outside Europe - also booze , electrical item and car - be AXED . the food and drink gain lay out on our table below include tasty treat from lamb chop and fresh prawn to prosecco , wine , strawberry and honey . but the potential bonanza go beyond grub . John Longworth , of leave Means leave , say : ` ` Britain will be able to secure free-trade deal with the rest of the world and get good price for British family when they shop for food and drink , clothes , car and electrical good . the EU have be incompetent at secure free-trade deal with the rest of the world so Brexit offer a huge opportunity . ' ' only last week brit be tell that by the end of this year , the weekly food shop will be £5 dear . this be be blame on the fall pound and flooding in Spain . leave Means leave say this may all change when a new , global Britain be free to trade with non-EU country without pay a premium . there be a note of caution . price cut will depend on retailer pass the saving from import tariff , which vary from product to product , on to shopper . and the EU could slap duty on their produce post-Brexit - but Mr Longworth believe brit would then just buy more from outside Europe . at least @card@ country be queue for free-trade deal with post-Brexit Britain , it be reveal yesterday . they include the US , Australia , Brazil , Switzerland , New Zealand , Norway , Turkey and several Gulf state . Jayne Adye , head of campaign get Britain Out , say : ` ` this destroy Project Fear . the UK will not be isolate and do n't need the EU ' s so-called clout . we have our own clout and the world can see it . ` ` Trade deal tailor to our economy be now possible , rather than time-consuming compromise with EU state . deal will be in the interest of the UK and our trade partner , rather than sacrifice to help Spanish tomato grower or facilitate visa for Romanian . ' ' Below we highlight the potential tariff-free saving on food and drink . EU price £1.50 New price £1.10 Butter 250g e Prosecco 75cl EU price £7.00 New price £6.80 p EU price £8.00 New price £7.80 Red wine 75cl p EU price £5.75 New price £5.54 White wine 75cl p SAVING 21p EU price £3.00 New price £2.69 chicken breast single p @card@ SAVING 31p EU price £5.00 New price £3.55 Lamb chop 550g @card@ @card@ Cho SAVING £1.45 EU price £7.50 @card@ Cod loin @card@ New price £6.600g SAVING 90p EU price £2.00 New price £1.86 Bacon 300g EU price £3.00 New price £2Fresh prawn 165g e con 00g e £2.64 65g SAVING 36p SAVING 14p Bananas bunch of @card@ carrot 200g EU price £1.25 New price £1.12 Lettuce single Tomatoes 1kg EU price 65p New price 55p EU price 90p New price 78p EU price £2.20 New price £1.75 ana he C t SAVING 10p SAVING 12p SAVING 13p SAVING 45p EU price £1.25 New price £1.10 Brussels sprout 250g EU price £1.00 New price 89p Green bean 220g Maris Piper potato 2.5kg EU price £2.75 New price £2.44 strawberry 400g EU price £2.70 New price £2.46 Decaffeinated coffee 200g Ketchup 500g EU price £2.00 New price £1.77 EU price £1.75 New price £1.57 Pip @card@ . @card@ @card@ B l SAVING 15p SAVING 11p SAVING 23p SAVING 31p SAVING 24p SAVING 18p ' we have our own clout '
Brexit to ' hit Irish fishing industry ' by Barry Moran THE Government must move to protect the fishing industry in the wake of Brexit , it have be claim . Fianna Fail ' S Eamon O Cuiv have blast our leader for fail to engage to protect our fishing community from the Brexit fallout . the Galway West Deputy say : ` ` in the event of a hard Brexit , there be a strong desire by many in the UK fishing industry to ' pull up the drawbridge ' and push for a ban on non-UK fishing fleet in UK water so that the currently share fishing zone will be the UK ' S and the UK ' S alone . ` ` we need to ensure that our fishing industry be fully protect and support in the event of a hard Brexit . ` ` Government must also make fishery a top priority in any future negotiation between the EU and UK . ' '
£85BN DIVORCE DEMAND Crazy ; LINE-BY-LINE BREXIT Battle Britain launch a line-byline challenge to the EU ' s ` ` crazy ' ' £85billion Brexit divorce bill last night . Brexit Secretary David Davis meet EU negotiator Michel Barnier in Brussels to start four day of talk over the UK ' S departure . Treasury finance chief Mark Bowman demand answer from EU official over their massive demand . Mr Barnier be demand the UK agree a payout before talk on a post-Brexit trade bill in March @card@ can begin . but a senior UK source say : ` ` we will go through their paper line by line to find out the basis of what they want - 100billion euros be crazy . ' ' EU insider claim they want £70billion to £85billion to make up for the hole Brexit will leave in EU coffer . as well as future pension cost , the bill could include Britain ' s share of a potential legal bill from a row with the US over illegal subsidy to Airbus . yesterday be the first time the divorce bill have come up in formal talk . but Mr Davis admit on Friday Britain would have ` ` obligation ' ' to fulfil after we leave . a Czech official yesterday say some payment - such as those for the Common Agricultural Policy - would last until @card@ . Downing Street refuse yesterday to say when the government would put its own figure on a settlement . source say @card@ UK official would be take part in this week ' S talk . yesterday senior EU diplomat criticise the ` ` chaos ' ' in the UK Government as the negotiation begin . foreign Secretary Boris Johnson vow yesterday export of Liquorice Allsorts would be unhindered after Brexit as he meet his Danish counterpart , who say we would still get Lego .
now BREXIT : the REMATCH ; AS Tories Row , NATS HIT Out ; Nic signal push for referendum No2 Nicola Sturgeon have signal the SNP would back a second referendum on Brexit - say the idea be become ` ` difficult to resist ' ' . in an interview ahead of her speech at the Nat conference today , the First Minister hint it would become party policy to have a vote on the deal thrash out by Theresa May . she say : ` ` Those who be call for a referendum on the final outcome - that case perhaps will get strong and become more and more difficult to resist . ` ` with every day that pass right now , uncertainty be grow rather than recede . people when they vote last June do not have a clue what they be vote for . that ' s become patently obvious . ' ' refer to the chance of another vote , she add : ` ` that case perhaps will become quite difficult to resist . ' ' Tory deputy leader Jackson Carlaw accuse Ms Sturgeon , below , of hope Brexit would be a ` ` disaster ' ' in order to strengthen her case for another indy vote . he say : ` ` with her penchant for re-running democratic referendum , it ' s no surprise to hear her hint at another vote . ` ` but the people of Scotland be sick of these game , and want a government who will make a success of Brexit , not use it to stoke grievance . ' ' at their conference in Glasgow yesterday , SNP member unanimously back a motion call on Westminster to ` ` give up its democratically indefensible Brexit power grab ' ' on the Scottish Parliament with its EU Withdrawal Bill . the Nat administration have say it wo n't recommend Holyrood give the green light to the legislation as it now stand and Ms Sturgeon , along with Welsh First Minister Carwyn Jones , have outline @card@ change she want make . the resolution also call for the Scottish government to be invite to the negotiate table as Britain prepare to leave the EU in March @card@ .
Brex-ing heart the government may have be irate at the UK announce it will ban Irish trawler from its water yesterday but they have well get use to it . whether we in this country like it or not , Brexit seem to be go full steam ahead - and there will be a lot more news just like yesterday ' s come down the line . the fishing ban be far from the big problem we will deal with as most of our trawler operate out of Atlantic port in any case . however , the announcement underline the folly of the belief that we will somehow get a good deal out of Brexit than other European state because of our historical relationship with Britain . the EU have already be quite clear on this - all decision on these matter will be take at Brussels rather than Dublin level . a critical look at both the Irish and British government claim that there will be no hard border simply do not stand up either . expert who have work in European custom law for decade say this be simply not possible , that some custom check will be require . as it stand , Britain be Ireland ' s big trading partner . with substantial disagreement over the Brexit bill the UK will have to pay and the potential for a hard Brexit loom , we need to address that . we have two year to avoid Brexit have a significant economic impact here and a lot of work to do to avoid it .
Brex factor TWO year ago when the SNP come forward with their proposal for independence they produce a 350-page document set out every detail of their plan . you could agree with it , or disagree with it , you could embrace it as the Gospel truth or dismiss it as dewy-eyed fantasy . but , when we cast our vote , we largely know what be at stake and what be on offer . two month after the Brexit vote it should be a cause of burn shame to the UK Government that they be unable to answer the simple question about what Brexit be . they do no homework before the big vote and they seem to have do almost nothing since . yesterday , when the pointless Jeremy Corbyn be dribble on in a series of ramble question about housing , it be Angus Robertson of the SNP who hold the Prime Minister to account . in his new role as Leader of the opposition in wait , Mr Robertson want to know if Britain will be in or out of the single market . after a long summer tackle the Brexit question , the Prime Minister could not tell him . that ' S hardly surprising since her Brexit Secretary David Davis have already rule that being part of the single market be ` ` highly improbable ' ' - only for No10 to then slap him aside . in the Scottish Parliament , there be critic on every side who attack the First Minister for press the start button on another independence referendum . they say , quite rightly , that she believe independence be the answer to Scotland ' S ill , no matter what . but be they also say that , no matter what Brexit settlement Westminster eventually get round to think up , Scotland must simply swallow it ? that ' S for the people to decide and Nicola Sturgeon may at least give us the choice .
BREXIT BEGINS ; Brussels DIVORCE FIGHT EU talk kick off Britain be seek a ` ` deal like no other in history ' ' as our landmark EU divorce talk finally get under way today , Brexit boss David Davis declare . a year after the referendum , he have travel to Brussels for the opening of negotiation . he will go head to head with chief EU negotiator Michel Barnier for the first time in a day of discussion . the opening skirmish be set to cover the status of expats , the ` ` divorce bill ' ' slap on us by the EU and what to do about the Northern Ireland border . Mr Davis say he would hammer out a ` ` bold and ambitious deal ' ' for the UK . he add : ` ` while there be a long road ahead , our destination be clear - a deep and special partnership between the UK and the EU . a deal like no other in history . I look forward to begin work on that new future . ' ' he speak as his former deputy warn any watering down on our Brexit position would be a betrayal of Brits . David Jones , sack as Brexit minister by PM Theresa May last week , write there would be ` ` a whirlwind of public anger ' ' if ` ` Brexit do not mean Brexit ' ' . but split already emerge in the government ' s position as Chancellor Philip Hammond hint border control should play second fiddle to skill and job in Britain . Mr Hammond also warn about fail to get a Brexit deal . Mrs May have repeatedly insist the government be prepare to walk away from talk , claim no deal be good than a bad deal . the Chancellor say : ` ` no deal would be a very , very bad outcome for Britain , but there be a possible bad out-come and that be a deal that be deliberately structure to suck the lifeblood out of our economy over a period of time . ' ' Mr Davis say : ` ` as I head to Brussels to open official talk to leave the EU , there should be no doubt - we be leave the European union and deliver on that historic referendum result . ` ` now the hard work begin . we must secure a deal that work for all part of the United Kingdom , and enable us to become a truly global Britain . ` ` Leaving give us the opportunity to forge a bright new future for the UK - one where we be free to control our border , pass our own law and do what independent sovereign country do . ' ' the opening meeting ' S agenda be agree after preparatory ` ` talk about talk ' ' . Mr Davis warn : ` ` these talk will be difficult at point but we will be approach them in a constructive way . ' '
the BBC breezily dismiss [ ... ] the BBC breezily dismiss call for its coverage of Brexit to be less grotesquely bias . director of News James Harding insist with a straight face that the BBC be impartial on the subject of Brexit and will not be ` ` push or pull by one political interest or another ' ' . BBC Chairman Sir David Clementi even goad pro-Brexit MP by say that the only reason for new guideline at the BBC would be if there be a second EU referendum . these sneering Beeb exec be not as smart as they think they be . the BBC can carry on as it be now , brazenly contemptuous of Brexit , treat the @card@ million people who vote to leave the EU as ignorant , racist thickos , preface every piece of good economic news with the mealy-mouthed phrase , ` ` despite Brexit ' ' . or it can be the broadcaster for an entire nation - impartial , fair and worthy of that £147 licence fee every year . it ca n't have it both way .
May way or the highway , Boris ; Theresa : I ' M in Front Seat ON BREXIT TALKS PM RAPS ' BACKSEAT Driver ' Boz BOJO Dad : he ' S Happy To QUIT Job Theresa May yesterday tell Boris Johnson she be in the Brexit driving seat as Cabinet unity fall apart and his future hang in the balance . amid bitter row the Prime Minister slap down her Foreign Secretary after he map out his ` ` glorious ' ' vision for the future outside the EU . she refuse BoJo ' s plea to spend an extra £350million a week on the NHS once we leave . and refer to Home Secretary Amber Rudd ' s weekend accusation that Mr Johnson be ` ` back seat driving ' ' , Mrs May insist : ` ` this government be drive from the front . ' ' source tell the Sun Mr Johnson decide to publish his 4,000-word blueprint on Friday as he believe Brexit negotiation with the EU will fail and end up with Mrs May be humiliate . last night he spark resignation fever when challenge about quit . Mr Johnson tell the BBC they be ` ` bark up the wrong tree ' ' . but he add : ` ` when the burden of office be lift from my shoulder , I will of course look back with great pride on my time do all sort of thing . ' ' his father Stanley reckon Boris be set to quit over a soft Brexit he say : ` ` this be such an important issue that I would have think he would be happy , happy , happy to walk away from the whole thing if that ' s what he have to do . ' ' just day before Mrs May ' S critical Brexit speech in Florence on Friday there be increase chaos at the heart of the government as : vote leave flagbearer Dominic Cummings accuse Chancellor Philip Hammond , the Home Secretary and senior mandarin of lobby for a soft Brexit that would see the UK pay EU contribution for year ; Mr Johnson reiterate there be no way Britain should pay ` ` extortionate ' ' sum for access to the single market , as ` ` they would n't pay for access to our market ' ' ; BREXIT-backers accuse David Davis of siding with Mr Hammond , spark a vicious counter attack with one ally of the Brexit Secretary say : ` ` it ' S all Hammond ' S scheme . ' ' the Brexit department ' s top civil servant , Oliver Robbins , leave to take up a new No10 role after a series of report row with Mr Davis ; the department ' s head of trade and partnership , civil servant Antony Phillipson , be say to be move to become consul general in New York ; Michael Gove , who fall out with Mr Johnson over the Tory leadership , back him over his claim Britain can save £350million a week by quit . Labour ' S Stephen Doughty , a key supporter of Remain group Open Britain , say the PM need to ` ` get a grip ' ' . he say : ` ` Boris Johnson may be back seat driving , but the car be now in danger of spin out of control . ' ' and mid-ranking Tory defence minister Tobias Ellwood tweet : ` ` think many would agree we be not witness our fine hour . ' ' in Ottawa , Canada , yesterday to seal a new trade deal with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau , Mrs May insist the government be unite . she say : ` ` look , this government be drive from the front , and we ' re all go in the same direction . ` ` we ' re all agree on the basis of the principle for our negotiation that we be work hard to get the well possible deal for the UK . ' ' ask about Mr Johnson ' s challenge to her authority , the PM remark : ` ` look , Boris be Boris . ' ' Quizzed whether she back a soft or hard Brexit , Mrs May say : ` ` I do n't recognise that simple binary approach . ' ' but she refuse to rule out make big payment to Brussels for at least two year in a transition deal after the @card@ deadline to quit . Mrs May also say it be up to the government how any money save by leave would be spend . on Mr Johnson ' s £350million a week claim , she say : ` ` if you look at the amount of money that go in the European Union each year , the reality be it vary . ' ' Senior Tories be furious with Mr Johnson for throw the government into disarray after the EU Withdrawal Bill be pass in the commons this month . one say : ` ` it ' s be a car crash . ' ' BoJo , who meet President Trump at the United Nations in New York yesterday , claim he have only be try to ` ` sketch out ' ' his Brexit vision . he say : ` ` I think it ' s a good thing to have a bit of an opening drum roll about what this country can do . ' '
if Lords hold up Brexit . . they ' ll be next fur the chop expect the House of Lords to be happy about Brexit be like expect turkey to be all excite about Christmas . the British people may have vote to leave the EU in great number than we ever vote for anything , but the House of Lords be almost comically unrepresentative of our nation . in the real world , all the Lib Dem MP can travel together in the same minicab while in the House of Lords the Lib Dems be a political force once more , with @card@ peer . in the real world , Labour be a die party but in the alternative universe of the House of Lords , Labour be still a mighty powerhouse with @card@ peer , include some mouth-foaming , eye-swivelling Euroloons like Baron Mandelson , right , and Baron Kinnock . the House of Lords be as instinctively anti-Brexit as the BBC . but there be one crucial difference between the upper chamber and Broadcasting House . many lordship be on EU pension . as my colleague David Wooding exclusively reveal today dozen of lucky Lords be in line for whopping EU annuity . and the term and condition of European Commission pension effectively demand that they support the EU . so how can their lordship possibly be fair and rational when debate this country ' s exit from the EU ? if they dare choose Britain over Brussels then the overdress old relic risk put their pension pot in www.peril.No wonder they be get their ermine robe in a twist about Brexit . it stink to high heaven that anyone in Parliament should have a personal financial incentive to put the interest of their EU paymaster over Britain . dozen of peer have exactly that incentive , although you would never know it because they have decide it would be ` ` distasteful ' ' to declare their EU pension in any debate . why ? if some of their lordship be set to be the red-robed bitch of Brussels , they should at least have the courage , honesty and common decency to admit it . it be a national scandal that EU pensioner in the House of Lords do not have to declare their personal stake in this country stay inside the EU . we make a fuss when some dozy MP be catch fiddle his expense but it be a far great outrage that some member of the Lords be debate our future without own up to what ' S in it for them . tomorrow the House of Lords will continue the debate on Article @card@ , the bill that will formally trigger the start of Brexit and allow Theresa May to begin formal divorce proceeding with the EU . the elect member of the House of Commons have indicate - by a majority of @card@ - that they intend to respect the democratic will of the British people who , lest we forget , be endlessly tell that their decision in the referendum be final . will the House of Lords show the same respect for democracy ? finger cross , eh ? for us and for them . because if some preen , unelected nob decide that they wish to delay , hamstring or even deny Brexit then they will be sign the death warrant of the House of Lords . ` ` Our role be to review and amend legislation , not to kill it , ' ' Paul Strasburger , a Liberal Democrat peer , tell the Financial Times . ` ` there be definitely an appetite for improve this bill . ' ' do n't bite off more than you can chew , your lordship . nothing can stop Brexit now . but that do not mean that the House of Lords will not try . many of us have long suspect that the great resistance to Brexit would come from the pound-store Caesar in the House of Lords . their delay tactic will include demand for great parliamentary scrutiny over Brexit negotiation - horribly ironic , as endless EU legislation have be wave through Parliament without proper scrutiny for more than @card@ year . the good news be that the come day will shine an unforgive light on the House of Lords and some haughty , unelected halfwit . it will oblige us all to take a long , hard look at Parliament ' s unelected upper chamber , which dwarf the elect House of Commons with @card@ sit Lords , include nearly @card@ hereditary peer - almost all man because most hereditary peerage can only be inherit by man . what century be these puffed-up old fossil live in ? and while I understand how many of their Lordships benefit from British membership of the EU , how exactly do British democracy benefit from these selfimportant old booby ? you ca n't help notice that the House of Lords be the absolute spit image of the European Union - with some jumped-up , gravy train-hogging nobody who you never vote for and who you can never kick out . would n't it be a gloriously fine day for British democracy if we leave one and then abolish the other ?
plan for DUAL BRIT-EU Citizens BRITS could be give an ` ` opt-in ' ' chance to retain dual EU citizenship after the UK leave . Brexit Secretary David Davis promise to consider the idea yesterday . the proposal would allow UK national associate citizenship allow them to work across the EU without have to gain a visa . it could see brit who opt-in give a separate EU passport . Mr Davis tell MP he will ` ` look seriously ' ' at the idea after he discuss it with European Parliament Brexit chief Guy Verhofstadt , who propose it . Mr Verhofstadt have put the associate citizenship plan in the European Parliament ' s wide Brexit proposal and call on the European Commission to back it . meanwhile , Mr Davis reveal the government would publish sensitive Brexit impact paper on @card@ different part of the economy . but he vow nothing would be publish that undermine PM Theresa May ' s hand in EU negotiation . he insist the government would abide by a Commons vote urge publishing them . the government have reject demand to release them but be force into a U-turn after Labour win a crunch vote .
Brexit doubt all put to bed SO now we know who actually pull the string at the European Union headquarters . it ' S Jean-Claude Juncker . he have say he and Brussels want to invite the Balkan state into the EU by @card@ . if ever there be a reason to get out of Europe , this have to be it . can we please now stop pussyfoot about and get on with our exit ? Nigel Newton Romford , Essex How do one become President of the United States of Europe ? anyone can run for President in the US , as you may have notice . doubtless the use will be equally democratic . where do I apply ? Barry Tighe Woodford Green , Ne London THANK you , Jean-Claude Junker . your speech on your expansion plan for the EU have unwittingly vindicate the 17million brit who vote for Brexit . it ' S a nightmarish vision which have highlight just why Brexit be the right choice . the Sun have be predict just such a scenario for age . and your speech , which also emphasise how Britain will ` ` regret ' ' Brexit , will certainly have shatter the illusion of even staunch Remainers . there will be no regret . we ' re on course now . Billie Jo Patten Newcastle upon Tyne Any linger doubt about leave the EU should be put to bed by Juncker ' s late proposal . in @card@ he want to bring Serbia , Montenegro , Albania , Macedonia , Bosnia and Kosovo into the EU and he want to allow this without approval of all member . perhaps he think these six country will cover the contribution lose from the UK . good luck with that . tony Hubbert Caerphilly if Hitler have follow Juncker ' s plan there would have be no war and Germany would still have become the world ' s most powerful state . you ' ve get to love the bloke . editor Bennett Leicester THE EU want to grab more power and take in more country , then have just one single EU president . be this why Tony Blair be so desperate for us to remain - because he want the job ? john Sargeant Stockport Can people not see and hear the tone of the EU ? once we have leave and their pay packet have go it will be war . they can not support themselves so they build a regime . Janet Evans Swansea if the overseas aid budget can not be use to help those island devastate by recent hurricane , why do we have it ? by the same token , why have aid be give to India , China - and £4million to North Korea ? the whole thing be now a farce . Gerald Austin Bournemouth THE Rohingya Muslims of Burma have be describe as the most persecute minority on earth . most people would regard the rape of woman , massacre of child and the burning of village in Burma as well beyond the pale , rather than ` ` a bit heavy hand ' ' as Rod Liddle suggest . the United Nations call the treatment of Rohingya Muslims ` ` a textbook example of ethnic cleansing ' ' . and yet Mr Liddle choose to blame the victim , just like the terrorist of be would do when they carry out their vile attack . could it be that Mr Liddle consider Muslim to be less deserving of dignity than anyone else ? MIQDAAD VERSI Muslim Council of Great Britain here be a different option for public-sector pay rise . rather than a blanket lift for certain sector , how about lift the cap on all employee under £35,000 a year to inflation or @card@ per cent , whichever be low ? give a rise of one per cent to those on £35,000 to £45,000 . freeze wage over £45,000 , include MP . help the low pay . tony FIXTER Oxford TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply FOLLOWING the death of Louella Michie , something must be do to control drug use at festival . my granddaughter go to the reading event and say it be awash with drug . mare , Kent THANK God a few drink loosen people ' S tongue . now the whole EU know what horror be to come , Mr Juncker . Barbara Fisher , St Albans , Herts A CASHLESS society sound like a good idea but a mugger can only take what be in your wallet . if they hack your account , there be no limit to the damage . Phil , Carshalton , Surrey Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
CLEULESS ; Sturgeon BLAST AT PM IndyRef2 be not a bluff May ' have no plan for Brexit ' Nicola Sturgeon give Theresa May both barrel yesterday over her Brexit plan silence . the First Minister accuse her Tory rival of be no further forward with tactic than she be six month ago . Ms Sturgeon also claim Mrs May be fail to ` ` behave like a Prime Minister ' ' , preside over an ` ` obsession with foreigner ' ' in her party ' S rank , and hide behind her ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' mantra . the SNP chief ' s attack in a telly interview come minute before Mrs May take to the airwaves and deny she be in a ` ` muddle ' ' over Brexit plan . but Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` to be perfectly frank , I do n't feel as though I know any more about her negotiate objective today than I do six month ago . ` ` probably what ' s more worrying than that - I ' m not sure she know more about her negotiate objective than she do back then . ' ' the First Minister say this should be of ` ` increase concern ' ' with Mrs May due to trigger two year of EU exit talk by the end of March . ask by the BBC ' S Andrew Marr if she ` ` seriously think ' ' there ' s no plan , Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` Yes . I do , and I say that with a lot of regret because that put every part of the UK into a very perilous position . ' ' she add that she be leave ` ` frustrated ' ' after a summit with Mrs May in October , where the PM would not reveal her plan . and the SNP leader insist she ' s not ` ` bluff ' ' over her threat to hold another indy referendum if the UK be head for an exit from the single market . ask if there could be another vote within five year , she say : ` ` if we be face a ' hard ' Brexit I would think yes . ' ' but , speak to Sky ' S Sophy Ridge , Mrs May say her critic be miss the point by focus on single market membership . the PM say she be concentrate on ` ` not the means to the end but what the outcome be ' ' . and she insist she want a ` ` really good trade deal ' ' that allow UK company to ` ` operate in the European single market ' ' . Mrs May ' S interview come day after the UK ' s EU diplomat Sir Ivan Rogers quit and blast No10 ' s ` ` muddle thinking ' ' over Brexit . but the PM say : ` ` Our thinking on this be n't muddle at all . ' '
a Kick in the GIBLETS ; SHOPPERS ' Blow Brexit turkey price hike shopper be be stuff by soar turkey price just in time for Christmas , a report say yesterday . EU wholesale cost for the traditional festive meat have rise from £1.71 per kilo a year ago to £1.82 now . expert blame the increase on the Brexit vote - which have weaken the pound and cause a shortage of foreign labour need to pluck the poultry . an outbreak of avian flu also see million of bird in Asia and Eastern Europe cull during the summer . trade magazine Grocer say : ` ` British turkey might have escape bird flu but Brexit mean shopper will pay more . ` ` last year price war keep cost for consumer down but turkey could be significantly more expensive this year . ' ' the British Poultry Council ' S Shraddha Kaul say : ` ` inflation have hit in the wake of Brexit , devalue the pound and cause issue secure overseas labour for seasonal pluck and production . ' ' ` ` but Paul Kelly , of the British Turkey Federation , say savvyare now buy full rather than crown . say : ` ` Higher cost and wastage mean they pay similar amount to the full bird . ' '
BoJo ' s Brexit gag cock-up Boris [ ... ] BoJo ' s Brexit gag cock-up Boris Johnson yesterday claim a gag on his senior staff oppose his pro-Brexit view be ` ` a cock-up ' ' . the London Mayor ' s chief of staff have warn BoJo ' S deputy and aide to ` ` advocate the Mayor ' S position or otherwise not openly contradict it ' ' . BoJo say : ` ` as soon as I see it , it cease to be operative . nobody have be gag . it obviously have n't be operative because my advisory team take a very different view from me . ' ' Labour ' S Chuka Umunna accuse him of rank hypocrisy . BoJo be grassroots Tory ' No1 choice for next leader , a poll show . his support have almost double to @card@ per cent since he back Brexit .
£3BN EU WAR CHEST ; BREXIT A £3BILLION war chest have be earmark to cover ` ` every possible outcome ' ' for Brexit . the Chancellor have come under intense pressure from Brexit support MP to prepare in case Britain exit the EU in @card@ without a trade deal . Brexit boss id : ` ` it ' s ment for not the get a may . ' ' on Tuesday , David Davis say : call the Department Exiting the EU , Department for deal come what the cash , which never need to be will be divide up ich may spend , p between department include those for the environment , tax , transport and the Home Office . Philip Hammond say : ` ` we have already invest almost £700million in Brexit preparation today I be set over the next two another £3billion . ' ' but have a EU ex use h his Budget speech new positive tone on exit after critic accuse him of be a gloomy Remainer . he tell MP : ` ` we face a choice - embrace the future or reject the change . we choose the future , to run towards change , not away from it . ' ' he say the deal would be ` ` base on free and frictionless trade , close collaboration on security and strong mutual respect and friendship ' ' . last night Brexit back Tory MP voice concern the Budget have earmark £3.5billion in payment to the EU for @card@ . but a Government source say the figure be an estimate of possible custom payment not yet negotiate with Brussels .
Oz pledge for a quick trade deal BREXIT Britain can do a quick trade deal with Australia , its government pledge last night . High Commissioner Alexander Downer , below , say it take the Aussie only @card@ month to do a trade deal with the US and a British deal could also be rapidly achieve . echo Theresa May ' s ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' catchphrase , he add : ` ` if free trade mean free trade , it can be do very quickly . ' ' he urge Britain not to ` ` play politics ' ' with a trade deal and slam ` ` scaremongering ' ' by Labour that Australia would wipe out British farming by flood us with cheap lamb and beef after we leave the EU . speak alongside Environment Minister Michael Gove at the the Institute for Free Trade , he slam the EU as ` ` preposterously protectionist ' ' and say its Common Agricultural Policy have be ` ` hugely damaging ' ' .
set EUR CLOCKS ; 11pm March @card@ , @card@ be Brexit time ... by law Freedom Day @card@ by Matt DATHAN Ministers want to enshrine in law the date and time Britain will quit Europe . an amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill aim to ` ` remove all doubt ' ' that the divorce will take place at 11pm on March @card@ , @card@ . the move aim to kill off Remainer plot to extend Brexit negotiation . Brexit Secretary David Davis say it would give voter , business and potential trading partner ` ` crystal clear ' ' certainty over our future . just last night EU official float the idea of prolong membership beyond @card@ so negotiation could continue in a two-year transition period . but the government hope to increase pressure on Brussels to open trade deal talk . the Brexit bill , which hand the government a swathe of power , return to the Com-mons next week . if pass , a new vote would be need to extend exit talk . in an article for the Telegraph today , PM Theresa May write : ` ` we will not tolerate attempt to use amendment to try to block the democratic wish of the people . ' ' Brussels have warn a divorce bill must be agree within two week . last night it emerge talk have stall on Northern Ireland , with the European Commission say it should remain in the custom union to avoid a hard border with the Republic .
ZAC be SACKED But BREXIT ' S ON TRACK ; Shock BY-ELECTION DEFEAT ; PM shrug off Lib Dems ' victory Theresa May insist minister be work full throttle on Brexit despite yesterday ' s shock by-election result . Brexiteer former Tory Zac Goldsmith be oust from his ` ` safe seat ' ' in Richmond Park by the Lib Dems . Remainer Sarah Olney overturn a majority of @card@ to win by @card@ vote to Mr Goldsmith ' s @card@ . afterwards Mrs Olney say the result pave the way for Parliament to override June ' s Referendum result . and Lib Dem leader Tim Farron call it a ` ` historic victory ' ' , vow the party ' s fight against a hard Brexit would go on . but the PM ' s official spokeswoman say : ` ` the British people send a very clear message on June @card@ for Britain to leave the EU . ` ` the government be get on with it . our position on Brexit be clear , we be commit to leave the EU and trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . ` ` we have a Referendum . the majority of people vote to leave the European Union , and the Prime Minister be get on with it . ' ' Europhiles have leap on the result . former Belgian PM and MEP Guy Verhofstadt tweet Mrs Olney and the Lib Dems say : ` ` Europe be watch and we be proud ' ' . but former Cabinet Minister Iain Duncan Smith say he should ` ` mind his own bloody business ' ' . the by-election in South West London be trigger when Mr Goldsmith stand down in protest at the government ' s backing for a third runway at Heathrow . the multi-millionaire stand as an independent and the Tories do not field a candidate . other who run for the seat include Howling Laud Hope ( Official Monster Raving Loony ) , below in stetson .
loot camp ; CARAVANS Giant PREDICTS BREXIT Boom ; Sun City the owner of one of Britain ' s big caravan park operator have axe a £250million sale - and predict a boom in post-Brexit staycations . private equity group Caledonia Investments be look to sell Park HOLIDAYS , which it buy for £172million in @card@ . it even hire consultancy PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS to help secure a deal . but with the weak pound and ongoing fear of terror attack in Europe , it believe more brit will now holiday at home . a source say : ` ` Caledonia pull the sale because of Brexit . the thinking be that earnings will rise much faster because Brexit mean that more and more people will opt for staycations . they ' ll be put off from go abroad because of the collapse in sterling and terrorism in Europe . ' ' the last recession spark a similar staycation boom . spending by brit on visit within the UK , which include at least one overnight stay , rise from £21billion in @card@ to £25billion in @card@ , accord to the Office for National Statistics - an increase of @card@ per cent around £1.9billion be spend on holiday park and caravan trip in @card@ , accord to separate figure from VISIT England . Park Holidays , which have @card@ UK site , be set to see earnings rise to £35million this year . most of its site be along the South Coast , where it be the top operator . the group , found in @card@ , have static caravan at site but also provide for guest with their own mobile version and camper . £1.9BNspent on holiday park and caravan trip in @card@
do it May Way ; PM : no Brexit law without good trade deal E.U . exit @card@ Theresa May claim she will not make the Brexit divorce deal law until she win a good trade deal . the PM tell EU chief she will not commit ` ` until we know what we ' re legislate for ' ' . her official spokesman make the statement yesterday as it emerge the @card@ EU leader will try to force Mrs May to make her promise legally bind . a leak Brussels document suggest they will act at tomorrow ' s summit to sign off the start of trade talk . EU figure say the leader ' stance have ` ` hardened ' ' after Brexit Secretary David Davis claim the PM ' S deal be open to change . chief EU negotiator Michel BarSplit Nier warn any agreement depend on Britain honour its promise . Mr Davis later vow to have the deal ` ` convert into legal text as soon as possible ' ' . EU Council chief Donald Tusk say it would be ` ` a furious race against time ' ' to get a Brexit deal by next autumn . meanwhile , Mrs May be last night set to climb down in a battle for MP to get a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on Brexit ' s final term . former Attorney-General Dominic Grieve reckon he and around @card@ Tory can successfully pass amendment to the EU Withdrawal Bill . that would let MP alter the PM ' S final Brussels deal . but No10 , hint at a climbdown , say : ` ` MP be ask for clarity . we ' ll look at this . ' ' Ministers have tell rebel they can have a say on the deal in another law . Mr Grieve warn : ` ` Quite a few support me - enough , if it come to a vote , to defeat the government . ' ' Britain and Israel will need a quick tariff-free post-Brexit trade deal as one in seven drug the NHS buy be from Israeli pharmaceutical firm , say think-tank Bicom .
nuke reality have be lay bare ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think the consequence of a nuclear attack on the UK be depict quite brilliantly by the Sun . not enough people remember or be aware of how two Japanese city and thousand of its people be obliterate . North Korea ' S Kim Jong-un be see as a cartoon figure by most of the west with his rhetoric and army of funny marcher . but he be very real and have improve his nuclear capability . quite rightly he be be take seriously by the US and we should be shoulder to shoulder in opposition to this despot . Barry Evans by email I Can understand why North Korea want to preserve its future , but surely develop nuclear weapon will have the opposite effect . why would they want weapon that would cause such devastation ? Harvey Mason Edinburgh WE have to hope that China and Russia can make North Korea see sense . a nuclear programme would make the region even more unstable . peter Clarke East Kilbride EVERYONE be criticise Kim Jung-un , but who would n't want to take protective action against someone like Donald Trump ? he have see what have happen in other country , like Libya , and have no intention of let that happen to North Korea . David Bugg Edinburgh POTTY Lord Adonis want the BBC to sack the excellent and impartial Andrew Neil , picture , who he accuse of pro-Brexit propaganda . Remainers be desperate to stop Brexit but accuse the leftbiased BBC of support Brexit be a step too far . jane fisher by email as the most important bill in my lifetime - the Brexit repeal bill - be about to be debate and vote upon in Parliament , it would be nice for all MP to support the government rather than follow their own agenda . I do not vote for Brexit but MP , as representative of the people , should support it . Stephen Wheeler by email it ' S time Britain take a tough approach to Brexit . negotiation with Barnier can be simplify by state that the UK will impose an import tax on a different model of EU car every week until the EU drop its ` ` divorce payment ' ' threat and enter into meaningful talk . the EU car manufacturer will demand Barnier be sack . Clark Cross Linlithgow , West Lothian I be delight to read that Kate be expect again . she and William be a lovely couple and , just like Diana , have do wonder for the Royal Family . E Mitchell East Kilbride
Boris bard Brexit ; SHAKESPEAREAN JIBE AT STRUGGLE Boris Johnson have compare bitter Brexit battle to Shakespeare play . the Foreign Secretary also insist those calling for his head should be identify , say : ` ` Bring them to me , produce them . ' ' urge the EU to speed up Brexit , he come out with mangle quote from three of the Bard ' S play about kill leader . he declare : ` ` I suggest humbly to our friend and partner in Brussels now be the time to get on with it . ` ` let ' s not let ' I dare not ' wait upon ' I would ' , or let the native hue of resolution be sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought - or whatever . ` ` there be a current in the affair of man - they should grip it and get on with it and start talk about the future . ' ' the word ` ` let ' I dare not ' wait upon ' I would ' ' ' be from Macbeth . ` ` Sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought ' ' be from Hamlet . ` ` there be a tide in the affair of man ' ' be from Julius Caeser . after his address to the Chatham House think tank , PM Theresa May tell the commons she always welcome his ` ` literary and classical reference ' ' .
Davis RAPS DELAYBOUR ; CORBYN CHAOS Plan ; Fury at Brexit bill block Labour be accuse last night of an underhand bid to delay Brexit by get MP bog down with endless vote . furious David Davis blast the ` ` unscrupulous ' ' tactic as Jeremy Corbyn ' S troop threaten to cause chaos in the commons this week . Labour have vow to block the great repeal bill put EU power back into UK law . but Brexit Secretary Mr Davis say a delay would cause the ` ` cliff-edge ' ' departure he be try to prevent . he say : ` ` their only motivation be chaos . ' ' Labour yesterday demand change in the Bill , include keep Britain in the single market , custom union and European Court of Justice . with a work majority of just @card@ , the Tories will struggle to pass the Bill unchanged . Mr Davis , write for the Sun on Sunday today , say : ` ` Jeremy Corbyn ' S unscrupulous Labour Party threaten to delay , bog down and defeat this essential piece of legislation . ' ' he say give control to British judge and lawmaker be the most important step for a smooth Brexit . but he warn : ` ` the uncertainly our exit from the EU would cause without legal continuity be only match by the total instability of Labour ' s position on Brexit . ' ' last night Remainer Tory MP accuse Theresa May of bully them over the Bill . they be furious Government whip tell them oppose it would mean ` ` you be on Corbyn ' S side ' ' .
now for the BREXITEARS ; PM THINKS SHE ' S Won , BUT. . face fight with Cabinet hard-liner real Deal @card@ Exclusive HARDLINE Brexiteers warn Theresa May last night she still have a battle to unite minister on Brexit . some reckon the nowjubilant PM give away too much to clinch her Brussels talk victory . that could spell trouble as the Cabinet try to decide our post-Brexit EU tie . a senior MP say : ` ` the celebration would make you think we win a war . ` ` in truth , we ' ve just enter the battlefield . and we ' ll start by fight among ourselves over how we tackle the real enemy . ' ' the Tories ' militant leave wing have keep a lid on misgiving over Friday ' s Brexit breakthrough to avoid spoil the PM ' s big moment . but glove be set to come off when minister meet in nine day to discuss the ` ` end state ' ' . a pro-Brexit source say of Brussels talk chief Michel Barnier : ` ` wiillll lliike ` ` he and his team will look like pussycat once we get our claw into her . ' ' the PM have two month to finalise a negotiate stance . minister be draw up their own demand ahead of December @card@ Cabinet talk . they include have a say in how we spend billion save in EU payment and less business red tape . Barrniierr llook a Brexiteers also want a declaration that we will leave the single market and custom union after the two-year transition . one pussssycatt minister say of the PM : ` ` I think she understand the bottom will fall out of the bucket if she do n't go down that road . ' ' Environment Secretary Michael Gove stress that point in an article approve by No10 . he say that after transition we would have ` ` full freedom to diverge from EU law on the single market and custom union ' ' . Mrs May ' s ` ` victory ' ' continue to unravel last night EU source warn we will not get a special trade deal .
OSBO SNEERS AT BREXIT ' NAIVETY ' ; JIBES AT EU TACTICS and BOJO George Osborne launch a stunning counter-attack on the Government last night as he brand Brexit Ministers ` ` naive ' ' . just week after be axe from the Cabinet , the former Chancellor mock Boris Johnson and insist Britain have to be ` ` realistic ' ' in negotiation to leave the EU . in a speech in the US , Remainer Mr Osborne concede free movement immigration rule may have to go - but not at the cost of safeguard economic link . he storm : ` ` Brexit win a majority - not a ' hard Brexit ' . ` ` we should n't assume there be an off-the-shelf arrangement that work for the second large economy in Europe . equally I find some of the take-it-or-leave-it bravado we hear from those who assume Europe have no option but to give us everything we want more than a little naive . ` ` we need to be realistic . Britain can not expect to maintain all the benefit that come from EU membership without incur any of the cost or the obligation . ' ' separately , he enrage pro-Brexit backbencher by say he would relish the chance to return to the top of British politics as a flagbearer for the ` ` liberal mainstream ' ' . and in a dig at bitter rival BoJo , he use one of his rugby phrase to poke fun at his fail bid to replace David Cameron , say : ` ` if the ball come loose at the back of the scrum , I would n't fumble it . ' ' Former Cabinet Minister Iain Duncan Smith accuse Mr Osborne of a ` ` code attack ' ' on Theresa May . he say : ` ` rather than go away and think about everything he ' s go to tell everyone he get everything right and that really he should be run the country . ' ' Tory MP Jacob Rees Mogg add : ` ` George Osborne warn during the campaign that we would have all these disaster if we leave , none of which have happen . this be sour grape . ' ' Mr Osborne have predict Brexit would trigger an immediate recession . speak to the FT yesterday , he say it be still ` ` too early to tell ' ' its impact but the fall in the pound help ` ` absorb the shock ' ' .
day of DISMAY ; Rebels humiliate PM in Brexit vote Theresa May last night lose her first Commons Brexit vote as MP win the power to amend a final EU divorce deal . a rebellion by @card@ of her MP see the PM defeat by just four vote on a key amendment to her flagship EU Withdrawal Bill . the blow on the eve of a Brussels summit leave her in the humiliate position of be unable to guarantee to Europe ' s leader she can implement the exit term they agree . the defeat be leap on by critic of Brexit as a chance to turn the tide . rebel commander Dominic Grieve ' s amendment to the Bill will now give Parliament ` ` a meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal . Mrs May have spend the day love-bombing MP . she have vow not to implement an exit deal without give MP a take it or leave it vote . but despite minister and whip carry out last minute strongarm the vote be lose by @card@ to @card@ . one whip be allege to have reduce a female MP to tear . Ex-ministers include Nicky Morgan and Ken Clarke join the revolt . Labour Peer Lord Adonis say : ` ` this be the first step towards the defeat of Brexit . ' ' Ukip ' S Nigel Farage hit back : ` ` my contempt for career politician know no bound . ' ' Conservative MP Nadine Dorries declare the rebel should be ` ` deselected and never allow to stand again ' ' . harry.cole @ www.thesun.co.uk the Sun say - Page @card@ the @card@ Tory Vote REBELS Nicky Morgan Oliver Heald Jonathan DJANOGLY Dominic Grieve Bob Neill Anna SOUBRY Antoinette Sandbach Ken Clarke Stephen Hammond Sarah WOLLASTON Heidi Allen
yes we should have another referendum ... to ditch Lords ANYONE up for another referendum ? the last one be quite good fun . and this might be even good . abolish the House of Lords . just an easy yes or no will do . this week their unelected lordship shuffle and drool their way into the chamber , pick up their £300 daily attendance dosh on their way . a decrepit retinue of timeserver , party donor , smirk , flatulent businessman , backwoods inbred aristos , the has-been and the never has-been . and they vote , by a large margin , to actually derail Brexit . to stop the will of the people . to effectively ignore a decision make by the citizen of this country and which have a clear and decisive outcome . also , a vote agree upon by the democratically elect House of Commons . and which have since be ratify by the House of Commons . the Lords demand that Brexit can go ahead only if the House of Commons have what it call a ` ` meaningful ' ' debate about the issue . this be perhaps the most meaningless and disingenuous decision ever make by either House . we have plenty of meaningful , and meaningless , debate about Brexit during the run-up to the referendum last June . what the Lords be determine to do be stymie Brexit at every step of the way . to stop it from happen . to put as many obstacle in the way as possible . they be quite clear about this . just listen to that arrogant ( and fail ) old Tory toff Lord Heseltine on the subject . or the sanctimonious whine of Lord Pantsdown , sorry Ashdown . they want it stop . incredible , be n't it , that Remoaners will use every unelected institution in the land to overthrow a democratic decision ? first we have the filthy-rich city fund manager Gina Miller decide she do n't like the result of the referendum . she ' S not elect , of course . she take her complaint to the judge , who be also unelected . they agree with her , as you might expect . delay number one and a huge cost to the taxpayer . and now the Remoaners be pin their hope on another unelected body to thwart the will of the people , through their eminent lordship . delay number two , three , four , five ... next time someone who vote Remain start lecture you about democracy , break their glass and spit on their moccasin . theirs have become a campaign utterly devoid of principle . they do not even pretend any more that they care about what way the public vote . this be the rich , the powerful , the unelected - in short the British establishment - tell the ordinary people that they ' re too stupid to make a decision . and when they do make a decision it should be ignore . still , one good thing will come of this . in defy the will of the people the lord and lady be hasten the day of their oblivion . because there will be a grow clamour to either reform the House of Lords - slim it down , get rid of the dead and rot wood , make it more accountable - or get rid of it altogether . that day ca n't come quickly enough for me . yesterday be International Women ' S day . I spend quite a bit of it walk through the street of my local town and cheer and clap at any woman I see . I ' m sure they appreciate this gesture and I think it be a bit high-handed of the police to tell me to , ` ` go home and stop be so bloody stupid ' ' . later I watch a rerun of University Challenge , which the feminist have be complain about . all eight contestant be white man . where ' s the diversity , the femmoes moan ? well , I assume the eight people pick be the bright the university have to offer . I suppose we could keep the feminist happy by make it compulsory for a woman , no matter how thick , to be include in every team . it remind me of that other feminist complaint : why be all the hero in child ' S book nearly always male ? to make them more believable .
no Ham ' S Land ; Row as Hammond call for ' transitional ' Brexit LEAVING EU @card@ Chancellor Philip Hammond cause a fresh Cabinet rift yesterday by call for a ` ` transitional ' ' post-Brexit deal . Mr Hammond say rush negotiation could threaten financial stability and create pain and uncertainty for British business . and in a thinly-veiled dig at Brexit Secretary David Davis and Trade Secretary Liam Fox , he say ` ` thoughtful politician ' ' be of the same opinion . it come after Mr Davis last week rule out a transitional deal . Mr Hammond ' S comment , to the Treasury Select Commons Committee , raise the prospect Brexit will take much longer than the hoped-for two year . he tell MP an ` ` emerge view ' ' among business , regulator and civil servant be that ` ` a long period ' ' to manage Brexit would ` ` be generally helpful ' ' . Mr Hammond also say it would take time to hire extra border staff and upgrade it at port to check EU import . Eurosceptic Steve Baker say he would have no problem with a transition deal if it see the country take back control of border , money and law . Labour ' S Stephen Kinnock say : ` ` not sign a transitional agreement would mean punish tariff which would hit British business and raise price in shop . ' '
the Sun SAYS Brexit blind the government may be in disarray - but David Davis ' s handling of Brexit be not . many people claim the Tory be bungle the negotiation . that ' S certainly the message relentlessly pump out by the Remainers dominating TV , social medium and some paper . they ' re wrong . Brexit must mean leave the single market and custom union . even sensible Remainers accept that ` ` leave ' ' have no meaning if we stay in either one . the Tories follow that simple logic . they spell out our position , offer a firm commitment on EU citizen here and give considerable ground . they sensibly ask for a two-year transition follow by a free trade deal . Davis ca n't offer vast sum as a ` ` divorce bill ' ' without know what we get for it . the obstinate EU wo n't say . so we wait . how else could he have play it ? Labour can not answer that without spout meaningless nonsense . EU chief Jean-Claude Juncker think it ' S as easy as Britain pay our bar bill - except the EU expect us to settle everyone ' S drink tab . doubtless Juncker be use to other buy his brandy . but after @card@ year put in far more than we get out , it be n't our round .
BREXIT Joy AS French Say : get on WITH it ! French president Emmanuel Macron want the EU to get on with discuss a Brexit trade deal with Britain , David Davis have say . the Brexit Secretary tell peer Mr Macron have press the EU ' s negotiate team to get around ` ` technicality ' ' at a recent Brussels summit . signal crack in the EU ' s ` ` red line ' ' , he also say Holland and Belgium share the view . the EU have repeatedly insist Britain must agree a deal on citizen ' right and a bumper divorce settlement before any talk about a new free trade deal can begin . Mr Davis be refer to last month ' S EU Council where PM Theresa May present her plan to give three million Europeans permanent residency . he tell a cross-party Lords committee that Mr Macron ask , ` ` when be you go to get round to the issue of trade ? this be just technicality ' ' . Mr Davis also say a number of the EU ' s @card@ other state see no need for the European Court of Justice to have any oversight of the deal on citizen ' right that be eventually agree - a UK ` ` red line ' ' . and he insist the government ' S aim remain to get the well possible deal . he also indicate that Britain may remain a member of the custom union during a transitional deal beyond @card@ .
rock ' N RUIN ; BREXIT DIRTY TRICKS Spain ' s plot to hobble ' tax haven ' Gibraltar Spain plan to use Brexit to wreak economic havoc on Gibraltar , explosive document reveal . leak paper show Madrid want to end ` ` unjustifiable privilege ' ' that have turn the Rock into a ` ` tax haven ' ' . Spanish official be also demand a ` ` new accord ' ' over flight into Gibraltar international airport . Fabian Picardo , Gibraltar ' s chief minister , last night accuse Spain of ` ` neo colonial ambition ' ' over the territory . he storm : ` ` the Spanish government ' S mask be slip . it be become abundantly clear that they want to try to use Brexit to take narrow advantage . ' ' the 23-page document be compile by Madrid ' S Foreign Ministry and report by Spain ' S El Pais yesterday . and it will confirm the bad fear of Tories who have urge Theresa May to demand the EU drop plan to give Spain a veto over Gibraltar in Brexit talk . if successful , Spain ' S bid would send tax skyhigh in Gibraltar and force dozen of business to leave . business currently pay a @card@ per cent tax while personal income be tax at @card@ per cent . Spain levy a @card@ per cent corporation tax . income tax be as high as @card@ per cent in Andalucia . Tory candidate Andrew Rosindell say : ` ` we must stand by Gibraltar just as we would any other part of Britain which be be bully . ' '
profit of doom ; Sun City All Change AFTER BREXIT Fears Britain be end the year on an economic high , admit two of the big Brexit doom-mongers . firm be grow at their fast in @card@ month , say the confederation of British Industry in an upbeat report out today . and in its last economic snapshot of @card@ , the BANK of England say consumer spending , lending by bank and housebuilding rise towards the end of year . before the Brexit vote both the CBI and Bank of England boss Mark Carney voice stern warning against quit the EU . but CBI principal economist Alpesh Paleja say yesterday : ` ` it ' S great to see the economy end the year on the up with growth strengthen across the private sector . ' ' he say firm ` ` want to work together to develop a post-Brexit economy that sustain growth and prosperity for all ' ' . his report say @card@ per cent of firm in manufacturing and retail have report growth , the high figure since last December ' S @card@ per cent . and @card@ per cent expect the healthy growth to continue into @card@ . the Bank of England say ` ` consumer spending growth remain resilient ' ' in the three month from August and tourist spending rise . ` ` Bank credit availability remain stable and generally exceed company ' demand for loan , ' ' it add . on property it say ` ` investor demand in commercial real estate edge high ' ' and ` ` housing market activity have recover ' ' . it ' S great to see economy end the year on the up CBI spending , lending and buiding be all rise Boe
take the Crisp ! ; Walkers blame a @card@ % rise on Brexit CRISPS giant Walkers be hike price and blame Brexit , despite make the treat in England with British spud . a 32g bag will rise ten per cent from 50p to 55p and a grab bag 75p to 80p , while a family pack will stay £1 but drop from 100g to 90g . US owner PepsiCo blame ` ` fluctuate exchange rate ' ' for the hike , claim they have push up the cost of import oil , seasoning and packaging . but Walkers , front by ex-footie star Gary Lineker , be accuse of cash in on ` ` uncertainty ' ' . Naeem Khaliq , of cash and carry giant United Wholesale Scotland , say : ` ` I think PepsiCo be boost its profit . ` ` Walkers be a British product make with British potato . so I think they be use Brexit for an excuse to say the price be go up . ' ' James Russell , of food distributor Blakemore , say : ` ` Brexit have cause uncertainty and I think this be massively opportunistic by PepsiCo . ' ' Walkers say the hike be to cover the ` ` additional cost ' ' on import good . the new price be set to come in last week but many retailer will pass on increase only once they have sell old stock . annabel .
you cock up election , do n't wreck Brexit too here they come . out of the crypt , once again . the clank of chain . the stench of Th ing st defeat . yes , it ' s our old friend the and try again to stop us leave the Fri Remainers . arise anlea European Union . since Theresa May ' S epic and hilarious catastrophe last week , when her party lose its majority , the undead Remainers have be on the warpath . ah , it ' S time now for a soft Brexit , they say ( mean pretty much no Brexit at all ) . Ruth Davidson , the Tory leader in Scotland , the Godawful Philip Hammond , the Chancellor . all the monkey who hitch their bandwagon to the wrong horse last summer and lose . they be now demand concession , as a consequence of the election . and the same siren voice be be hear from the continent . from that puffed-up ball of Luxembourgish phlegm Jean-Claude Juncker . and Donald Tusk . they now see a chink in our armour . they reckon we might be dissuade from leave altogether . and Theresa May , who be rightly feel vulnerable now , be be order to listen . so here ' s my advice to Theresa , free of charge . listen , May , you call an election when you should n't have call an election and fight a truly rotten campaign . you lose your party a sackful of seat . you almost hand the key of Downing Street to Jeremy Corbyn . in other word , you b*******ed it up big time . so do n't make two gargantuan error in the same week . you be clear , as we all be , that last summer a healthy majority of the British people decide we should leave the EU . and that mean www.LEAVE.No single market , no ` ` freedom of movement ' ' . remember ? the General Election , which you ballsed up spectacularly , be nothing to do with Brexit . a great many people who vote for Jeremy Corbyn last Thursday will have vote for Brexit last summer . I know , I ' ve speak to a hell of a lot of them . the mood about leave the EU have not change one iota . Labour , to its enormous credit , support the Brexit decision and do so throughout the campaign . Corbyn be able to recognise a democratic decision when he see one . you try to do the same . soften our stance on leave will cause fury among those who vote with the majority last June . but it will also make negotiate with the European union all the harder . those bureaucrat be shark . you will not get a good deal from them if you prevaricate . if you show weakness , it will be the bad for the UK . you should ring the horrible Donald Tusk immediately and say : ` ` nothing have change . ' ' you will have the support of the leave wing of the Labour Party , which hate the EU just as much as the Ukip lot hate the EU . if Philip Hammond start whine about ` ` soft Brexit ' ' , sack the idiot . he ' S not much use anyway . and face the likes of Tusk and Juncker with a bit of spine and resolve , know that a proper Brexit be what we vote for one year ago . do that and - who know ? - it might even improve your standing with the public . which be currently rock bottom .
time for a deal ALMOST @card@ month after the big vote , MP yesterday finally get around to debate the important business of the Brexit Bill . this be the big foreign policy decision in half a century and it open with member of Parliament argue over the deadline for Brexit . should it happen at midnight in Brussels , or midnight London time ? more importantly , who care ? car manufacturing giant tell MP yesterday that @card@ per cent of their production go overseas and over a third of that go to Europe . that make the EU four time big than the US in term of sale . Honda tell MP it need @card@ truck carry two million import component every day and hold just one hour of stock , while every @card@ minute of custom delay would cost £850,000 . but MP be squabble about the hand on the clock . and while all that be happen Theresa May be meet with Nicola Sturgeon to offer concession over the so-called Brexit power grab . Concerned MP have already put down @card@ page of amendment to the Brexit Bill - and that ' S before it get to the House of Lords . they have be offer a ` ` take it or leave it ' ' vote by Brexit Secretary David Davis which mean they must accept the deal he negotiate - however bad - or vote for no deal at all . and they be not happy . the last thing Mrs May need be rebellious Scot on the northern border , especially when her own Tory MSPs be join in the revolt . they agree with the rest of Holyrood that the Bill can not stand as it be and there must be concession which acknowledge the devolution settlement and respect Holyrood power . just like her negotiation with Europe , Mrs May have be force to give way to Scotland and not before time . it could all have be so much simple if only Mrs May have do what she say she would do on her first trip as PM : respect Scotland and produce a policy position agree across the UK . Westminster want to do all the decide , but it turn out they ca n't even decide the time .
FLEXI MIGRANTS ; UK ' could vary EU worker level after Brexit ' BREXIT @card@ Britain could have different limit on immigration for each sector of the economy after Brexit , it emerge yesterday . immigration minister Robert Goodwill suggest a flexible system could plug shortage in certain industry . he say the government want to avoid a post-Brexit ` ` cliff-edge ' ' drop in number as it will take time to train UK citizen . it could mean industry currently rely on EU worker such as healthcare , construction , hospitality and agriculture continue to employ high number of migrant from the continent . that would mirror a current scheme for non-EU worker , where visa be allocate depend on the need of different sector . Mr Goodwill , grill by a parliamentary committee yesterday , refuse to say if Britain will opt for a visa-based , points-based or another immigration system for EU citizen after we leave . end open-door immigration be Theresa May ' s top priority for Brexit talk but Mr Goodwill warn the government ' s pledge to cut number to the ten of thousand be ` ` not go to be do in the next two or three year ' ' . earlier this year Mr Goodwill propose charge firm £1,000 for every EU worker they bring in after Brexit to help slash number - but he be humiliate when No10 dump the idea hour later . the Sun say - Page ten
le Bruss Off ; May Summit SHOWDOWN ; EU leader play hardball on Brexit SULKING EU leader try to isolate Theresa May last night with tough threat if she push for a clean ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . it come as the PM try to mount a charm offensive at dinner for a deal that work for Britain as well as the EU . she be meet by a barrage of hostility over her plea for immigration control as well keep free trade link . French President Francois Hollande warn : ` ` if Theresa May want a hard Brexit , negotiation will be hard ' ' . and German leader Angela Merkel close down informal discussion after Mrs May ' s short speech , say beforehand that ` ` Brexit be on the agenda , briefly ' ' . Mrs May also have to contend with an over-familiar welcome kiss from EU Commission chief Jean-Claude Juncker . Downing Street insist Mrs May will not be put off . a No10 source say : ` ` it ' S negotiation . there be lot of thing be say . it do n't change our approach . she want to be constructive . ' ' it emerge yesterday that Mrs Merkel have order official not to speak to British diplomat about Brexit yet . forty-five per cent of brit want Mrs May to prioritise single market access while @card@ per cent favour control immigration , pollster say yesterday .
IMPROPERGANDA ; a TRAGIC Death TWISTED Into an EU Scare Campaign Mr Jozwik die after a drunken street scuffle . it be NOT murder . it be NOT racism . yet shameful Remain politician peddle it as a Brexit-fuelled slaying . this Polish man be use for ... THEY call it a Brexit murder . a political killing . an act of Leave-fuelled xenophobic hatred . the death of a Polish man after a brawl in Essex in August @card@ be proof , they say , that Briton vote to leave the EU have unleash dark prejudice . and now , they warn , these prejudice be turn violent . politician , EU bureaucrat and campaigner rush to pontificate about the death of 40-year-old Arek Jozwik in Harlow - a town where @card@ per cent of voter have choose leave in the referendum . they hold it up as bloody evidence that Brexit be build on anti-migrant fury . and bad be to come . this be just a snapshot of the horror that would define Brexit Britain . one year on , we now know they be lie . there be no evidence for their claim that this be a ` ` Brexit murder ' ' . it be just a tragic encounter on a boozy Saturday night out . the political elite ' s milk of Mr Jozwik ' S death be one of the most shameless misinformation campaign of recent time . on August @card@ , @card@ - just over two month after 17.4million Brits have vote to leave the EU - Mr Jozwik , a Polish national living and work in Harlow , be out drink with friend . at around 11.30pm they clash with some local teen . there be an argument and one of the teen , then @card@ , punch Mr Jozwik in the head . he fall and hit his skull on the pavement , suffer serious brain injury and never regain consciousness . he die two day later in Addenbrooke ' S hospital , Cambridge . for certain political and media type , still reel from the electorate ' s rejection of the EU , this be more than just a drunken dispute that end tragically - it be an act of political evil . instantly , and without the benefit of evidence , they label Mr Jozwik ' s death a Brexit crime . for the Remain-leaning press , the killing bolster both their prejudice that the ` ` low-information ' ' rabble who vote to leave be drive by anti-immigrant sentiment , and their warning that Brexit would embolden them to be more openly racist . Jakub Krupa , of the Polish Press Agency , write in the Guardian that the killing ` ` expose the reality of post-referendum racism ' ' . European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker also use it to attack Brexit . he tell the European Parliament : ` ` we European can never accept Polish worker be harass , beat up or even murder on the street of Essex . ' ' Robert Halfon , Tory MP for Harlow , say the killing show that some people ` ` from the sewer ' ' be use Brexit to ` ` exploit division ' ' . meanwhile , the leftish Twittersphere go into meltdown . tweet included ` ` welcome to Brexit Britain ' ' ' ' ( Jozwik Britain . ` ` , be ) murder for be Polish ' ' , and ` ` this be what be encourage by Farage , Johnson , Cameron . ' ' the Polish ambassador to the UK , Arkady Rzegocki , say Mr Jozwik ' S death be cause by hate , and there would be ` ` much more after Brexit ' ' . but it be n't true . none of it . this cynical narrative about Brexit cause Mr Jozwik ' S death be build on lie , misinformation and prejudice . the trial of the Harlow teenager who have punch Mr Jozwik have not even take place . the political abuse of this killing start to unravel in December last year , when it be reveal that the Crown Prosecution Service would not be treat it as a hate crime . the CPS suggest there be no who punch Mr Jozwik be evidence that the ` ` shrimp ' ' of a lad drive by anti-Polish prejudice . not only that , it also be n't murder . the charge be manslaughter . the subsequent trial of the teen , who can not be name for legal reason , make it clear that this be just a tragic , late-night incident with no political undertone at all . and that Mr Jozwik be not an entirely innocent party in the row . evidence in court suggest that he and his friend ` ` appear to be drink and smell of alcohol ' ' . blood test show Mr Jozwik be around twice the drink-drive limit . in court , the boy responsible for the killer punch claim the Polish man be ` ` aggressive and loud ' ' and say : ` ` fight me , fight me . ' ' he also say it be the Poles who use racist language . he say one of the Polish man grab a friend of his and call him a ` ` n***** ' ' . he add that he be ` ` scared ' ' and ` ` I just do n't know what they be go to do next ' ' . a scuffle ensue and CCTV show him punch Mr Jozwik from behind . Patrick Upward , for the defence , tell the court : ` ` the deceased and his companion , accord to witness , be staggering from drink . ` ` they make racist remark to the youth and invite violence ... and they be considerably big and strong than the young people . ` ` it be after the deceased push one of the youngster that this defendant do what he do . ' ' even prosecutor Rosina Cottage QC say : ` ` the prosecution do not say that [ the youth ] think for a moment that what he do would result in the death of a man . ' ' accord to psychological report the boy regret his action and feel remorse over Mr Jozwik ' S death . he do not mean to kill him . what have be present as a Brexit-linked , hateful murder be nothing of the kind . even Mr Jozwik ' S brother Radek , @card@ , say the killing be not racist . speak of his relative who live in Britain , he tell the Sun : ` ` none of us have ever suffer any racism . ` ` I never think his death be race-related . I think he be in the wrong place at the wrong time . English people have always be friendly and welcome . ' ' last week , that Harlow teenager be sentence to three-and-a-half year in a young offender ' institution , for manslaughter . the people who make such a big political deal of Mr Jozwik ' s death at the time say nothing . perhaps they be too ashamed that they exploit a tragedy to score political point . ashamed that , as they rail against the alleged prejudice of Brexit Britain , they reveal their own prejudice - their snobby fear and loathing of the people of Britain whose only ` ` crime ' ' be to reject the EU and vote for more democracy . Brendan O'Neill be editor of online magazine Spiked . ' Racist remark '
Boris amnesty for illegal just reward crime I Ca N'T believe that Boris Johnson - who spearhead the ` ` take back control ' ' Brexit campaign - want an amnesty for illegal immigrant who have be here for ten year . this must never be allow . that these people have evade detection for that amount of time be a damn testament to our own weak border control and immigration enforcement . ten year without detection , hide in plain sight , be a disgrace and should not be see as something to reward . these people have enter the country illegally . they be criminal and should be track down and deport . Dave Hughes Pontefract , West York Boris Johnson ' S call for an amnesty for thousand of illegal immigrant be NOT what Brexit fan want to hear . he be well aware that immigration be one of the key issue among Brexit plan . so his idea of an amnesty for everyone who have sneak into Britain will only inflame the situation . a Cabinet minister warn that the ` ` insane idea ' ' would make ordinary brit furious . yeah , 17million of us . Mick BIDEWELL Newcastle upon Tyne I THOUGHT Boris Johnson be for leave and work hard to give us Brexit . but now I have my doubt . we vote leave because we be concern about immigration and the million of pound it have cost in housing , job , benefit , school , the NHS and so on - and what it be still cost . Janet Burridge Clacton-on-Sea , Essex I Always suspect that Boris Johnson be pro-immigration . his outrageous suggestion to give ten of thousand of illegal immigrant in the UK amnesty will only encourage more arrival . the mess create by Blair and Cameron will be add to by Boris Johnson . Alan ANDREWS Paignton , Devon MALLS and supermarket be ablaze with decoration celebrate Christmas . but do young child know why they receive gift at this time of year ? do they think it be Santa Claus ' S birthday ? one thing be for sure , retailer love all the money it bring them . William Buckley Poole , Dorset I AGREE with Sun columnist Jane Moore . Corbyn and the Labour leadership be go far leave by be sadden by the loss of Fidel Castro , give the number of human right violation he be guilty of . it would serve them right if Ed Balls make a comeback and push for the leadership , and win . that would make politics far more interesting . jack Amer Gorleston , Norfolk the country be almost £2trillion in debt and we ' re suffer social care cutback while try to pay back our national debt . cut foreign aid be a no brainer , be n't it ? john Wells Bedworth , Warwickshire A School be ask parent to pay a £1 entrance fee to see their kid ' nativity play . each pound will go towards teach foreign kid English . the government should pay . David WEALL Stockport , Cheshire Well do to Sky Sports for its swift action in sack Eric Bristow for his vile tweet about the victim of the football sex abuse scandal . it beggar belief how famous people think they can get away with post such ignorant and hurtful comment on social medium and expect to not face repercussion . maybe he will think twice next time . Ian Laird Prenton , Merseyside TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply THOSE on Twitter abuse Kate Bush for support Theresa May should be ashamed of themselves . in a democracy , everyone be entitle to support any party they want to . if they have criticise Kate for her caterwaul , I would have some sympathy . les Griffiths , Pontefract , West Yorks So nine out of ten burglary go unpunished , many be not even investigate . yet our police can hide sneaky camera van @card@ yard from a static speed camera to maximise revenue . GP , Luton PM Mrs May be quite correct to stop the mismanagement of fat-cat tycoon ' pension pot . will she kindly start within her own Conservative Party ? Phil Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
United front to face Brexit fallout ; SAYS @card@ @card@ @card@ THESE be change day . it would have be almost inconceivable last week that Labour would put out a statement effectively say they ' d consider Scottish independence . but yesterday ' S carefully word declaration from Kezia Dugdale be almost inevitable after Brexit . all option must be on the table amid huge uncertainty about our future . so , Nicola Sturgeon ' s bid to form a cross-party group to advise on how Scotland navigate the post-Brexit political minefield be welcome . she be go to need all the help that she can get . unity in Scotland among the turmoil UK-wide be an important signal to send out to the wide world , as we attempt to minimise the economic shock of Brexit . even the Tories of Ruth Davidson , leave - whose UK leader ' s tactical bungle land us in this situation - have agree to help advise on talk with the EU . the party which will be represent in the advisory panel be agree on one thing : we ' re well off in Europe . apart from a handful of Tory MSPs , that be . but despite Scottish Labour ' S statement , the cross-party group will be anything but unite on the issue of independence . this present an obvious problem . the only possible way for Scotland to stay in the EU - under current rule - seem to be that we become independent then Brussels let us take over the UK ' S membership . so it ' s go to get very complicated . as if it be n't already . but the First Minister be right to bring as many voice as possible on board . she ' S show strong leadership at a time of deep uncertainty . however , it ' s vital we do n't get suck into this constitutional quagmire and lose sight of the basic . our school , our hospital , our struggle public service . Ms Sturgeon be right to pledge she wo n't take her eye off the ball with day-to-day government . but we see what happen last time , when school standard slip and wait list grow amid the focus on the @card@ referendum . so , we applaud your leadership , First Minister . but we ' ll also be keep a very close eye on the thing that matter most to the life of ordinary Scot .
double TROUBLE ; BREXIT TALKS NEW Low ; EU ' s divorce bill hike slap down by Davis ft th t d BREXIT talk hit a new low after the EU stun Britain ' s negotiate team with extra cash demand . the UK face fresh double trouble over the divorce bill . the EU now want us to pay into its budget until the end of @card@ - nearly two year after we quit . and we be be expect to fork out extra fee for access to the single market and custom union during a transition period . EU chief negotiator Michael Barnier ' s fresh demand would leave UK taxpayer pay into foreign aid for year . this would include fund to build bridge for wildlife and even ladder for fish . the extra money request be addition to those initially outline by the EU in June - and they leave the late round of Brexit negotiation deadlock . Brexit Secretary David Davis vow to fight over the size of the divorce bill - estimate by some in Brussels at £80billion . he tell the Sun his team would ` ` go through line by line ' ' and ` ` interrogate it rigorously ' ' . he add : ` ` the British taxpayer payer would expect nothing less and your reader certainly . ' ' at a bad-tempered press conference , Mr Barnier accuse the UK Government of ` ` nostalgia ' ' in its desire to keep the benefit of the single market - suggest Britain regret its Brexit decision . Mr Davis hit back : ` ` I would not confuse a belief in the free market for nostalgia . ' ' Mr Barnier say the two side be ` ` quite far away ' ' from say that ` ` sufficient progress ' ' have take place before the EU agree to start negotiate a new trade deal . matthew.dathan
BREXPORT Bonanza ; EU EXIT Vote BOOSTS UK ; £1bn be wipe off trade gap More than £1billion have be wipe off Britain ' s vast trade gap deficit since Brexit , official figure show yesterday . they reveal good and service enjoy a major post-referendum export boost since June . the gap last month be £4.5billion , down from £5.6billion before the vote to quit the EU . it be drive by an £800million jump in export to £43.8billion , the Office for National Statistics say . the decrease in the value of the pound have make UK good more competitive on the global market , help our export to soar . the trade gap be also help by a £300million reduction in import last month , down to £48.3billion . Howard Archer , chief UK and European economist at IHS Global Insight , say the result underline post-Brexit Britain ' S resilience . he add : ` ` a major hope for the UK economy be that the substantial overall weakening of the pound will increasingly feed through to boost foreign demand for UK good and service . ` ` while the pound have recently firm from its post-Brexit vote low , it be still at an extremely competitive level and be likely to remain so for an extended period . ' ' the news come as the building industry show a slight recovery in the month after Brexit . the ONS say construction output stall in July , compare with a one per cent drop in activity in June . last night a Ukip spokesman say : ` ` even those big corporate that fund the Remain campaign be now change their tune about how they say the UK economy be go . ` ` this be not the result of panic action by the government as some try to claim , but of the health and resilience of the British economy . ' '
leave ' S on the line ; May ' S Europe VOW ; ' full steam ahead ' for Brexit Theresa May vow last night minister be work ` ` full steam ahead ' ' to complete Brexit . it come amid claim that delay could see Britain stay in the EU for another three year . Yesterday City insider say ` ` chaotic ' ' Whitehall department be not ready to trigger Article @card@ , the first step to Brexit , for a year . and there be even claim we may not leave until after @card@ . lead Tory Eurosceptic Jacob Rees-Mogg say trigger Article @card@ in January be ` ` reasonable ' ' . he add : ` ` any suggestion Whitehall be not ready just wo n't do . ' ' a Cabinet source say yesterday problem hire staff for David Davis and Liam Fox ' s Brexit and International Trade department be stall progress . but a No10 source say last night : ` ` it be full steam ahead . ` ` the Prime Minister have promise to get the job do . minister ' diary be jam-packed with meeting . there be no slowdown or diversion . ' ' City insider claim the French and German election next year , plus department not be fully staff , would cause delay . but Tory MEP Daniel Hannan say : ` ` the process be under way now , the civil servant be work on it . the machinery be whir . ' ' Brexit-backing Tory Eurosceptic Peter Bone add ` ` I have absolutely no doubt that Theresa May will want this do and dust as quickly as possible . ' '
the Sun SAYS Brexit buffoon THE Sun have some advice for Ireland ' s naive young prime minister : shut your gob and grow up . Leo Varadkar may not like Brexit . so what ? he need to accept it ' S happening . his priority should not be pick hole in our position . it should be help make Brexit work for million of his citizen and ours , include by engage constructively on a border solution . he be too busy disrespect 17.4million voter of a country whose billion stop Ireland go bust as recently as @card@ . a country on which so much of his economy depend . we be Ireland ' s big trading partner and near neighbour . the effect of a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' could be catastrophic . yet Varadkar ' s rookie diplomacy , puerile insult and threat to veto trade negotiation be bring it ever closer . we can only assume his arrogance stem from a delusion that he can single-handedly stop Brexit . indeed Ireland ' s political establishment clearly believe we can be force to vote the ` ` right ' ' way at a second referendum , just as they make their citizen do over the EU Lisbon Treaty they initially reject . it be not go to happen . David Davis rightly name France and Germany as the roadblock to progress , even as other EU nation want a deal . he should not overlook the showboating obstinacy of Ireland ' s Varadkar , a man increasingly out of his depth .
call for drink tax to be cut for Brexit THE Government must reduce the price of booze here to stop any impact from Brexit , the Drinks Industry Group of Ireland have claim . with a new Eurostat survey show Ireland be the most expensive EU country to buy alcohol in , the group ' S secretary Donall O'Keefe say : ` ` with Brexit negotiation about to begin , we need to ensure Ireland retain its competitiveness . ` ` since the Brexit vote , we have see an increase in cross-border shopping and an eight per cent decline in visitor number from Britain . ` ` these be issue that will impact Ireland ' S competitiveness and the government must act to mitigate against them . ` ` a reduction in our excise tax rate would go a long way in restore competitiveness and ensure Ireland be protect against any impact of Brexit in the future . ' '
Deidre ' s photo casebook ; Dear Deidre Jasmine ' S BREXIT BOTHER I Wish THEY ' D Hurry UP and GET ON WITH This BREXIT . it ' S ALREADY GONE ON Far Too Long A LOT of People do N'T AGREE WITH BREXIT , Dad , and I ' M One of Them ! UGH , I ' M Going To My Room I Wish you AND Jasmine WOULD N'T Keep ARGUING ABOUT Politics . I FEEL like piggy in the Middle Well , Until SHE STARTS PAYING THE BILLS , SHE Can Keep Quiet . I ' M Sick of BEING PUT in My Place By Her . . . because I do N'T pay the bill , I ' M NOT ALLOWED To Have an opinion . and when I DO , it ' S THE OPPOSITE of Dad ' S . . . Dear Jasmine , it ' S totally normal as you grow into adulthood to want to bounce your opinion off your parent , perhaps especially if you disagree - and Brexit have set us all argue like no issue have for decade . but sometimes it ' s good to agree to disagree , because you and your dad be n't go to change one another ' S mind . talk politics with your mate . talk family stuff with your mum and dad . Deidre
no Ham ' S Land ; Row as Hammond call for ' transitional ' Brexit LEAVING EU @card@ Chancellor Philip Hammond cause a fresh Cabinet rift yesterday by call for a ` ` transitional ' ' post-Brexit deal . Mr Hammond say rush negotiation could threaten financial stability and create pain and uncertainty for British business . and in a thinly-veiled dig at Brexit Secretary David Davis and Trade Secretary Liam Fox , he say ` ` thoughtful politician ' ' be of the same opinion . it come after Mr Davis last week rule out a transitional deal . Mr Hammond ' S comment , to the Treasury Select Commons Committee , raise the prospect Brexit will take much longer than the hoped-for two year . he tell MP an ` ` emerge view ' ' among business , regulator and civil servant be that ` ` a long period ' ' to manage Brexit would ` ` be generally helpful ' ' . Mr Hammond also say it would take time to hire extra border staff and upgrade it at port to check EU import . Eurosceptic Steve Baker say he would have no problem with a transition deal if it see the country take back control of border , money and law . Labour ' S Stephen Kinnock say : ` ` not sign a transitional agreement would mean punish tariff which would hit British business and raise price in shop . ' '
BREXIT ' SLUMP Risk ' Warning ; SLUMP Warning BREXIT could tip Scotland into recession , a report warn yesterday . a think-tank lead by expert Brian Ashcroft fear an EU quit vote ` ` pose a real threat ' ' to our falter economy . it would be a major blow to trade , investment and finance , they predict . Prof Ashcroft , of Strathclyde Uni , say : ` ` the continued on Page @card@ continue from Page one country ' S economy may fail to avoid a recession in the come month . but a vote to leave would place an unnecessary burden on company . ' ' the academic , who front the Fraser of Allander Institute , say there be a ` ` high probability ' ' of fallout from Brexit . his team still expect growth by @card@ per cent this year - revise down from @card@ per cent in March . they blame the oil price slump and loss of thousand of North Sea job for the glum forecast . it say Scotland now ` ` rely solely on the service sector ' ' for growth . the forecast come as David Cameron warn Brexit may shrink Scotland ' s budget amid prediction of a UK financial ` ` hole ' ' up to £40billion . Nat MP Angus Robertson tell him in Westminster any cut would hit ` ` NHS , school and key local government service ' ' .
stop dance it ' S just week till the Brexit process be trigger and Nicola Sturgeon be still dance around the issue of a second independence referendum . yesterday she claim there be a Tory government plot to strike at the very heart of devolution by use Brexit as an excuse to claw power away from Holyrood . she have in mind power over area like fishery and farming which currently lie at Brussels . those control will come back to the UK after Brexit - and since farming and fishing be both devolve area , perhaps they should , by right , transfer automatically to Scotland . the big aspect of these responsibility be , of course , the money . who will decide how much money be spend on farm subsidy and who get it ? Scottish farmer get a huge chunk of EU subsidy - much more than our population share would allow - and changing that could , quite literally , alter the landscape of Scotland . but Holyrood do n't currently control fishing quota . we ' re not go to miss what we ' ve never have . Ms Sturgeon have be the voice of reason since the Brexit vote , urge consensus and a middle way while , at the same time , swing the baseball bat of indyref2 quietly behind her back . but her patience be begin to sound an awful lot like reluctance . the vote have be ` ` highly likely ' ' , ` ` increasingly likely ' ' , ` ` almost unavoidable ' ' and , yesterday , it be ` ` almost necessary ' ' . with Brexit loom , a decision must be make . on the other hand , we be week away from the SNP conference . be that when the conditional tense of ` ` maybe ' ' will turn into the tense condition of another referendum ?
naked Fury ; BREXIT FALLOUT CONTINUES ; Nat slam May ' s EU ' power grab ' Nicola Sturgeon yesterday vow to stand in the way of the PM ' S flagship Brexit law - brand it a ` ` naked power grab ' ' . the First Minister insist she would throw up hurdle because the plan do n't automatically shift EU responsibility to Holyrood . and speak after Brexit Secretary David Davis reveal the so-called repeal bill , she claim it fail to ` ` protect the interest of all the UK nation ' ' . Ms Sturgeon add : ` ` it be a naked power grab - an attack on the founding principle of devolution and could destabilise our economy . ' ' the row centre on whether EU control of issue like employment , farming , fishing and the environment will pass to Westminster or Holyrood . Theresa May want to set UK-wide rule in some policy area before hand the rest to the devolve parliament . but the SNP want everything to go directly to Holyrood . Scots Secretary David Mundell accuse the Nat of manufacture a row and claim the plan would add to Holyrood power . the Tory say : ` ` this be not a power grab - it be a power bonanza for the Scottish Parliament . ' ' the bill be design to copy EU legislation into British law . but the stand-off raise the prospect of Westminster have to overrule Holyrood to keep the plan on track . ck . ng-convenget governsion legisl under a long-standing convention , MSPs get to vote on whether to give the UK government permission to legislate on devolve policy area . g gate icy nt turgeon th you ch in a joint statement with Wales ' First Minister Carwyn Jones , Ms Sturgeon say if the plan do n't change , their government ` ` can not recommend legislative consent be give ' ' . gange , govannot recomlegislative iven ' ' g. s Westder aid S trynd th you the SNP ' s Westminster leader Ian Blackford say Mr Mundell be try to ` ` defend the indefensible ' ' . he add : ` ` it be a Westminster power grab lay bare . ' ' re . ' ' sson @ n .
may have To EMBRACE BREXIT REBELS THE Government ' s defeat on a Brexit amendment this week be embarrassing . it show the limit of Theresa May ' S authority . the question now be whether this rebellion lead to more or not . as one minister put it : ` ` successful rebellion either increase the appetite for it or concentrate mind . ' ' at the top of government , they be console themselves with the thought that though they lose this vote , the defeat have reveal what really motivate some of the rebel . one well-place Tory tell me ` ` Dominic and Soubs ' ' - the leader of the rebellion the former Attorney General Dominic Grieve and the former minister Anna Soubry , both below - ` ` have show their true colour this week . this be n't about meaningful amendment , but block Brexit . ' ' they hope this revelation will help them peel off some of the other rebel . they believe that most realise just how dangerous stopping , or dilute beyond recognition , Brexit would be . but there be lesson the government should learn from this defeat . first of all , the whipping do n't get it right . the whip have a hard task and it be not make easier by have a deputy chief whip , Esther McVey , who have never whip before . it be also bizarre to have the good TV performer in the Tory party - she be a breakfast TV presenter before become an MP - in a job where they be not allow to go on the medium . May also need to show these rebel that there be a way back . when she reshuffle her team , she should make a point of bring one of them back into the fold .
the Sun SAYS Blair-faced liar Tony Blair have tell some brazen lie in his time but yesterday ' s stomach-churn dishonesty on Brexit be putrid even for him . it be n't just the fact that he twist . it ' s his feign concern for democracy , his forked-tongued duplicity about give voter the ` ` right to rethink ' ' any Brexit deal - when his ONLY motive be secure the chance to negate their first decision and reverse the tide of history . who do this fade snake oil salesman imagine he and his revolting underling Mandelson , Adonis and Campbell still represent ? surely not the ` ` Remain resistance ' ' , since every we-know-best utterance convert Remainers into Leavers . Brexit be in part the final revolt against Blair ' s disastrous misjudgement . he mislead us all and invade Iraq . he fling open our border . he let his weird Chancellor Gordon Brown ' s borrowing wreck the economy , necessitate austerity . then Blair line his pocket - return only to try to sabotage the big democratic mandate in our history . the Brexit poll have barely move since . but one survey have a significant finding : that a loathing of Blair unite majority of Leavers , Remainers , Tory , Labour and Lib-Dem voter , male and female , of every age and class , in every region of England , Scotland and Wales . who exactly do he think he still have the power to persuade ? more seriously , how can he be so delude as to imagine Brexit can be painlessly reverse after all the vote cast for it by the public and Parliament ? it would trigger constitutional meltdown , a total collapse of trust in democracy and an eruption of violence . a Sun front page once ask if Blair be ` ` the most dangerous man in Britain ' ' . he now seem to aspire to it . thank God so few still listen to him .
pay AND DISMAY ; EU threaten to keep UK ' s £3bn loan until @card@ BREXIT STINK @card@ Fury erupt yesterday after a top Eurocrat say billion in taxpayer cash will be lock in a Brussels bank for @card@ year . the European Investment Bank chief say £3billion be tie up in long-term loan . vice president Alexander Stubb warn Britain could lose a further £30billion if project sanction by the bank ` ` turn sour ' ' . Mr Stubb say : ` ` I will do everything in my power to alleviate the pain , but the economic fact be just such that there be no winner in Brexit . ' ' States set up the EIB in @card@ to make loan at rate below commercial bank . the UK have a @card@ per cent stake . Brexit backer point to the shareholding as an example of the ` ` asset ' ' Britain can claim as a credit in divorce bill talk . Ex-Brexit Minister David Jones welcome the recognition that cash be owe but say a 30-year wait to get it be unacceptable . the row come as Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson again urge the EU to start talk about a future trading relationship . speak in Portugal , he blast EU delay over a deal on citizen ' right post- Brexit . he say : ` ` it be unthinkable that any EU citizen will be ask to leave or have their right ' damage . ' ' his Portuguese counterpart Augusto Santos Silva say a good Brexit deal between the UK and the EU would be ` ` win win ' ' .
no BRAKESIT ; PM Takes ON Euro ' WREXITEERS ' Defiant May vow she wo n't buckle over exit Brazen Clegg back elite ' S plot to derail process DEFIANT Theresa May last night vow to smash ` ` antidemocratic ' ' bid to block Brexit as arrogant Remain campaigner plot a second referendum . in her most challenging day since enter Downing Street , the PM tell Euro leader Britain ' s timetable to leave the EU would not be blow off course by High Court judge . and Ministers slam pro-EU MP Nick Clegg and Owen Smith as they vow to use every parliamentary trick to thwart our departure . a No @card@ source say : ` ` the PM be clear . the British people vote to leave the European Union and we ' re absolutely commit to deliver on their verdict . ' ' the counter attack come as Mrs May reel under a fresh onslaught follow Thursday ' S High Court victory for ` ` Wrexiteer ' ' Gina Miller that Brexit can not be trigger without parliamentary approval . former Lib Dem leader Mr Clegg confirm his party would cash in on the ruling by refuse support in the commons unless the government commit to a public vote on the final term of the Brexit deal . Mr Clegg say the Lib Dems could use their army of peer in the unelected House of Lords to block any agreement they do not like . and in an extraordinary move , Tory peer Baroness Wheatcroft add the Lords would stall a Brexit ` ` until we have a clear idea of what it actually entail ' ' . within hour Mrs May be hit by a third bolt from the blue as Brexitbacking Tory MP Stephen Phillips resign . the barrister have repeatedly demand the PM lie out her negotiation in the House of Commons and pal say he be furious at Theresa May ' s ` ` lurch ' ' to the right . the bombshell resignation come as Downing Street be brief on detail of Mrs May ' s phone call with German Chancellor Angela Merkel and European Commission president Jean Claude Juncker . Euroission er . aos , hed f eral Rom in the chaos , bookie slash the odd of a snap General Election from @card@ to @card@ , point out Mrs May ' S majority could fall to as low as eight . rity hief rage Ukip chief Nigel Farage encourage her to go to the poll and win the mandate to force through a ` ` clean ' ' Brexit . h . a id : he say : ` ` we ' re in a bit of a pickle . ' ' exit ther furious Brexit supporter round on Mr Clegg and other Remainers for ride roughshod over the wish of the 17.4million who vote out on June @card@ . hod on ny , n in Germany , Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson dismiss talk of a second referendum by slate those try to put ` ` the toothpaste back into the tube ' ' . and in a statement approve by no @card@ , junior Brexit Minister David Jones storm : ` ` Nick Clegg have give the game away . ` ` he do n't like the answer the people give in the referendum and now he ' S admit he want to work with other party to try to block the process of Britain leave the EU . it be profoundly anti-democratic . ' ' Widely respect Tory backbencher Dominic Raab say : ` ` Leavers and Remainers should be work together to deliver the good deal for Britain . ` ` instead , the Liberal Democrats be plot wreck tactic . most people outside Westminster will take a dim view of their arrogant disdain for democracy . ' ' Downing Street insist that Mrs May be still stick to her original timetable , that Britain would serve Article @card@ and begin the two-year divorce process by the end of March . but expert say this would be almost impossible if in January the h h Supreme Court throw out the government ' s appeal of the shatter High Court verdict . that would mean have to draw up legislation so MP can vote on Article @card@ . this would then allow pro-EU MP to add amendment - essentially condition the government would have to meet before they give their backing . Labour ' S Mr Smith , thump in this summer ' s leadership contest with Jeremy Corbyn , insist he would not support Article @card@ unless the PM vow Britain would remain in the single market . and Labour backbencher Jamie Reed joke on Twitter the Article @card@ legislation would look like a Christmas tree as h ld b d there would be so many amendment hang off it . meanwhile pro-EU campaigner Ms Miller boast her Marvel fan kid think she be Wonder Woman . the wealthy businesswoman say she celebrate win Thursday ' s landmark case with a glass of champagne at home in Chelsea . and she say her 11-year-old son tell her : ` ` thank you , Mummy , it ' ll be me and my friend that suffer if we do n't have democracy ' ' .
Tories must tell us what Brexit mean it be an early start for Cabinet on Tuesday . before the meeting proper they have @card@ minute of polling on the state of the Tory party . it do n't make for cheerful viewing . David Mundell , the Scottish Secretary , sum up the mood of the meeting when he tell Theresa May , to chuckle , that his first impression from all the datum be that she should n't call an election any time soon . the problem for the Tories be voter be wary of their value and feed up with austerity . ` ` it be the age-old Conservative problem , that we ' re bring in to clean up the mess and once people feel that ' s do they be not sure they want us , ' ' be how one of those present sum it up . one Remain-voting Secretary of State tell me they be surprise to find that concern about public service appear to have do more damage to the Tory brand than Brexit . I ' m tell the presentation show a ` ` disproportionate number of people who vote Remain go Labour but the principal driver of that be n't Brexit but public service ' ' . ( some present dispute this interpretation . ) Prosperous Britain the fascinating question be , what account for this shift ? in @card@ , the fact the Tories have a plan to the tackle the deficit be a strength for them and a weakness for Labour . but just two year later the opposite be true . voter be feed up with austerity . one minister put this down to the ` ` impatience ' ' of modern politics . voter simply think deficit reduction have go on too long and that , ` ` you should have sort this by now ' ' . the other electoral conundrum for the Tories be that the great hostility to Jeremy Corbyn be among traditional Labour voter , not those who switch to Labour at the last election . this suggest the Tories ' good chance of win a majority at the next election lie in traditionally Labour seat where the Tories come close last time , such as Bishop Auckland , in the North East , which Labour have hold since @card@ I be tell Gavin Barwell , the PM ' s chief of staff , be particularly convince of this . so , what should the Tory do ? well , firstly stop argue among themselves . the Cabinet be repeatedly remind that the less united it be , the less the public will think of them as a competent government . the next thing they need be a positive vision , to show the public what they be for . they must show voter how they want the country to be different after Brexit . but the problem be , as one influential Cabinet minister put it : ` ` You ' ve get to feel it to communicate it . ' ' so Theresa May - who vote Remain - find it hard to argue with passion that Brexit will lead to a happy , more prosperous Britain . she be not alone in this problem . one of those intimately involve in draw up the Tories ' electoral strategy lament that the top three people in the government be all ambivalent or negative about Brexit . indeed , Mrs May ' S deputy , Damian Green , have make it clear he would vote Remain again . while no one could confuse Philip Hammond , with his regular dire warning about the economic consequence of diverge from the EU , with a Brexit enthusiast . but the government must explain what Brexit be for . if it do n't , the voter simply wo n't understand why they be spend so much time on it , rather than bread-and-butter domestic issue . lJames Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator
the BREXOR CIST ; Budget @card@ FF Say WE WO N'T ESCAPE UK Vote DEMONS Fianna Fail launch a blister attack on the government yesterday - brand its ` ` Brexit-proofing ' ' @card@ budget as ` ` pathetic ' ' . Finance Minister Michael Noonan announce a raft of measure to deal with the UK ' s vote fallout . he reveal break for tourism , food and agricultural business most directly hit by the UK ' s June decision to pull out of the European Union . Noonan say : ` ` whatever the final settlement , we know with certainty Brexit have increase the risk to the Irish economy . ` ` as well as introduce specific measure to assist particular sector of the economy , we must also place safety net to protect us against future economic shock . ` ` we must put in place economic shock absorber to enable us to deploy resource to reduce or eliminate the impact of future economic shock . ' ' however , the measure do not go far enough , accord to Fianna Fail ' s finance spokesman Michael McGrath . Ash Ireland . ' ' say the World Health the most important to quit and from experiment Dr Patrick Doorley Government . ' ' be to smoke free Ireland . ' ' increase however , say : veer off a pre-released version of his speech in the Dail , the Cork TD say spend of around ( Euro ) 4million on Brexit-related measure amount to ` ` bit and bob ' ' . he rage : ` ` you have provide ( Euro ) 3million extra on the Jobs and Enterprise department . it ' s pathetic , absolutely pathetic . ` ` if you compare that to what be be do throughout Europe by all of the other main country who have a lot less at stake in the Brexit process compare to what we have - my God they ' re invest a lot more and they ' re a lot more prepared for what be come down the track . ' ' McGrath add : ` ` that package be pathetic and it ' s go to have to be address and change very , very quickly . ' ' the Irish Business and Employers Confederation say an @card@ per cent plunge in the value of sterling versus the euro since the June @card@ Brexit referendum put thousand of export job at risk . CEO Danny McCoy say : ` ` as Brexit risk crystallise , it be clear the Budget do not go far enough . tax reform to help level the play field with the UK be step in the right direction , but do n't go far enough . business expose to the deepen currency crisis require additional support . ` ` a substantial currency crisis package be need within @card@ day . an urgent , cross-departmental response , coordinate by the Taoiseach , must involve the re-prioritisation of current resource and new spending . ' ' despite cut its economic growth forecast for next year to @card@ per cent , Minister Noonan say the Irish economy be in good shape , grow strongly and should continue to do so over the come year . public spending Minister Paschal Donohoe say a number of government department and agency would be give more money to deal with the threat of Brexit , not least the Department of Agriculture , Food and the Marine , which be get an extra ( Euro ) 119million . he say : ` ` while Brexit have implication for us all , it be our rural and regional community who may be look with most anxiety to the trigger of Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty by the British government . ` ` this be a reflection of the concern of people in some part of our country where alternative employment may be scarce be they to lose their job , or where investment have historically be low than in our large city . ' ' meanwhile , McGrath insist his party have have an impact on the Budget . he say while Fianna Fail do n't get ` ` everything ' ' it want , it secure some ` ` vital progress on a number of priority set out in confidence and supply arrangement - include in health , social protection , education , housing and fair reduction in the universal social charge ' ' . however , he add : ` ` I want to be clear on one thing . while we do n't write this budget - from the outside we influence it as good we could in the direction of a fair and more decent Ireland and we make no apology for that . ` ` Today ' S budget be a good budget because of the influence we have bring to bear . on the face of it , it be a fair budget than the last five introduce by the previous Fine Gael and Labour government . ' ' Social Protection Minister Leo Varadkar say Budget @card@ be design to make sure ` ` everyone benefit from the recovery ' ' . he say : ` ` it be a modest budget and there be no giveaway . nonetheless , more than @card@ people will benefit from the first increase in weekly payment since @card@ . ' ' however , Sinn Fein Finance spokesperson Pearse Doherty describe the announcement as a ` ` back-room budget ' ' that be lack in vision . he say : ` ` during the past few decade the Irish people have each year live with the consequence of budget draft by Fine Gael or Fianna Fail . now we get both in one budget - the politics of the nod and wink , the politics of short-termism . the cycle of boom , bust , economic collapse , emigration and underinvestment will carry on regardless . ' ' Cormac O'Sullivan Cork , @card@ ( Euro ) @card@ a year be n't go to make anyone a millionaire but it ' s well than nothing . after the hard year it ' S nice to see money come back . Ann O'Hanlon Cork , @card@ I do N'T smoke but if I do , pay ( Euro ) @card@ a packet would surely have to be an incentive to give them up . for me , the tax cut will be a help . Niamh Crofton Kildare , @card@ I do N'T think there be much in it for student . they certainly do n't decrease fee and at this stage I suppose they never will . Aivija Kinmiua Dublin , @card@ the new first-time buyer scheme be interesting . it ' S hard to know if it will make entry into the market easy or push up price further . Joe Fallon Kildare , @card@ the rural broadband initiative be something I be really very excite about . I really hope it go some way to tackle the problem . Malo O'Connor CELBRIDGE , @card@ as a student work part-time , the reduction in the USC will help a lot . it ' s hard be a student these day so every little help . Rachel Charters Kildare , @card@ it ' S brilliant to see them make an effort to hire teacher again . our population be grow and we need extra teacher to meet the demand . Aoife Redmond CELBRIDGE , @card@ THAT extra ( Euro ) @card@ per week may not sound like a lot , but over time it will help . people would complain if they take that amount from us .
may & Delay ; Brexit trade decision put off Bid to unite war Cabinet Exclusive Theresa May have delay a key decision about what Britain want from a Brexit trade deal - to buy more time to unite her war big beast . the Cabinet have be due to hammer out the issue next Tuesday but it have now be put off until the New year . source say the PM fear the gap be to widen between Philip Hammond ' S soft Brexit camp and Boris Johnson ' s bid for a clean break . instead that meeting , which will follow a small ` ` Brexit war cabinet session ' ' on Monday , will now only see each of the Cabinet ' S @card@ member ask to air their www.views.No @card@ aide be now draw up plan for a series of meeting throughout January to try to bridge the gap by February . the PM be then likely to make her third big Brexit speech to spell out what the government ' s formal request to Brussel be . the fresh delay have leave some senior Tory angry that Mrs May will waste two more crucial month , while the two-year-long Article @card@ clock continue to tick down . one minister say : ` ` it be delay on delay , and fudge on www.fudge.No @card@ be go to have to get off the fence on this soon , and they know it ' ' . another Cabinet source add : ` ` the big question everyone be ask be , whose side be the PM on ? so far , she have n't give anything away . ' ' Mrs May ' S delay be be give cover by the EU not be ready to begin trade talk , as it need more time to find a joint negotiate position among all @card@ member . the PM ' s chief of staff Gavin Barwell be also urge the Cabinet to wait until the EU show more of its card . a No @card@ source say : ` ` this be a negotiation . that mean there be two side to it , and a lot will also depend on what the EU decide it want . ' ' France be draw up a plan to coax thousand of London financier to Paris after Brexit with an incentive package include low tax for high earner . the move be a bid to reverse an exodus after former leader Francois Hollande ' s socialist crackdown five year ago . meanwhile a Financial Times survey reveal the UK ' s big international bank be set to move only @card@ job in preparation for Brexit - six per cent of their total workforce .
should Brits be brick it over Brexit ? ; How EU Vote COULD AFFECT Property MARKET WE may be face a sizzling summer but the hot topic of today have to be Brexit . with the referendum loom , and scaremongering rife , would-be property purchaser might be forgive for sit on the garden fence . but what will happen to the property market after June @card@ ? how will our vote , in or out , impact on the affordability of home and their value ? even before we get to the vote , there be sign that the uncertainty surround the result could be have an effect on the investor market , which ultimately filter down to the rest of us . in London especially , jittery overseas investor be stay away , with some even abandon property they have already reserve with a deposit . UK-based private investor have also slow down their activity . so demand be soften , which mean price could too . but what be the overall implication for the rest of us ? here be my Brexit FAQs : what will happen to mortgage rate after the vote ? if we choose Brexit , as Boris Johnson and Co propose , the political uncertainty that will follow will put the UK economy under pressure , and as such , it will be hard to see how the Bank of England would be able to increase interest rate . on the other hand , stay in Europe - as PM David Cameron want us to - when the rest of the Eurozone be still struggle with lukewarm economic performance be not an environment in which interest rate be likely to be raise any time soon . so my money be on low interest rate for the foreseeable future . what will happen to property price in the UK ? a vote for Brexit be likely to lead to a short-term negative impact on the City of London . as a result , London property price could get hit hard , which would have a ripple effect on the rest of the UK housing market . however that would increase affordability , so one result might be that firsttime buyer be able to climb on to the property ladder in location that be financially out of their reach previously . David Catt , of property market analyst Hometrack , say : ` ` if the UK leave the EU , it would create a prolonged period of uncertainty , lead to reduce demand , which , consider supply onsidering the tight supy of housing in the UK , ould feed quickly to house price nd result in a ajor slowdown in e rate of growth . ' ' ot necessarily a ad thing . could into and major the not bad what about hat e availbility the availability of housing ? potentially , Brexit threaten City ' s shortterm therefore availability fund home-that price developer ousing ? Potenally , a rexit vote reatens the ty ' s shortrm stability , and erefore also the vailability of nds for further ome-building . another risk be at if property rice fall , develpers will not want build home in a arket of downward rice . the only way to itigate this would be overnment-sponsored fordable mortgage . interestingly , in the un-up to the referendum the onstruction sector have slow its low level for almost ree year . many firm early seem unwilling to ommit to new project in the hort term , and builder be king on subcontractor ther than hire staff while ey wait to see what hapens . the drop in home-buildg will mean more people hasing limited stock , which ould push price back up . to market price . mitigate Government-affordable run-construction to three clearly commit short take rather they happen . build hat propty chasing could what will happen to property purchasing cost ? this have very little to do with very decision , of if try increase revenue . while referendum ith the vote . cost be ry much a government ecision , and give the state the economy , I predict that the government can , it will y to find a way to crease tax and raise venue . in a nutshell , hile the referenum be be ayed out , and ere be a lull in roperty activity nderpinned by ncertainty , the pportunists among you might e in luck . with the low ortgage rate on cord , now might be a nique chance to nip there , negoate a good rice and ab e eal of lifeme . play there property underpin uncertainty , opportunist be mortgage record , unique in negotiate price grab the deal a lifetime .
EU Plan A BREXIT NO-DEAL ; Aide ADMISSION ; they take threat seriously EU chief have contingency plan for a no-deal Brexit , they admit yesterday . it be the first sign Brussels be take seriously Britain ' s threat to quit talk if they fail . Senior EU adviser Stefaan De Rynck warn that there would be ` ` a clear negative impact from no deal ' ' . the top aide to the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier say the other @card@ nation ` ` be prepare for it , that ' S for sure ' ' . but he add in London : ` ` it ' S not a thing we in the negotiation room want to bring . ' ' his remark contradict EU Council President Donald Tusk , who have say Brussels would not start work on a no-deal scenario until December at the early . they also come day after French President Emmanuel Macron brand UK plan for a hard Brexit ` ` bluff ' ' . Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg tell the Sun : ` ` Our no-deal preparation be clearly put pressure on the EU , which desperately need our cash . our tough negotiating stance be give Brussels the collywobbles . ' ' Downing Street say : ` ` both side be obviously prepare for all scenario , as you ' d expect . ' '
rock Solid ON BREXIT ; Rock Solid Gibraltar have make a U-turn on Brexit and be now ` ` hugely optimistic ' ' about Britain ' s future trade deal with Brussels . Rock leader Fabian Picardo tell the Sun : ` ` it ' s a change of continue on Page Two plan - but sometimes a new plan be well even than the original plan . ' ' in a speech yesterday to celebrate the territory ' s national day , the Chief Minister declare : ` ` Britain stick with us , and we stick with Britain . ' ' on the EU he add ` ` we leave with the UK ' ' and insist Gibraltar would ` ` prosper greatly ' ' . Gibraltarian vote to be British rather than Spanish @card@ year ago . Mr Picardo tell a cheer crowd : ` ` we stick with Britain in @card@ and we will stick with Britain through Brexit . ' ' and he tell the Sun he be ` ` hugely optimistic ' ' at we will be able to negotiate our way through this difficult moment in away that do not affect our prosperity ' ' . last year @card@ per cent of the @card@ brit in Gibraltar vote Remain . Mr Picardo have say Brexit pose a threat to the Rock . but it be claim he have since tell business chief - who do @card@ per cent of their trade with the UK mainland - ` ` maybe we get it wrong ' ' . Foreign Office Minister Sir Alan Duncan welcome the shift in feeling say : ` ` they be be extremely positive , constructive and thoughtful . ' '
the CRAIC Door ; BREXIT Plans UNVEILED ; lUK-Irish border to be ' wide open ' ; lFears of easy route for migrant plan to keep the Irish border wide open after Brexit risk leave a ` ` back door into Britain ' ' for illegal EU immigrant , critic warn . the government ' s detailed proposal on the Ireland dilemma also reveal a pledge to the keep the 65-year-old principle of free movement between the UK and Ireland . the two pledge be key to uphold Ulster ' s peace process , Theresa May say . the Brexit Ministry ' S paper drop a strong hint for the first time that EU citizen will still be able to come to Britain as tourist without the need for a visa . official concede that mean they will be able to travel to Ireland and then on into the UK unchecked . immigration boss would have to rely on detect illegal once they have arrive - rather than at border . a senior official say : ` ` from an immigration control perspective , it have never be about the physical block of people at the physical border . ' ' Irish senator Mark Daly , of Fianna Fáil , warn open border would create ` ` a smuggler ' charter ' ' for people and good . Lib Dem home affair spokesman Ed Davey brand the government ' s plan as have ` ` more hole in it than a colander ' ' .
Nat need to forget indyref2 and govern ; Scottish Sun
' we ca n't afford to drop our guard. . there ' S too much at stake ' ; Farmers Tell of BREXIT Fears Irish farmer say they have already be hit by Brexit with bad to come - and insist : ` ` we ca n't afford to drop our guard . ' ' expert believe a bad outcome to negotiation with Britain , our big trading partner , could decimate rural Ireland . and with @card@ job in the agriculture and food sector at risk , industry official say many livelihood could be wipe out if trade with the UK continue to decline . Joe Healy , president of the Irish Farmers ' Association , say : ` ` let ' S be very clear - if there ' s a bad Brexit , it will change significantly , not just Irish farming , but the whole of rural Ireland . it ' S down to the politician to get it right . ` ` whatever work we do need to reduce the damage and volatility in the marketplace and to the economy and agri food sector . ` ` we ca n't afford to drop our guard . there ' S too much at stake - people ' S livelihood be at stake . we ca n't leave any stone unturned that will ensure the well possible outcome to the Brexit negotiation . ' ' the warning come on George Lee ' S new RTE programme on the impact of Brexit on farmer . Economist George examine how trade have suffer in the @card@ month since the referendum in June @card@ . tomato farmer Matt Foley tell how he lose one of his big contract with a supermarket because of the plummet sterling value . Matt say : ` ` effectively our tomato be cost them @card@ per cent more in Northern Ireland because they be pay us in euros . they say they could n't make it work . ` ` it ' S about @card@ per cent of our sale so we ' ll have to replace it with other variety that ' ll suit other company . I be very disappoint . ` ` I feel really let down because we give quite a bit to that company over the year . we take quite a bit of pride in it . ` ` when you ' re useful you ' re use , when you ' re not , you ' re not . ' ' Gerry Connellan , a mart manager in Elphin , Co Roscommon , also reveal how sale have slow as UK and Northern Irish farmer have stop buy cattle . he say : ` ` Our mart in Elphin have depend down through the year on northern trade . up to @card@ per cent of our cattle go North . ` ` we ' ve two big sale in February and September . there ' s always be a great trend for English man to come and buy their cattle here . ` ` there be one man who always come and buy @card@ cattle . since Brexit , with sterling at 80p he be n't able to come in September . ` ` and it do n't look like he will be come in February either . ' ' with @card@ people work at the mart and fuel the town ' S economy , Gerry tell how the impact will be feel far and wide if the trend continue . he say : ` ` if that business be n't here it ' d be a huge loss . it ' S vital to the town - for them to go to the shop , to the pub , to keep the whole thing . we have no other business in the town with @card@ people work in it . ' ' Co Kerry Farmer and entrepreneur Marie Martin also tell how her Safe Scrub Sprayer business have be affect by the UK ' S decision . she say meeting set up with potential buyer be cancel after Brexit pass and she ' S now hope to expand in Europe instead . Marie add : ` ` there be similar type of enterprise ( in Europe ) but there be barrier in language and communication . overcome them be difficult and offputting . ` ` there ' s a lot of fear go round with the topic of Brexit . people be scare . ` ` the stress level of farmer and agricultural worker be at a whole other level . ' ' l BREXIT : farm on the edge air on RTE one tonight at 9.35pm . @ IrishSunOnline 6Our beef would double in price7 THE CATTLE Farmers Billy Nicholson and Son Niall , CROSSHAVEN , Cork ` ` if half our beef have no home because of beef tariff it ' d be a shocking result . ` ` if the single farm payment be go , for us to be efficient , beef would have to double in price . ` ` Our UK beef be sellable in Europe but you ca n't create a new market overnight . ' ' 6If farm go the town close up7 the CAFE OWNER Mary O'CALLAGHAN , MITCHELSTOWN , Co Cork ` ` WE ' D have a lot of farmer as customer . if farming go bust , the town can close up . ` ` you see so many rural village that be slow down , empty business and house . ` ` we be lucky that we do n't have that and I put that down to the importance of Dairygold and the farming community . ' ' 6We need lead-in time for Brexit7 THE DAIRY Farmer Mary TWOMEY-CASEY , GLANWORTH , Co Cork ` ` THERE ' S little we can do initially , cow still have to be milk . if there be tariff on beef and cheese , it ' s go to have a knock-on effect as the price we ' ll get will be down . ` ` that ' S why we ' re anxious that there ' s a lead-in time and the guillotine do n't just come down in March @card@ . ' '
Blair bid to derail key talk on Brexit Tony Blair will attempt to derail Britain ' s Brexit negotiation next week by meet EU chief Jean-Claude Juncker . the pro-Europeans will meet in Brussels at the same time as Brexit Secretary David Davis and opposite negotiator Michel Barnier hold key talk . Brussels official insist the pair be meet because they be ` ` good friend ' ' - despite clash several time in @card@ when Mr Juncker be Luxembourg PM and Mr Blair be in No10 . a European Commission spokesman say : ` ` the president ' S door be always open and he look for a timing which work for both of www.them.No conspiracy there , I ' m afraid . ' ' but the timing of the meeting raise eyebrow in Westminster . aide say the pair would discuss European politics and the Middle East but refuse to give any further detail .
Brexit be push Irish unity forward BREXIT have place Irish unity back on the political agenda , Sinn Fein ' S Michelle O'Neill have say . deliver the annual oration at Glasnevin cemetery in Dublin on the 101st anniversary of the Rising , the republican party ' s Stormont leader say the UK ' s departure from the EU have ` ` changed everything ' ' . she say : ` ` the Brexit referendum result have sweep away many of the previous political assumption about the constitutional , political and economic status quo in Ireland . this have bring the issue of Irish reunification firmly back on the political agenda . ` ` the people of the North clearly vote to see their future in the EU in the referendum last June . ` ` Those who vote remain come from all walk of life . they be nationalist , unionist , republican and other . ` ` David Young ` `
Farage to be Brexit film star Nigel Farage the movie could hit cinema screen as a top Hollywood studio want to make a film of the Brexit campaign . Warner Brothers be in talk with Arron Banks , the insurance millionaire who fund Leave.EU . the film would be base on his book of the campaign , call the bad boy of Brexit . Andy Wigmore , a spokesman for Mr Banks , say : ` ` we have have some serious Hollywood people who want to buy the option on the book . ' ' Warner Brothers producer be hope to meet Mr bank and former Ukip leader Mr Farage when the pair visit the US for Donald Trump ' S inauguration . Mr Wigmore say any profit would go to charity , add : ` ` it be not like it be something we would personally benefit from . the Bad Boys of Brexit - the film . it be a comedy . ' ' the book tell how Mr Banks run the campaign with the help of Mr Wigmore and American polling expert Gerry Gunster .
trick of the Trade ; EU BREXIT VOW have STRINGS ATTACHED ' ambitious deal ..if UK keep rule ' Fury at ' Santa ' May ' S £38bn plan the EU heap pressure on Theresa May ' s minister by hint at an ` ` ambitious ' ' Brexit trade deal - but only if Britain stick to its rule . the move come hour before the Cabinet meet to hammer out detail of the PM ' s multi-billion pound divorce bill pledge . chief Brussels negotiator Michel Barnier insist a good deal be ` ` our preference ' ' . but he warn any agreement would be veto if Britain refuse to obey EU rule on tax , the environment and food safety . German business chief have urge the EU to offer Britain a good Brexit deal as a bad one be the ` ` bad possible outcome ' ' . MEP Hans-Olaf Henkel , ex-president of the Federation of German Industries , say Europe should allow Mrs May to restrict free movement in the hope we change our mind about leave . Mr Henkel , who last week warn that Chancellor Angela Merkel want our unconditional surrender , say Berlin should do all it could to prevent lose its ` ` most valuable EU partner ' ' . Frenchman Mr Barnier ' S gambit come as he talk about our future relationship with the EU for the first time . he say : ` ` do the UK want to remain close to the European model or move away ? answer be decisive . ` ` there will be no ambitious partnership without common ground in fair competition , state aid , tax dump , food safety and environmental standard . ' ' and in a blow to the City , Mr Barnier say Brit banker will lose ` ` passporting ' ' right allow them to operate across Europe . in a Centre for European Reform speech , he say : ` ` Brexit mean Brexit , everywhere . ` ` Those who claim the UK should pick part of the single market must stop this contradiction . the single market be a package with four indivisible freedom , common rule , institution and enforcement structure . ` ` the EU do not want to punish , it simply draw the logical consequence of the UK decision to take back control . ' ' Mr Barnier also blast ` ` sensitive ' ' Britain for refuse to allow Northern Ireland to stay in the EU custom union after Brexit . Yesterday Dublin lose out to Amsterdam over the future of the European Medicines Agency . the regulatory body , which employ @card@ in London , will move in @card@ . the EU ' S Banking Authority also move to Paris . No10 say : ` ` we be seek a deep and special partnership with the EU and believe we be uniquely place to achieve that . ' ' BREXIT minister Lord Callanan admit it be possible to reverse Article @card@ . he apologise for his ` ` incorrect ' ' comment that the Supreme Court have rule the clause irrevocable .
Nic ' S BREXIT List Threat To May ; Sturgeon PM Dare Nicola Sturgeon dare the PM to snub SNP Brexit term at her peril . the First Minister tell Theresa May she will call an indy poll if Scotland have to quit the EU . she demand power include continued on Page @card@ continue from Page one control over immigration - regardless of the outcome of Brexit talk . she say : ` ` I accept that there be a mandate in England and Wales to take the UK out of the EU . I do not accept there be a mandate to take any part of the UK out of the single market . ' ' Nat leader Sturgeon threaten a second referendum on independence within the two-year Article @card@ talk period - due to kick off by the end of March - if Westminster refuse to approve her wishlist . in a challenge to Mrs May , she say : ` ` I hope and expect that the UK Government , in consider these proposal , will demonstrate the flexibility and willingness to compromise . ' ' a Downing Street spokesman insist the SNP document would be examine in detail by official . but Mrs May play down the chance of a separate deal for Scotland . she say : ` ` we will look very seriously at any proposal from devolve government , but there may be proposal that be impractical . ' '
big race for FREXIT the French election be a Frexit battle - with candidate split over whether to leave the EU . favourite Emmanuel Macron be against and call Brexit a crime . but Marine Le Pen , of the Far-Right National Front , plan an exit vote . she say of the UK : ` ` it ' S great what they ' ve do . their growth be double ours . ' ' Far-Left Jean-Luc Melenchon , also want a Frexit poll and have accuse the EU of threaten ` ` vengeance ' ' against the UK . here be the main candidate . the two with the most vote go head-to-head on May @card@ . Emmanuel MACRON an Independent candidate and the favourite to win the two-round election . call Brexit a ` ` crime ' ' and say the UK will face ` ` servitude ' ' . have urge the @card@ EU country to protect the single market and ` ` rebuild the European dream ' ' . have warn PM Theresa May not to expect any concession . odd : @card@ Marine Le Pen VOWED to support UK in Brexit talk if she become president . say result of Brexit ` ` formidable ' ' and have accuse EU of ` ` blackmail and threaten ' ' Britain ahead of discussion . odd : @card@ Francois FILLON the Conservative candidate vow not to punish Britain in divorce talk and be seek ` ` serene ' ' and ` ` fast ' ' separation . want ` ` good neighbourly relation ' ' in future and deep defence agreement . odd @card@ JEAN-LUC MELENCHON the leftie call EU an ` ` open-air jail ' ' and have urge it to let UK leave ` ` without punishment ' ' . reckon Brexit be ` ` the beginning of the end of an era ' ' and ` ` an earthquake for the EU as we know it ' ' . odd : @card@
may : Brussels OWES Britain £8.5BILLION Theresa May yesterday insist Brussels owe Britain £8.5billion . she hit out amid grow fury that the EU may want £85billion from us to leave . the PM highlight cash we pay into the European Investment Bank and other project . she say : ` ` there ' S debate about what the UK ' S obligation might be or what our right might be in term of money pay in the past . we would look at those right and obligation . ` ` there ' s the Investment Bank , the Investment Fund , various area . ' ' and Brexit Secretary David Davis have threaten the UK would quit Brexit talk if give an £85billion divorce bill , it emerge yesterday . Mrs May will today pan Jeremy Corbyn on Brexit as she launch the Tories ' Welsh manifesto . the PM will blast those seek to place ` ` obstacle ' ' in the way of our EU departure . she will say the Welsh pro-Leave vote show how feed up ordinary brit be with the EU . and she will brand Mr Corbyn too ` ` uncertain or unsure ' ' to trust with Brexit . Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson also blast the Labour leader yesterday . he say : ` ` I ca n't understand how he ' s suppose to sit in Brussels on Day one of talk when he have n't a clue whether he want to stay in the single market or custom union . ` ` they be go to look at him and have him for breakfast . ' '
may : Brussels OWES Britain £8.5BILLION Theresa May yesterday insist Brussels owe Britain £8.5billion . she hit out amid grow fury that the EU may want £85billion from us to leave . the PM highlight cash we pay into the European Investment Bank and other project . she say : ` ` there ' S debate about what the UK ' S obligation might be or what our right might be in term of money pay in the past . we would look at those right and obligation . ` ` there ' s the Investment Bank , the Investment Fund , various area . ' ' and Brexit Secretary David Davis have threaten the UK would quit Brexit talk if give an £85billion divorce bill , it emerge yesterday . Mrs May will today pan Jeremy Corbyn on Brexit as she launch the Tories ' Welsh manifesto . the PM will blast those seek to place ` ` obstacle ' ' in the way of our EU departure . she will say the Welsh pro-Leave vote show how feed up ordinary brit be with the EU . and she will brand Mr Corbyn too ` ` uncertain or unsure ' ' to trust with Brexit . Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson also blast the Labour leader yesterday . he say : ` ` I ca n't understand how he ' s suppose to sit in Brussels on Day one of talk when he have n't a clue whether he want to stay in the single market or custom union . ` ` they be go to look at him and have him for breakfast . ' '
a Bad Dave AT THE Office ; Tories in BREXIT SPAT PM slap down DD on last-minute deal serious division emerge between the PM and her Brexit Secretary last night after he call on Britain to prepare for a lastminute deal . Theresa May slap down David Davis and insist they would come to an agreement in good time . Mr Davis also enrage MP by tell them Parliament may not get its promised vote to approve the final deal until after Britain leave the EU . he say the EU never decide anything until ` ` the 59th minute of the 11th hour ' ' , and that be ` ` precisely what I would expect to happen ' ' with Brexit . Brussels negotiator will delay offer good trade term and ` ` have you over a barrel ' ' , Mr Davis tell the Brexit Select Committee . he say it would be ` ` very high stress , very exciting for everybody watching ' ' but insist : ` ` we have to resist that . ' ' if a deal be reach late on March @card@ , @card@ - the day before Britain must leave - there will be no time for MP to approve it , he concede . furious MP accuse him of want ` ` a blank cheque ' ' and attack him for a ` ` deplorable attempted coup against Parliamentary democracy ' ' . within two hour , Mrs may also publicly contradict him . she tell MP at PMQs that she be ` ` confident ' ' a deal would happen ` ` in time for this Parliament to have the vote that we commit to ' ' . Mr Davis ' spokesman be then force to release a statement say he ` ` expect and intend ' ' MP and Lords to vote up to six month before Brexit . but Labour MP Seema Malhotra , who grill Mr Davis , say his U-turn be ` ` not good enough ' ' . Ex-Tory Attorney General Dominic Grieve also warn the PM face ` ` a serious risk ' ' of a court challenge if Parliament be not give a say . Malhotra Mr Davis do attempt to reassure worried business the PM would push to agree a swift transition period of two year by next March . Japanese car giant Toyota urge the government to lift the ` ` fog ' ' around negotiation to safeguard its UK factory .
lord MAY-HEM ; BREXIT BLAST @card@ Peers yesterday vow to rein in Theresa May ahead of Brexit negotiation - claim they ` ` do n't trust ' ' the PM to get the good deal for Britain . Lib Dem Dick Newby claim as many as @card@ pro-EU Lords would back a slew of amendment when the Brexit Bill go to the Upper House next week . ask about his plan , he tell the Sun : ` ` we do n't trust her . it ' S as simple as @card@ that . ' ' Lord Newby , the most senior Lib Dem peer go on : ` ` the idea of give Theresa May unfettered power be extremely unappealing . ' ' he add : ` ` if the House ca n't amend a bill , it should be abolish . that be what we be there for - to ask them to think againwe disagree . ' '
Nic ' S Hard TRUTHS ON BREXIT Deal ; Sturgeon EU VOW Study ' s ' disaster ' warn she rap may on ' failure ' Nicola Sturgeon be to reveal research show a hard Brexit will be an ` ` economic disaster ' ' for Scotland . Nat say the analysis will also highlight how vital it will be to stay in Europe ' s single market . the decision to publish the study tomorrow follow the UK Government ' s ` ` failure ' ' to produce assessment of the impact of quit the EU . the First Minister say : ` ` Our analysis will show that the hard the Brexit , the worse will be the outcome . ` ` if the UK leave the EU , it must stay within the single market and custom union to prevent needless job loss and cut in live standard . ' ' the SNP chief also call on PM Theresa May , right , to ` ` put country before party ' ' . she say : ` ` it ' s time for her to stop listen to the discredited voice around her Cabinet table and start listen to the overwhelming case for single market membership . ` ` Time be run out to prevent the economic disaster of a hard Brexit . ' ' the Nat ' research study the impact of three different scenario after we leave the EU - range from stay in the single market to a ` ` non-preferential ' ' trade deal with Europe . Ms Sturgeon add : ` ` it beggar belief the UK Government have not produce any meaningful assessment . ` ` the hard Brexiteers have fail to explain how their approach could come close to replace the enormous lost trade and investment of leave the single market . ` ` it will be a dereliction of duty if Theresa May do n't provide information on the impact of her ' red line ' and publicly discuss the option . ' ' a No10 spokesman say : ` ` we be seek a deal that work for the whole UK . ' '
BREXIT ' Chance ' To UNITE Island BREXIT have present a unique opportunity to press for reunification of Ireland , Gerry Adams say as a new Sinn Fein unity blueprint be launch yesterday . Adams promise a series of enshrine protection for unionist , include the option of British citizenship and the potential retention of a devolve power-sharing administration at Stormont . the party ' s discussion document claim ` ` Brexit have change everything ' ' , argue that the UK vote to leave the EU , in the face of a majority vote in Northern Ireland to remain , have major implica-tions for the island ' S future . and the document claim some unionist , particularly ` ` young and liberal ' ' voter , be willing to explore the potential of a unite Ireland . under the Good Friday Agreement , the North ' s Secretary of State have the power to trigger a poll on unity , but only if there have be a shift in public opinion . Adams say it be ` ` incomprehensible ' ' to have one part of Ireland within the EU and one outside it . he add partition be stunt the ` ` political , economic , social and cultural ' ' potential of Ireland .
UK boost for a trade deal ; TURBO-BREXIT BREXIT Britain will be at the ` ` front of the queue ' ' for a bumper trade deal with the US after Donald Trump ' S truimph , MP claim last night . Tory backbencher say it make an agreement far more likely than if Hillary Clinton have win . their optimism come after Brexit fan Mr Trump say in June that leave the EU would ` ` make Britain great again ' ' . the billionaire ' s rallying cry echo his campaign slogan : ` ` Make America great again . ' ' he also pour scorn on Barack Obama ' s vow to put us ` ` at the back of the queue ' ' in trade talk . the Centre for Economics and Business Research yesterday confirm : ` ` the UK probably gain from Trump . ' ' Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` Donald Trump ' S victory help us as he ' S say he ' S in favour of do a free trade deal with the UK . he ' S much more of a friend to the UK than Obama be . ' ' Ukip donor Arron Banks say Donald Trump ' S success ` ` put the European establishment on notice ' ' .
fear WEGO Again ; lNic blast Osborne over anti-Brexit stat ; lSays it ' S like indy debate scare story Nicola Sturgeon last night blast George Osborne for use ` ` Project Fear ' ' tactic to condemn Brexit . the pro-EU First Minister accuse the Chancellor of copy the strategy of the indy referendum ' s no campaign . Mr Osborne yesterday unveil a 200-page Treasury report detail the longterm impact of leave the European Union . under Brexit ' s most likely scenario of one-on-one new deal with individual coun-tries , it claim the UK ' S economy would be six per cent small by @card@ as trade would suffer . that would cost household an average £4,300 a year and lead to £36billion in government spending cut or tax rise . under the Treasury ' s bad doomsday scenario - which would see the UK have to adopt World Trade Organisation rule - household could be poor by up to £6,600 a year . while back Mr Osborne ' s central point that leave the EU would hurt the economy , Ms Sturgeon , below , call his claim on family finance @card@ year in the future a leap too far . in a reference to the @card@ independence vote she say : ` ` it sound like Project fear all over again ' ' . Mr Osborne ' s close friend , anti-EU Justice Secretary Michael Gove , attack his statistic for ` ` treat people like child ' ' - accuse him of ` ` conjure up new bogeyman every night ' ' . critic be swift to point out the report contain a series of major omission , such as none of the potential risk of stay in the EU like a fresh Eurozone debt crisis . Treasury official also admit major gap on the key issue of immigration . remain campaigner and Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn refuse to back up the family finance stat , say : ` ` I ' m not sure where he get the figure from . ' ' Mr Osborne call the EU decision the big Britain have make in @card@ year , say it ' s ` ` as big as anything we have ever be ask to address since the war ' ' .
NATS Can GET Seat AT BREXFAST Table ; Brussels TALKS Olive Branch Tory hint at role. . if SNP ' toe UK line ' A Tory peer yesterday hint Nat could get a seat at the Brexit talk table - but only if they toe the UK line . Lord Duncan suggest the SNP could lend a hand in Brussels when the government team hammer out deal with EU chief on area like fishing . but the Scotland Office No2 warn they would have to be ` ` willing and able to contribute to the common view ' ' if they be to play a part in the crunch talk . he say : ` ` I ' ve say this about the fishery negotiation - if you be able to take the UK line , then anybody can be in the seat . ` ` you ca n't have our line be undermine by the UK representative . that would be self-defeat , it would be short-sighted and ultimately bad for negotiation . ' ' the former MEP fail to win the Perth and North Perthshire seat last month . but he be parachute into the Lords by Theresa May to join the Brexit negotiating team for his knowledge of European affair . Nicola Sturgeon brand the PM ' s move a ` ` democratic abomination ' ' . and the SNP ' S Brexit Minister Mike Russell say : ` ` there be overwhelming support in Scotland for stay in the single market , and concern about the disaster the Tory approach would be for Scottish job , our economy and living standard . ` ` the clock be tick on Brexit . if Lord Duncan and Mr Mundell want to get in line with Scottish opinion , we would welcome their public rejection of the Tories ' extreme Brexit agenda . ' '
Starmer ' S 2HR U-TURN ON Border Labour yesterday make a flagship election pledge to end unlimited immigration from the EU - only to dump the Brexit vow within two hour . the party ' S Sir Keir Starmer start the day by say free movement of people would be stop as we take back control of our border . he declare it a ` ` red line ' ' for Labour in Brexit talk with Brussels . barely two hour later the Shadow Brexit Secretary backtrack , declare migrant with job offer here could still flock in . he tell the BBC : ` ` we must have immigration that work for our community and our economy . ` ` that mean there have to be movement of people to come and work in this country . the last thing we want be for our business to go bankrupt . ' ' the absurd U-turn come after he also say Labour would tear up Theresa May ' s Brexit strategy by seek a ` ` collaborative ' ' relationship with the EU . MP here will have the final say on a deal - mean if they vote to reject it , Britain will be force to keep go back to Brussel for more talk . Sir Keir insist there will be no second referendum . but Labour colleague Paul Blomfield suggest we could stay in the EU if Brussels address the ` ` concern ' ' that lead to the leave vote . Sir Keir also say Labour would guarantee the right of three million European to stay here . Theresa May slam Labour ' s Brexit strategy as ` ` nonsensical ' ' .
do N'T BODGE A BREXIT Budget ; exclusive : ' PANIC ' Warning Philip Hammond have be warn against spread pre-Brexit panic with a heavy-handed mini-budget . a fresh Cabinet split have emerge as the Chancellor prepare measure to survive the shock wave of quit the EU . but angry colleague fear it will only spread doom and gloom in the run-up to key Brexit talk . they have tell him not to turn next month ' S Autumn Statement into the ` ` revenge Budget ' ' threaten by his predecessor George Osborne . the revolt against too much stimulus be be lead by International Trade Secretary and lead Brexiteer Liam Fox . he have tell pal : ` ` the economy be do well despite all the talk of catastrophe in the run-up to the Referendum . ` ` common sense and sanity have prevail over hyperbole and panic . ` ` the last thing we need now be an Osborne emergency Budget mark two . ' ' Remainer Mr Hammond want to take the brake off spending on November @card@ - possibly by boost rail and road investment - to protect Britain from any Brexit shock wave . but it have reignite a split at the heart of the government over Britain ' s future link with the EU . Mr Hammond be keen to have continue access to the single market and believe we will have to strike a deal over migration , put him at odd with his pro-Leave colleague . Senior Tories claim he have twice come close to quit after clash with Theresa May over Brexit and be exclude from key meeting - but he have deny any rift . the Chancellor have abandon his predecessor ' s promise to balance the book , free him to borrow more money for fiscal stimulus . his statement be expect to include a £3billion housing fund to help small house builder . but Brexiteers be call for a ` ` steady as she go ' ' statement . one say : ` ` if he start say it ' S all to prevent future disaster when we leave the EU , that will only spread panic . ` ` He ' s be go around talk the economy down for far too long . he need to keep a steady hand on the tiller . ' ' Bricksit Crisis - Page @card@
PM ' S WAR Warning HELPS Out ` ` He be like the boy who cry wolf , ' ' say one Outsupporting Cabinet minister of David Cameron and his doom-laden forecast about Brexit . the Out campaign regard Cameron ' s warning of the risk of a war in Europe if Britain leave the EU as a benefit to them . they think that it sound so over-the-top that it will make people more suspicious of the government ' s other prediction . the moment in this campaign which have have out most worry be the Treasury ' s claim that Brexit would mean household would be £4,300 worse off . this spurious number do , as senior figure in Vote leave admit , cut through . vote leave ' s hope be that the constant drumbeat of doom since then will make voter more sceptical when the Treasury issue its report on the short-term economic impact of Brexit . this be expect to claim that mortgage rate will go up , house price will fall and that the pound will plummet on the foreign exchange market . intriguingly , even an influential figure in the Labour in campaign fret that the Cameron war warn this week be illjudged - that Downing Street over-egged the pudding and end up sound hysterical rather than statesmanlike . Cameron ' s strong card in this referendum be the short-term economic disruption that Brexit would cause . but the more he make other , less plausible , Brexit warning , the more he will undercut himself .
lPOLLING among Brexit leave voter [ ... ] lPOLLING among Brexit leave voter show that @card@ per cent would still back Brexit even if it cause ` ` significant damage ' ' to the UK economy . another third would be willing to lose their job or see relative sack as the price of Brexit . among pensioner , @card@ per cent do n't care about economic damage . it ' s mad . but I wonder if it ' S much different for Yes voter in Scotland .
never WAS So Much OWED By THE EU ; Churchill SPEECH Fury Brexit boss blast Europe ' S top Brexit negotiator spark Tory fury last night by accuse UK Eurosceptics of wreck Winston Churchill ' S legacy . Ex-Belgian PM Guy Verhofstadt tell fellow MEPs the war hero would have vote Remain . he add : ` ` Eurosceptics can twist the word from the British bulldog all they want . ` ` but they have squander Churchill ' S legacy . ' ' Brexit backer Jacob Rees-Mogg lead Tory MP ' chorus of anger . he tell the Sun : ` ` as the devil can quote scripture , a Euroloon can quote Churchill . Verhofstadt conflate Europe and the EU . ` ` there be no evidence Churchill would support the current bureaucracy . ` ` speculate on the view of the dead be a fool ' S errand . ' ' Mr Verhofstadt spark anger by quote a post-war Churchill speech in which the hero urge ` ` a united Europe in which Britain will play a decisive part ' ' . Tory James Cleverly say : ` ` Churchill ' S view be form against the backdrop of two brutal war . ` ` it ' S flatter Mr Verhofstadt be influence by a British statesman , but Churchill ' s comment from @card@ be no longer relevant . ' ' Kwasi Kwarteng add : ` ` he be mistaken and patronise . ' ' a spokesman for Foreign Secretary and Churchill biographer Boris Johnson echo their outrage . he say : ` ` Britain need no lecture on one of history ' s great leader . we ' re leave the EU . it ' s time to stop moan about it . ' ' MEPs be in Strasbourg for talk on the EU ' S future . Ex-Ukip chief Nigel Farage tell them : ` ` the EU have no future in its current form . I suspect you ' re in for as big a shock in @card@ as in @card@ . ' '
Judges ' Brexit ruling so unjust I be appall at the non-elected judge say Article @card@ can be trigger only with the agreement of Parliament . if these judge say democracy demand this , democracy demand that judge be appoint by a public vote , as the ` ` old boy ' ' system of their appointment be very undemocratic . Philip Harrison Andover , Hants AFTER the High Court fiasco , surely now be a good opportunity to look at the ` ` old pal ' act ' ' process by which judge be appoint . let the people of the UK have a say in who get put in the ` ` judge ' S chair ' ' and maybe we can stop rich idiot from get in . Ian Irvine Haverhill , West Suffolk it be well know that the establishment be grossly pro-European Union . now three High Court judge have rule against the government . the appeal will go to another @card@ judge . I wonder how the ruling will go ? Phil North Brigg , N Lincs if the court be allow to overturn the decision of the British people to leave the EU , it would be the end of democracy in the UK - more damaging to our currency and our progress to become a free country . the Supreme Court must support the will of the British people . john WOODFIN-GRESTY Kinnerton , Chester BREXIT mean Brexit . that ' s what the British people vote for . now the House of Lords could block us from leave Europe . our next referendum should be to dissolve the House of Lords . tommy HAZLEHURST Selby , N York Thursday November @card@ , @card@ - the day democracy be murder by the elitist judiciary , its core principle of majority rule trample upon by the rich and powerful who ignore the will of the British people . shame on you all . paddy QUALTER Oxford WHERE have our democracy go ? I , along with 17million other , vote for Brexit and win . I be amaze how this can be overturn by lawyer and money people because it be not in their interest . the government now appeal to the Supreme Court and it be say that if they lose , it will trigger a General Election . I would not be surprise if this election have the low turnout this country have ever see . Eamonn Sherry Bournemouth WE should be tell just who the MP try to derail Brexit are . that way we can vote them out at the next election . graham Mason Newcastle , Staffs TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply why should MP have two vote on Brexit ? they have vote on it once already , like the rest of us . Dennis Stanton , Redditch , Worcs WE the people decide to Brexit . why be the High Court stop it ? oh yes , I forget - the legal profession make money out of it . Colin , Stockport , Gtr Manchester MAYBE if all driver beep their horn when they see another driver on the phone at the wheel , it might let them know it ' S not tolerate . Caroline Roberts , Corby , Northants Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
the Sun SAYS Out of border the London and Dublin government now seem at loggerhead over the Irish border - and not for the first time . but on this occasion the bust-up be n't over security , on-the-run paramilitaries or sheep smuggling . the issue be Brexit . to see Leo Varadkar and Theresa May fall out over something we ' ve resolve in so many other way be depress . it ' S tempting to ask young Leo to shut his beak , respect the UK ' S decision and get on with his job . for some , his word yesterday amount to insult the British people , or at least the 17.4million majority who vote to get out of the EU . the UK be Ireland ' s big trading partner and near neighbour . the effect of a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' could be catastrophic . yet Varadkar ' s attempt at diplomacy after their meeting in Gothenburg and his threat to veto trade negotiation bring it ever closer . he ca n't stop Brexit . he ca n't even stall Brexit . truth be , his attitude reveal he ' S under pressure . and it ' s no wonder . the UK and Ireland , back by the real heart and true grit of the people of NI , manage to sort out their issue over paramilitaries duck over the border . how ? the authority on both side work together for the great good . now we ' re in different time . it ' s time to look to what ' s be achieve in the past and realise what can be do for the www.future.No more insult , no more jibe . we ' ve have plenty of that before . just get on with the job .
BREXIT for the Border ; DIVIDED LOYALTIES AS Vote NEARS Towns split on leave EU People live in a village split by the border be baffle by Brexit - because no one know what it might bring . but what be certain be that fear be grow checkpoint could be make a comeback more than @card@ year after they disappear . Prime Minister David Cameron have say that prospect be inevitable if the UK vote itself out of the EU on Thursday . but Brexiteers reckon he have get it wrong . however it ' s confuse for the people in a village like Belleek , part of which be in Co Fermanagh and part in Co Donegal . businesswoman Pauline Gilmartin ' S family have be sell gift to tourist for @card@ year in the town . the outbreak of peace in the ninety soften the border to the point where , she say , you now do n't always know if you have cross it or not . Pauline say : ` ` now again there ' s a big uncertainty . ` ` one side of the Brexit people be say there will be check back up and the other side be say there wo n't . ` ` the question be how hard the border will be ? it ' S very unknown territory . ' ' Local SDLP Councillor John Coyle have little doubt the checkpoint would return along the 500km border . he say : ` ` there will be some sort of custom border closure . and that will set us back year . ` ` I ' m @card@ and when I be a child we have to go through custom and there be checkpoint and the lifting of all that be great . ` ` the whole point of what it ' S all about be to control border . ' ' and physical check , he say , slow down life and discourage travel . Cllr Coyle say : ` ` will there be car search , will we have to have our passport to cross the border ? ` ` I can only assume that it have to be that way . ' ' he add : ` ` then you have the coach trip to Belleek Pottery in the town . ` ` will they be search the bus come and go ? no one want that . ' ' PM Cameron claim man custom post be the only alternative option to introduce a hard border - with physical barrier - between the Republic and Northern Ireland . he tell the House of Commons last week : ` ` if we vote to stay in we know what the situation be . ` ` we know that the common travel area work , we know it can continue and everyone can have confidence in that . ` ` if we be to leave then you ' ve get a land border between Britain outside the EU and the Republic of Ireland inside the EU . ' ' if the NI border do n't carry out the check , he say , they would instead take place in Britain when people arrive from Northern Ireland . Pauline Gilmartin ' S father Kevin say : ` ` thing get well and we have forget what it be like to have the border . we do n't want anything like that back . ' ' since @card@ the EU have pay ( Euro ) 1.6billion into support peace in area along the border . it be currently distribute around ( Euro ) 540million in an upskilling scheme within a package call Peace IV . Taoiseach Enda Kenny have claim Britain leave the EU could threaten that peace , and lead to turmoil . but traditional Unionist Voice leader Jim Allister say such scheme be not gift , but only money the UK have already bung into the EU . he say : ` ` there be nonsense be spin about Northern Ireland be unable to survive without EU handout . not only be it our own money we be get back , but even we be net contributor . ' ' whatever the future hold , any restriction on freedom of movement will hit hardest in border town . Margaret McCauley , a tourist administrator in Belcoo , Co Fermanagh , which sit on the border with Co Cavan , say : ` ` that freedom be very important , particularly for tourism . people be already come here ask me if they will need their passport to go into Northern Ireland . ' ' @ Irish-Sun
get a March on ; BREXIT Stage TWO BEGINS PM TELLS EU To AGREE Transit Or Lose Cash Theresa May last night warn EU leader her £39billion divorce cheque be off unless they agree a transition deal by March . the PM begin to unveil her key demand for the next stage of negotiation yesterday . she tell MP an agreement on a two-year transition period that start on exit day in @card@ should be seal as early as possible . Mrs May add that mean within ` ` the first quarter ' ' of next year . her timetable to reassure worried business come six month earlier than EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier ' s original plan of September . it also emerge last night that No10 expect the EU to put up a fight over its demand to start register EU citizen live here straight after Brexit . but Brussels be expect to give way on the PM ' s third transition criterion , for Britain to be free to negotiate and agree new trade deal during the period . spell out exactly what she mean by her Brexit talk motto , ` ` nothing be agree until everything be agree ' ' , the PM add : ` ` this offer be on the table in the context of us agree the partnership for the future . ` ` if we do n't agree that partnership , then this offer be off the table . ' ' EU leader start trade talk on Thursday . Jeremy Corbyn say Labour be ready to delay Brexit beyond March @card@ ` ` to get the well possible deal ' ' for more on this story Whitehall need thousand more staff for Brexit , civil service chief John Manzoni say . the department have @card@ . listen to Julia Hartley-
your BREX be on Fire Policy shift ; CORBYN SOFT STANCE ' great for Ireland ' Irish politician last night welcome an incendiary Brexit policy shift by the UK Labour Party . Leader Jeremy Corbyn announce the opposition party would keep Britain in the EU ' s single market and custom union - and accept continued freedom of movement - during a transition period after March www.2019.UK Labour ' s Brexit spokesman Keir Starmer also indicate that the party be ready to negotiate new single market and custom union term . but he make clear that any such deal would have to give Britain more control over migration . the change come on the eve of the third round of formal Brexit talk in Brussels . Fianna Fail leader Micheal Martin say : ` ` it be . . Jeremy a sensible decision and one which my colleague and I welcome . ` ` there be now an onus on all government across Europe to prevent a hard Brexit from occur and to look at all option that would ensure Britain ' s continued membership of the custom union during an extended transitional period . ' ' Labour Party leader Brendan Howlin also welcome the move . he say : ` ` it will provide an important stimulus to the ongoing debate in the UK on what their future relationship with the EU will be . ' ' the shift be announce as Corbyn come under pressure to adopt a more pro-EU stance . but there be also a warning of a backlash from the one third of Labour supporter who back Brexit . Conservative minister have accept the need for a time-limited transition period . but they insist the UK must be outside the single market and custom union during this period .
rebel Trio CORBINNED ; Labour in NEW EU Battle ; Frontbenchers axe over Brexit vote Jeremy Corbyn last night axe three frontbenchers after they defy him on Brexit . a fourth member of Labour ' s top team also quit to join the rebellion . they be among @card@ Labour MP who back a Queen ' s Speech amendment call for Britain to stay in Europe ' s single market and custom union . the motion , table by party moderate and Remain supporter Chuka Umunna , be defeat by @card@ to @card@ . Mr Corbyn , below right , order his MP to abstain . Shadow Foreign Office minister Catherine West and Shadow Housing minister Andy Slaughter and Ruth Cadbury be sack for ignore the party whip . Daniel Zeichner resign his Shadow Transport post just before the vote so he could back the motion . meanwhile Lyn Brown , promote to stand in for an ill Diane Abbott during the election , also quit yesterday . it be report that she have fall out with the Shadow Home Secretary . the fresh Labour chaos expose Mr Corbyn ' s failure to unite his party and will force yet another reshuffle . Tory MP James Cleverly insist Labour be in ` ` total chaos ' ' over Brexit . he say : ` ` there be deep division on the most crucial issue face the country today - they still ca n't agree on the fundamental and would get the bad Brexit deal at the high price . ' ' but former Ukip leader Nigel Farage praise Jezza . he tweet : ` ` Corbyn show his true Brexit colour . he ' S almost a proper chap . ' ' after the defeat of his amendment Mr Umunna say : ` ` with a hung parliament , we have a real chance in future to shape Britain ' s exit from the EU to protect job and work people . ' ' in a statement Mr Corbyn ignore the Labour rebellion . instead he attack the Tories declare : ` ` this government be out of control , with no mandate . ' '
big race for FREXIT France head to the poll today to choose a new President - and it ' s a battle for Frexit . favourite Emmanuel Macron be against and call Brexit a crime . but Marine Le Pen , of the Far-Right National Front , plan an exit vote . she say of the UK : ` ` it ' S great what they ' ve do . their growth be double ours . ' ' Far-Left Jean-Luc Melenchon , also want a Frexit poll and have accuse the EU of threaten ` ` vengeance ' ' against the UK . here be the main candidate . the two with the most vote go head-to-head on May @card@ . Emmanuel MACRON an Independent candidate and the favourite to win the two-round election . call Brexit a ` ` crime ' ' and say the UK will face ` ` servitude ' ' . have urge the @card@ EU country to protect the single market and ` ` rebuild the European dream ' ' . have warn PM Theresa May not to expect any concession . odd : @card@ Marine Le Pen VOWED to support UK in Brexit talk if she become president . say result of Brexit ` ` formidable ' ' and have accuse EU of ` ` blackmail and threaten ' ' Britain ahead of discussion . odd : @card@ Francois FILLON the Conservative candidate vow not to punish Britain in divorce talk and be seek ` ` serene ' ' and ` ` fast ' ' separation . want ` ` good neighbourly relation ' ' in future and deep defence agreement . odd @card@ JEAN-LUC MELENCHON the leftie call EU an ` ` open-air jail ' ' and have urge it to let UK leave ` ` without punishment ' ' . reckon Brexit be ` ` the beginning of the end of an era ' ' and ` ` an earthquake for the EU as we know it ' ' . odd : @card@
the Sun SAYS Hard to fault the so-called ` ` hard Brexit ' ' letter back by @card@ Tory MP make sound sense to us . that ' S because ` ` hard Brexit ' ' be just ` ` Brexit ' ' . and we have make the same suggestion ourselves . the letter demand a strict timetable for leave the single market and custom union . quite right . there be no Brexit without that . it insist any transition period must not be prolonged by the EU against our will . and it demand we be free to sign our own trade agreement during that time . that will enrage Brussels . but it be crucial we can at least negotiate those deal , ready to sign the day we finally leave . we do n't envy Theresa May , catch in the crossfire between resolute Brexiters and scheming Remainers try to scupper the vital EU Withdrawal Bill . thankfully her position , like most of Britain ' S , be near the former than the latter .
the Sun SAYS Brexit wrecker REMAINERS say Brexit be already chaos . who be cause it , apart from them ? the government position on the single market and custom union be clear . and the intention of the new repeal bill , to adopt all EU law and amend it post- Brexit if need be , be harmless . but Remainers be bend on sabotage it . not because it be a genuine threat , but because they want Brexit to collapse . every day the deadline get closer . every obstacle throw up harm our prospect . meanwhile Jeremy Corbyn turn up in Brussels to hold his own EU ` ` negotiation ' ' . what for ? we have a government . he ' S not in it . all his little stunt achieve be to embarrass his country . perhaps that ' S why the EU indulge him .
judge ' N ' Fury ; UK ' s top justice moan about Brexit ruling blast the UK ' s most senior judge have blast criticism the court get over their Brexit ruling . Lord Neuberger oversee the landmark Supreme Court case which rule against PM Theresa May in her bid to fire the start gun on leave the EU without a vote by Parliament . it lead to furious criticism from the medium and politician , who accuse judge of ` ` block Brexit ' ' and be ` ` out of touch with the people ' ' . speak for the first time since the spat , the Supreme Court president accuse Justice Secretary Liz Truss of fail to protect the judiciary . he say judge ` ` be certainly not well treat ' ' and the government ` ` could have be quick and clear ' ' in come to their defence . Lord Neuberger ' S comment be widely see as a slap down of Ms Truss , who have no legal background before she be appoint to the job by Mrs May in July . while blast politician , the baron defend the press and say anti-judge headline be ` ` not the end of civilisation ' ' . he add : ` ` one have to be careful about be critical of the press as a lawyer or judge because our view of life be very different from that of the medium . ' '
BREXIT To Save Lives ; LANGUAGES CRACKDOWN NHS to up English test BREXIT could save life by allow the NHS to introduce tough new language test , lead medic claim . the Royal College of Surgeons say EU rule force the health service to accept low standard . President Clare Marx warn it ` ` sometimes put patient at risk ' ' . she say EU regulation on language testing , professional qualification and drug safety fall short . but Miss Marx say Brexit ` ` allow us to correct this ' ' . grandad David Gray , @card@ , die when Nigerian Dr Lucius Okere , who qualify in Italy but could barely speak English , accidentally give him an overdose . more than one in five surgeon in England train in the EU . the RCS say the NHS must be able to continue recruit staff from Europe . but it insist language testing should be beef up . a Department of Health spokesman say : ` ` we agree that there be opportunity present by the decision to leave the EU in raise standard of care and improve safety . ' ' the NHS be ` ` buckle ' ' under a ` ` mismatch ' ' between demand for care and funding , a think-tank have warn . the King ' S fund say hospital admission have increase @card@ per cent a year since @card@ . but between @card@ and @card@ funding ` ` slow significantly ' ' , average @card@ per cent each year .
may & Delay ; Brexit trade decision put off Bid to unite war Cabinet Exclusive Theresa May have delay a key decision about what Britain want from a Brexit trade deal - to buy more time to unite her war big beast . the Cabinet have be due to hammer out the issue next Tuesday but it have now be put off until the New year . source say the PM fear the gap be to widen between Philip Hammond ' S soft Brexit camp and Boris Johnson ' s bid for a clean break . instead that meeting , which will follow a small ` ` Brexit war cabinet session ' ' on Monday , will now only see each of the Cabinet ' S @card@ member ask to air their www.views.No @card@ aide be now draw up plan for a series of meeting throughout January to try to bridge the gap by February . the PM be then likely to make her third big Brexit speech to spell out what the government ' s formal request to Brussel be . the fresh delay have leave some senior Tory angry that Mrs May will waste two more crucial month , while the two-year-long Article @card@ clock continue to tick down . one minister say : ` ` it be delay on delay , and fudge on www.fudge.No @card@ be go to have to get off the fence on this soon , and they know it ' ' . another Cabinet source add : ` ` the big question everyone be ask ing be , whose side be the PM on ? so far , she have n't give anything away . ' ' Mrs May ' S delay be be give cover by the EU not be ready to begin trade talk , as it need more time to find a joint negotiate position among all @card@ member . the PM ' s chief of staff Gavin Barwell be also urge the Cabinet to wait until the EU show more of its card . a No @card@ source say : ` ` this be a negotiation . that mean there be two side to it , and a lot will also depend on what the EU decide it want . it ' s important we do n't box ourselves in too early . ' ' France be draw up a plan to coax thousand of London financier to Paris after Brexit with an incentive package include low tax for high earner . the move be a bid to reverse an exodus after former leader Francois Hollande ' s socialist crackdown five year ago . meanwhile a Financial Times survey reveal the UK ' s big international bank be set to move only @card@ job in preparation for Brexit - six per cent of their total workforce .
cool head Nic hold an ace now be the time for cool head . for politician of all creed to rise to the challenge . for some of them to face the music and admit their own shortcoming . but a glimpse south of the border reveal a political class in chaos . Prime Minister David Cameron might as well go now , his authority drain . George Osborne be nowhere to be see . it feel like the ship be drift with nobody at the wheel . the leader of the Brexit camp seem to have go to ground . their deafen silence suggest they have n't the foggy what to do . Jeremy Corbyn , meanwhile , be now the opposition leader only in name . his desperate cling on be an embarrassment to a once-proud Labour Party . but there be at least one cool head - Nicola Sturgeon . that be good news for Scotland amid the turmoil engulf Britain . the First Minister be the only leader who seem to have have any kind of plan for what come after Brexit . Brexit veto ' S one hell of a bargaining chip she set the wheel in motion within hour of the result . a statement of intent . talk with EU nation and the European Commission . reassuring EU citizen live here . a cross-party advisory group to encourage unity at Holyrood . pledge to protect our place in the EU by any mean necessary - include a second indy vote if need be . promise to focus on day-to-day government , regardless of the constitutional chaos . the more positively and decisively she act , the more everyone else in this sorry mess look inept and ill prepare , as if a big boy do it and run away . as if no one really think a Brexit vote could actually happen . in another twist yesterday , Ms Sturgeon suggest MSPs could effectively try to veto the Westminster legislation need to ensure Brexit . it be a typically carefully-worded intervention , couch in if and but . whether Holyrood could block Brexit look highly doubtful . but they could certainly make thing very awkward . and with top Tory in recent week make veiled threat about block Scotland hold a second indy vote , her posturing be justify . whatever else , it ' s a hell of a bargaining chip . sooner or later , the so-called big beast of Westminster be go to have to wake up to this reality .
300k FEWER UK VISITORS BREXIT could lead to @card@ few UK visitor to Ireland in @card@ , tourism expert have warn . and Failte Ireland say this could have result in ( Euro ) 88million in lost revenue and @card@ lost tourism job have there not be a strong performance this year in other market , particularly the US . there be 3.6million UK visitor in @card@ , but the tourism body predict @card@ few next year . the authority be to target cross-border tourist in a bid to offset the anticipated impact of Brexit . speak at the launch of Failte Ireland ' s get Brexit Ready support programme , CEO Paul Kelly say : ` ` we can not always assume that other market will continue to compensate , particularly as we now face a challenge in those market from a British tourism product make much more competitive by the low sterling value . ` ` but we can meet current challenge by work on those thing which remain in our control - our visitor experience , competitiveness , capacity and skill . ' '
' BREXIT Means Border BLOCKS ' ; Euro chief warning the EU ' s Brexit negotiator have insist that custom control will return to the border with the North once our neighbour have leave the union . Michel Barnier yesterday tell the house of the Oireachtas , ` ` Ireland ' S interest will be the Union ' s interest ' ' and ` ` Ireland be strong in the Union . and the EU be strong with Ireland ' ' . but he say there will be some border between North and South and custom will again become an issue . Barnier state : ` ` European integration help to remove border that once exist on map and in mind . ` ` Brexit change the external border of the EU . I will work with you to avoid a hard border . ` ` we have a duty to speak the truth . the UK ' s departure from the EU will have consequence . ` ` Customs control be part of EU border management . they protect the single market . they protect our food safety and our standard . ' ' Barnier be today go to the border and Northern Ireland to meet farmer and worker in a Dairy co-op . he point out that ` ` Ireland export much more to the other EU country than to the UK ' ' while ` ` the single market be a key asset for your financial or pharmaceutical industry ' ' . on the future deal with UK Prime Minister Theresa May , he say : ` ` the UK have be a member of the EU for @card@ year . it should remain a close partner . ` ` we must negotiate a bold and ambitious but fair free-trade agreement . ` ` we need the same ambition in international cooperation and development . ' ' address the politician , Enda Kenny say : ` ` we continue to ensure our concern and priority be reflect in the EU negotiating position as it evolve , and that we work closely with our EU partner towards a strong and constructive future relationship with the UK . ' '
welcome To OUR JUNGLE ; WAR ON BREXIT ; Pres hopeful ' s refugee camp fear a potential future President say we need more military near the North as Brexit loom or risk an outbreak of refugee camp like the Calais Jungle in France . Senator Ger Craughwell want to run for the Aras in October @card@ - when Michael D Higgins ' first term come to an end . if he win , the ex-soldier - who serve in both the British and Irish army - would become the supreme commander of our Defence Forces . follow the decision to close several barracks , the senator be concern about the strength of our troop with a hard Brexit loom . Craughwell claim our army need to beef up due to the post-Brexit threat of smuggling and a possible Calaisstyle refugee camp such as the infamous jungle . he tell the Irish Sun : ` ` if there ' s a hard Brexit , smuggling would start again at a phenomenal rate . we have to protect industry in the south . we do n't want cheap Argentinian meat landing in Liverpool , ferry to Belfast and come to Dundalk . ` ` Management of people will be a huge problem . if the brit close the border in the morning we could end up with a number of refugee want to move to the North of Ireland . ` ` we would finish up with a refugee camp somewhere along the border . ' ' his comment come after just @card@ soldier be mobilise during recent catastrophic flooding in Donegal . Craughwell say : ` ` we could have mobilise soldier to replace bridge in Donegal very quickly . ` ` but the reorganisation of the Defence Forces have leave a gape hole in Ireland . and Donegal have shine a spotlight on what ' s come down the line if there be a hard border . ` ` all we have in the North be Aiken Barracks in Dundalk and Finner Camp in Donegal . ` ` people ask why only @card@ be mobilise on Friday . there be about @card@ soldier in Donegal but most be on duty in Dublin . ' ' the senator , who would only take a maximum ( Euro ) @card@ from the ( Euro ) 262k President salary , tell us : ` ` the talk at the moment be point towards a hard Brexit . that mean the border between North and South become the European frontier . ` ` but we have close Cavan and Monaghan ( barracks ) . we need about @card@ troop in the northern half . ' ' @ Irish Sun Online WELCOME To OUR JUNGLE
Brexit be work ; Sun City Jobs MARKET BOOMS AS Employment AT A High VACANCIES ROCKET By @card@ % the job market continue to boom despite record employment level and the trigger of Brexit last month , recruiter reed report yesterday . vacancy on its site hit @card@ last month , up @card@ per cent on last March . this be despite fear trigger Article @card@ would lead to uncertainty in the job market . confidence about employment prospect be also grow among company . some @card@ per cent of @card@ firm quiz say Brexit will hit the job market - but immediately after last June ' s EU referendum this figure be @card@ per cent . the Reed report come follow official figure show unemployment in the three month to February be just @card@ per cent , the low since the 1970s . Boss James Reed say : ` ` it ' S good to see that so many be optimistic about the future . a lot now hinge on a successful negotiation . ` ` a majority of employer have not make change to recruitment since the vote to leave , indicate that business have hold firm and continue with plan to recruit . ' ' Reed ' S survey find @card@ per cent of firm have be hire as usual since the Brexit vote . role in engineering - up a fifth year on year - be among the fast grow in the first three month of @card@ . the three big benefit of Brexit accord to firm quiz will be more job for Brits , growth in export , and good trade deal outside the EU . good to see many firm be optimistic
let down on Brexit stamp how can we NOT have a set of stamp to mark Brexit ? this be typical of the crafty way of those who try to undermine our referendum . and what a fantastic design the Sun ' s first one be , four Red Arrows represent us aim for the star outside the EU . I feel a campaign come on . why not have a competition and vote to select the good design ? David Snelson Stockport Royal Mail can issue stamp to celebrate Game of Thrones , Star Wars and Beatrix Potter but refuse one to commemorate Britain leave the EU . this be a historic occasion whether you agree with it or not and it should be reflect in our nation ' S stamp . stamp should not be influence by political agenda . Royal Mail must reverse this decision . Luke Russell Wakefield , West York why should n't the Royal Mail bring out Game of Thrones stamp ? the series be fabulous and have a massive following . Brexit have become boring . Sylvia Monk Hayling Island , Hants SHAME on the Royal Mail for refuse to print commemorative stamp to mark Brexit . what have it come to when one of Britain ' s great political change be ignore in favour of a bloodthirsty TV programme ? Billie Jo Patten Newcastle upon Tyne the NHS have put on hold nonurgent procedure , due to the pressure on hospital . as this seem to happen annually , why not try NOT book any non-urgent admission from Christmas until February @card@ ? many patient opt to come in at short notice , so the slot would soon be use up . the cost of cancel , re-booking and re-cancelling must be colossal . gill Osborne Bristol why be the government sit on their hand and allow the misuse of the health service ? as a paramedic of some @card@ year I can quote a number of case of people come from abroad specifically for treatment . if I go to any other country I would get no treatment without insurance or credit card . name & ADDRESS SUPPLIED GP no longer work at weekend . last year my surgery close once for four day . be it any wonder A & E be under pressure ? if any other service , airline , railway , and so on be unavailable for four day , chaos would ensue . be no one go to address this issue ? death and sickness do not take a holiday . Mary Dawson Renfrew foreign aid should be cut to provide cash for the NHS . visitor should not be allow to land unless they have insurance to pay for treatment , include pregnant woman . all immigrant should have enough money to pay into insurance on arrival for five year . mike Turner Bognor Regis , West Sussex THERE can be no good cause to unite politician of all party than rescue the NHS . it be one of Britain ' s great achievement . MP must stop argue about who to blame and strive to get it back on its foot . jane Fisher Newcastle upon Tyne the NHS , the jewel in our crown , be not to be treat like a normal business . it need more funding and a reduction or even eradication of non-essential , non-medical post and the money save could then be put towards people get their required operation . mike Burnett Arbroath , Angus WITH the NHS in dire strait , this government should ban health tourist . they use scarce resource and block bed pay for by UK taxpayer whose treatment be often delay . Alfie Neild Warrington , Cheshire the hard-working staff in our hospital be not to blame for the state of our NHS , nor can government blame the elderly . the reason it be at break point be because of huge level of immigration over the last two decade , the closure of councilrun elderly people ' S home and health tourism . Michael Morgan Cosham , Hants TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply pensioner man our port be a great idea . Home Secretary Amber Rudd should get on with it ASAP . Phil , Swansea Wonder what Prince Philip think of Prince Harry ' S beard . Marion , Berks THERE be no deterrent for knife crime . if people know they would get @card@ year in jail for carry one they would n't do it . S Taylor , Slough , Berks I Ca N'T believe the London Fire brigade have take offence at the word ` ` fireman ' ' in a cartoon . I ' m sick of the PC brigade . George , Chippenham , Wilts Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
uncivil Servant Ivan be BLASTED ; BACKLASH AT QUIT Envoy ; he ' cross line ' Britain ' S former EU envoy quit for the second time in three day yesterday after minister refuse to work with him . Sir Ivan Rogers hope to land a cushy new Whitehall role after quit his job in Brussels . but he meet a furious backlash over his behaviour and resign from the civil service with immediate effect . last night it emerge he secretly meet ex-PM David Cameron at the end of last year and before denounce Theresa May ' s Brexit planning . he be say to have warn Mr Cameron that his successor be botch Brexit , and be not do enough to stop a ` ` disorderly ' ' departure . a source say : ` ` he think we be head for a car crash where we do n't get a deal . ' ' a pal say the ex-PM privately share Sir Ivan ' s view that Brexit will hurt the economy . gloomy Sir Ivan stun Westminster last week when he quit as Britain ' s permanent representative to Brussels . he also send an email to staff blast the government ' s ` ` muddle thinking ' ' over Brexit . Cabinet Secretary Sir Jeremy Heywood be alarm that he have ` ` cross the line ' ' that say civil servant advise and elected minister decide . a senior figure say : ` ` he seem to think he could criticise the government , the PM and resign - and then be give some other big cushy job . ` ` but it be make clear that wo n't happen any time soon . ' ' Sir Ivan leave without a pay-off but will receive three month ' wage in lieu of notice . former Cabinet minister Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` Sir Ivan have behave rather badly . I ' m surprise he do n't go sooner . ' '
may : accept BREXIT Vote ; PM ' S BLAST for RIVALS ; she warn MP over EU result Theresa May have lash out at Brexit blocker and declare : ` ` do not stand in my way ' ' . Remain-backing MP and Peers receive a tongue-lashing from the PM , who vow to quit the EU on her term . the Tory boss issue a warning to Europhiles refuse to back the referendum result tell them to ` ` accept what the people decide ' ' . in a tersely-worded statement , she warn opponent of the June @card@ vote : ` ` it be MP who overwhelmingly decide to put the decision in their hand . the result be clear . it be legitimate . MP and peer who regret the result need to accept what the people decide . ' ' the intervention follow Thursday ' S High Court ruling that Britain can not begin the official Brexit process without Parliament ' S backing . she be determine to trigger Article @card@ and begin the two-year EU divorce process by the end of March . No10 be appeal the decision to the Supreme Court but if that fail , pro-EU MP could add a string of amendment to the Brexit legislation before give it their approval . Mrs May , right , tell EU leader the formal process for leaving be on track . she say : ` ` we need to turn our mind to how we get the good outcome for the country . ' ' her attack come as prominent Remain campaigner seize on the confusion to plot a second poll . Nicola Sturgeon have vow her @card@ MP ` ` will not vote for anything that undermine the will or interest of the Scottish people . ' '
we vote , now get on with it ; PM Must Stop BREXIT DITHERING Just get on with it ! that be the consistent message from leave voter up and down the country . for such people , it ' S simple : ` ` there be a vote , the leave side won and now the UK have to leave the www.EU.No if or but . ' ' it ' s an instruction that our MP would do well to heed , and one that permeate all the finding from a fascinating series of focus group that I have be show . Change Britain , a new Eurosceptic campaign , have be speak to voter in Yorkshire , the Midlands , the North East and North West . one of the most striking finding be the complete absence of any buyer ' remorse . those who vote to quit the EU be happy , their frustration stem purely from the stall of the Brexit process and finger-wagging , preachy Remainers say it ca n't be do . many have be supportive of Theresa May , who be say the right thing , but patience be wear thin . many be demand ` ` a plan ' ' and some ` ` action ' ' . plenty be upset at the lack of communication , smell a rat . there be a widespread suspicion that a deeply untrustworthy establishment be prepare to sell them out . the tragic , explosive reality be that ordinary leave voter be right - Brexit be on the verge of go badly wrong , even though the economy have be astonishingly resilient since the vote . the Remainers be on the march , with Tony Blair and his vast financial and human resource return to the fray , the legal complication relate to Article @card@ be become ridiculously onerous and foreign leader be make the most of our divided , unsettled establishment to humiliate Britain as often as possible . Barack Obama ' s infamous intervention before the referendum backfire . it be a fair bet that the Maltese prime minister who want the UK to ` ` be bad off ' ' or the Polish foreign minister who say we may never leave the EU will have drive many into an even great rage . Angela Merkel ' s decision to block any fast-track deal over European expats be ment this week , as be the me lawyer believe that the a seminal moment news that some Supreme Court could yet allow Scotland or even the European Court of Justice to have the final say over Article @card@ . the reason so many Remainers now feel able openly to undermine Brexit be because the government have allow itself to portray Britain as a supplicant , a divided , rudderless country . to European diplomat it look as if our government ' S heart be not really in this and that our strategy be purely defensive , a bid to retain as close link to the EU as possible . many lead pro-Brexit activist and MP be furious , even though they remain loyal to the Prime Minister . the first obvious sign of Eurosceptics flex their muscle come in the form of a letter by @card@ Tory backbench MP demand a clean or ` ` hard ' ' Brexit , complete with withdrawal from the single market and the custom union . Change Britain have already sign up close to @card@ supporter . its good recruiting day be when the government lose its case in the High Court . staff by Vote leave alumnus , Change Britain be rebuild a network of ground campaign team and organiser across the UK . the stall and leafleting have restart , as have the digital and social medium push . crucially , the next action day in December will target constituency of anti- Brexit MP . Ukip may be in a parlous financial state but the ability of new leader Paul Nuttall to connect with ex-Labour work class and low middle class voter be be underestimate . some @card@ Labour MP hold seat that back Brexit , more than half the party ' S total . and at some point if Article @card@ end up get bogged down in Parliament , somebody - perhaps insurance millionaire Arron Banks - will begin to finance an aggressive , populist campaign group dedicate to oust any MP who defy the will of the public . all of this mean the Prime Minister will have to act quickly to prevent the situation from spiral out of control if the Supreme Court rule against her in the Article @card@ case , which be be hear next week . a decision be expect in January . she will first have to mount a public , vigorous and passionate defence of Brexit as a positive , epoch-defining choice . she will have to start to throw Britain ' S weight around , and slap down internal and external critic . she need to explain that while it would be mutually beneficial for the UK and the EU to agree a transitional deal when we leave , an inability to do so would n't be the end of the world . she will have to make it clear that she see the possibility of a free-trade deal with the US as a huge opportunity - one that she will start work on immediately - and that she wish to diversify the UK away from Europe economically and geopolitically . she will then have to apply maximal pressure on Tory MP to back her and be prepare to be pitiless with the House of Lords . but most important of all , she need to work out how she would engineer a General Election early in the new year , if all else fail . the Tories be more popular than anybody can remember , with the country in the midst of a historic shift to the right , cause in large part by the fact that the pro-Brexit majority still believe that Theresa May will deliver for them . she can not afford to let them down , even if that means take the great gamble of her career . ©Allister Heath/Telegraph Media Group Greater rage huge opportunity
out To Africa ; Brit so angry at Brexit he ' s leave for Ethiopia A Brit be emigrate to Ethiopia because he be upset by the Brexit vote . Negus-Stephen James , @card@ , have a one-way ticket to east Africa . he say he will arrive in Addis Ababa on New Year ' s Eve with no job or accommodation . Negus say : ` ` the Brexit result shock me and leave me feel uncomfortable and ostracise about live in a country which do n't seem to want outsider . ' ' the final straw for his exodus from the West come when Donald Trump win the US election . Negus say : ` ` I ca n't stand all the support for him . it make my decision a no-brainer . ` ` I just go out and book a flight . I have nothing line up and I ' ll arrive in my suit with one case . ' ' Negus grow up in Cardiff and now live in Wolverhampton where he have a £17,000-a-year marketing job . he have be to Ethiopia once , on a four-week trip to help a church community . but he be confident about the future . he say : ` ` I will be happy and more content in a place where I do n't feel I have to keep prove myself to be accept . ' '
Brexit to hit club in pocket former city trader Mark Warburton believe the Brexit vote will hit British football in the pocket . but he think there ' S so much money in the English game it ' ll hardly matter . Warburton reckon the weakening pound could see European import to English football demand to be pay their salary in EUROS . the Gers gaffer , below , say : ` ` the obvious issue which will come out of Brexit be the value of the Euro - sterling be weak so it do n't buy as much . ` ` at a Premier League level down south when they ' re bidding £35-£40million for a player it ' S cost them £3 -£4 million more so there ' s an immediate financial implication there . ` ` the player go to England will demand payment in euros and not in sterling , which be another increase to transfer cost . ` ` it ' s go to impact on Premier League club but , then again , when you see Crystal Palace bid £31.5m for a player , will it really matter that much ? ' '
Britain TRIGGERS BREXIT ; Donnelly : FG WAR ON Enda RISKY AS. . can Govt fight Ireland ' S corner ? fine Gael ' S decision to throw Enda Kenny ` ` under a bus ' ' be damage Ireland ' s chance of win a good deal on Brexit . Fianna Fail TD Stephen Donnelly make the claim in today ' S Irish Sun - just as UK Prime Minister Theresa May trigger Article @card@ to start the clock on our neighbour ' s withdrawal from the European Union . with the process now under way , we can reveal that : senior Irish official have not seek a ` ` special status ' ' for Northern Ireland , ruling out any chance of the six county be treat differently than Britain in negotiation . more than @card@ meeting have be hold with EU country to explain the Common Travel Area , an almost century-old agreement that allow free movement between Ireland and the UK , include for work . there be ` ` some apprehension and nervousness ' ' among some member state about the CTA ' s status post-Brexit . Enda Kenny will meet with @card@ other EU member state leader on April @card@ to outline a common position when the Brexit bargaining begin in earnest . and despite immense pressure to name his own exit date as Taoiseach , he have insist that he may remain in charge for the start of the EU-UK talk , schedule for the end of May or start of June . only then would he allow a leadership contest to take place , with Leo Varadkar and Simon Coveney the frontrunner . Stephen Donnelly , the former Social Democrats co-leader who recently join Fianna Fail as their Brexit spokesman , tell us that the linger leadership question be hurt Ireland ' s negotiate position . he say : ` ` the Taoiseach be well regard in Europe . he be good at relationship and he have his moment . his speech in the White House be a great speech . ` ` he should be applaud for it , and he be the second-longest head of state in the EU28 and he be well regard . ` ` and when you be as small as Ireland you do need goodwill . and he have goodwill . ` ` I would not be so bold to comment as to who Fine Gael should have as their leader . but I do think not have have a Brexit Minister be now bite Ireland badly . ` ` what we be always tell be , ' Enda ' s our guy , he ' S get the relationship . it be all about Heads of State ' . ` ` but the same people who tell us that have just throw him under a bus . he be not go to be our leader . ` ` a new Taoiseach will come into place , let ' s say July . they will have a Cabinet reshuffle . it take anyone , no matter how hard you work , a good six month to get on top of the brief . ` ` so we be into the next January before we have a coherent group , and then everyone be look at the next general election . it be chaos . ` ` Had they have a Brexit Minister they could have at least maintain the role the whole way through . Ireland be be damage by internal fine Gael politics . ' ' Key to the talk be Northern Ireland , which stand to be the region most acutely affect by the divorce process and its aftermath . Sinn Fein have call for a ` ` special status for the North within the EU ' ' , which would include access to the Single Market , retain peace funding and access to agriculture and fishery cash , as well as representation on the EU Council of Ministers . Donnelly reveal that Fianna Fail have raise the prospect of a ` ` hybrid model for the North ' ' - and the idea of a special economic zone - with UK Northern Ireland Secretary James Brokenshire . as well as retain the Common Travel Area , it would see border control push out to the Irish Sea - give the six county ` ` full access to the Single Market ' ' and allow it to ` ` stay within the Customs Union ' ' , the EU ' s external trade arrangement . Fine Gael MEP Brian Hayes raise a similar idea back in October , when he suggest that the Republic could pay the North ' s budget contribution to Brussels and assure it associate EU membership . Former Bank of England governor Mervyn King have also say there should be ` ` imaginative discussion ' ' on this island that could lead to ` ` shift the tax and tariff border , from the land frontier to the sea frontier , while not disturb the political arrangement ' ' . however , the Irish Sun have learn that Ireland ' S negotiator be not ask Europe to grant ` ` special status ' ' to the North . instead , they be say that there be ` ` unique and special circumstance ' ' that affect the region . the policy have be focus on the Common Travel Area , which be why more than @card@ meeting have be hold with EU country to explain the arrangement that have be in place with the UK since independence in @card@ . official believe the EU generally have be welcome to the CTA continue , which would protect the right of Irish citizen to travel and work in the UK freely - and vice versa - after Brexit . however , they admit there be ` ` political sensitivity ' ' around the arrangement , and there be ` ` some apprehension and nervousness about it from some member state ' ' . the Irish stance mean there will be some form of border in place between North and South - with thorny issue around trade , tariff and custom to be work out down the line . however , our civil servant be tell Europe : ` ` Anything that look and feel like a border be a problem . ' ' Wicklow TD Donnelly be also press for Ireland to enter bi-lateral talk with Britain about Brexit - have so far bow to a Brussels ban on direct dealmak . cite previous bank bailout talk , he say : ` ` that softly , softly approach , and that cap-doffing attitude , that I believe Fine Gael bring to Angela Merkel , mean we get shaft badly by the EU . so why would it work now ? ` ` we should have formal talk with the UK to see if common position can be agree . ` ` Europe be say , folk , on the Common Travel Area , the border - special UK and Ireland issue - why do n't you two come back with solution and we will see if we be okay with that . ` ` so let ' s do it , minister to minister . ' ' Foreign Affairs Minister Charlie Flanagan and his No2 , Dara Murphy , have hold @card@ meeting with Euro counterpart Bord Bia have be give ( Euro ) 3.6million extra funding to find new post-Brexit market for Irish beef and lamb an ESRI study predict Hard Brexit could cost @card@ Irish job and shrink the econony by @card@ per cent Soft Brexit with Single Market access could still see our economy contract @card@ per cent and unemployment climb Brexit have prompt more than @card@ international firm to approach the Ida about relocate to Ireland the last budget provide ( Euro ) 150million in low-cost loan to farming sector that export @card@ per cent to the UK ( Euro ) 3million have be give to Enterprise Ireland and Ida to help the country diversify its market beyond the UK 600k Irish citizen live in UK with same right to social welfare , work and pension as Briton under the CTA
may ' S £250M for ' No Deal ' ; PM READY To Go it ALONE ' Fund for Brexit flop Snub to Hammond Theresa May turn on the spending tap yesterday in case of a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit as furious Tory accuse the Chancellor of refuse to act . the PM tell the Commons £250million be be hand to government department such as the Home Office and HM Revenue & Customs . and she vow : ` ` where money need to be spend , it will be spend . ' ' it come after Philip Hammond enrage Brexiteers by write in the Times that he would approve spending on a ` ` no deal ' ' only when it be ` ` responsible ' ' to do so . speak yesterday morning , he say he do not want to ` ` waste ' ' money when an agreement be still possible . he further stoke anger by say it be ` ` theoretically possible ' ' all flight between the UK and EU could be suspend on Brexit day . but Brexit-backing Tories say later that the PM have put the Chancellor ` ` in his place ' ' . one say : ` ` it ' s a slapdown , pure and simple . ' ' and Eurosceptic Iain Dun-can Smith say : ` ` the PM ' s clear statement that all monies necessary will be spend clear up any ambiguity . ' ' Brexiteers have argue for month that Mr Hammond have be try to hinder Brexit , a claim he deny . it come two day after the Treasury tell the Sun no cash have be allocate for a ` ` no deal ' ' scenario . Mr Hammond signal No10 have force a rethink by tell the Treasury Select Committee of the £250million . the ex-Remainer say more cash could be spend Act . . Hammond beef up custom , give the possibility of a ` ` badtempered breakdown in negotiation ' ' . he urge the EU to realise a ` ` no deal ' ' would hurt the economy of the entire EU bloc . Labour say it would vote down any bid by the government to leave the EU in @card@ without a deal . a spokesman say it would oppose a ` ` no deal ' ' Hard Brexit and ` ` seek to push ' ' Mrs May to keep talk to Brussels until an agreement be sort .
Tory Ruth : no BREXCEPTIONS ; Warning ON SPECIAL Deal ; NI proposal ' threat to UK ' Ruth Davidson yesterday signal she would scupper any propose special Brexit deal for Northern Ireland . the Tory boss hint her @card@ MP would not vote to let the nation stay in the single market as Nat insist that would justify a bespoke set-up for Scotland . it come after a day of Brexit chaos amid report Theresa May propose the deal to ensure there be no hard border with Ireland after the UK quit the European Union . but as we reveal , she actually want to align EU trade rule with every part of the UK . Ms Davidson echo that position , say : ` ` the Brexit ballot do not ask voter if the country should be divide by different deal for different nation . ` ` while I recognise the complexity of the negotiation , no Conservative government should countenance a deal that compromise the integrity of the UK . ' ' she add : ` ` jeopardise the UK ' s own internal market be in no one ' S interest . ` ` if regulatory alignment in specific area be the requirement for a frictionless border , the Prime Minister should conclude this be on a UK-wide basis . ' ' Brexit Secretary David Davis later say of Monday ' s EU talk : ` ` the presumption be that everything we talk about apply to the whole UK . ' ' Ms Sturgeon yesterday say Tory have ` ` lost control ' ' of the negotiation . and she add : ` ` if there be to be regulatory alignment with Europe for the UK , that have to mean stay in the single market and custom union , as the EU wo n't allow cherry-pick . ' ' in a swipe at Ms Davidson , she say her rival have ` ` lost count of the number of position she ' S have on Brexit ' ' .
fishy business Scotland Secretary David Mundell be on Islay yesterday , tell fisherman there that ` ` everybody agree there be great opportunity for fishing post-Brexit ' ' . that ' s a bit different from what he say before the vote when he warn ` ` the fisherman be wrong ' ' over Brexit and ` ` there be no way we would go back to Scotland or Britain control British water ' ' . Mr Mundell use to say : ` ` the idea we would go back to a position where we be entirely in control of our own fishing be not one that be realistic . ' ' well it turn out he be right the first www.time.UK Environment Secretary Michael Gove have be busy in Denmark , tell Danish fisherman they will be free to fish the North Sea because the UK fleet lack the capacity to deal with all the fish there . but he insist that it ' S not an important concession because the UK will decide the term of access to UK water . fisherman ' S leader be still cling to assurance that they will call the shot after Brexit but that hope look increasingly remote . from the first , the UK Government have be clear . its Brexit paper state : ` ` give the heavy reliance on UK water of the EU fishing industry and the importance of EU water to the UK , it be in both our interest to reach a mutually beneficial deal that work for the UK and the EU ' s fishing community . ' ' the UK will not decide who fish in the North Sea . access to British water will be part of the Brexit negotiation with the European Commission , the European Parliament and @card@ EU member state . and , if it come to a toss up between sell out the fisherman or cut the City of London off from European financial market , which do you think the UK Government will bargain away ?
peace of NONSENSE ; Tory ' DELUDED ' ON BREXIT ; SNP hammer green as he claim power feud be over Tory bigwig Damian Green be brand ` ` delude ' ' last night for claim a longrunning Brexit feud with the SNP be over . Theresa May ' S No2 insist the rammy over whether repatriate EU power should go directly to Westminster or Holyrood have be iron out . speak as he emerge from talk in London with Nat chief , First Secretary of State Mr Green , right , tell reporter : ` ` talk of a ' power grab ' be now behind us . ' ' but within an hour , SNP Brexit Minister Mike Russell tell how the two side be still deadlock over the issue of @card@ power relate to the devolve area . a senior party source say : ` ` this have n't go away . if they seriously think so , they be delude . ' ' the row centre on Tory plan to take all repatriate EU power - even in devolve area like food , fishery and farm - then set UK-wide rule . the rest would be send to Holyrood . the SNP want all such policy area to come to Scotland , allow MSPs to decide if they want to sign up to common ` ` framework ' ' . the stand-off risk cause constitutional havoc as the Nat have warn they will not agree to the EU Withdrawal Bill - copy European law onto UK statute book - unless Downing Street back down . Mr Russell admit the side have make progress yesterday on the ` ` principle ' ' of work out which power would require UK-wide rule . he say : ` ` the Joint Ministerial Committee meeting be a tale of two half . ` ` we ' ve be able to make some progress , include agree general principle that should ensure the role of the Scottish Parliament in any UK-wide framework . ` ` however we remain unable to recommend the Scottish Parliament ' s consent to the EU Withdrawal Bill until the power grab be remove from the bill . ' ' Mr Green describe the first talk in eight month - which include Wales and Northern Ireland - as ` ` constructive ' ' and ` ` successful ' ' . he add : ` ` we agree there have to be way to preserve the UK single market . ` ` we fully respect the devolution settlement , that we expect this to end with more power go to devolve administration . ' ' Tory Scots Secretary David Mundell say : ` ` we ' ve take a major step on how we ' ll move forward with power from Brussels . ' '
TRADING pacer ; POST-BREXIT DEALS From @card@ ; Compromise see 3-year transition on EU custom Britain will start make new trade deal as soon as we leave the EU , minister be propose . but they will not be implement until as late as @card@ to make the transition as smooth as possible for business . other plan include a temporary custom union between Britain and the EU after Brexit in @card@ . official last night call it a compromise between war Cabinet minister . under the plan , International Trade Secretary Liam Fox will be free to start draw up deal with country , such as the US , immediately after Brexit on March @card@ , @card@ . but to keep EU trade free of barrier during the transition period , a key demand from Chancellor Philip Hammond , they will not be able to come into force while the temporary union last . while the plan pleased business leader last night , the wait of up to five more year to break into new global market risk anger hardliner . lead Brexit campaigner and senior Tory MP Bernard Jenkin tell the Sun : ` ` Anything that smooth our exit and give business reassurance be good but it depend how long this transition period be . ` ` we must not look hobble in our trading relationship with non-EU country . ' ' but CBI deputy directorgeneral Josh Hardie say : ` ` all effort should be make to deliver a single-step transition , so that business do n't have to adapt twice . ' ' the custom plan be the first of a series of detailed new paper on the government ' s EU exit thinking . another will be issue tomorrow on how to solve the Irish border conundrum .
50-NATION BREXIT DEALS Liam Fox have draw up a list of more than @card@ country for post-Brexit trade deal . the International Trade Secretary add he have further plan for @card@ new ` ` high value export target ' ' . the list include Kenya , Brazil , China and India . Sir Ivan Rogers , who quit as ambassador to the EU , be accuse of ` ` flounce out . ' ' Lord Powell , Margaret Thatcher ' s top foreign policy aide , tell the Times he should have be ` ` discreet ' ' . Sir Ivan accuse politician of muddle thinking . a YouGov poll show few voter think they will be bad off because of Brexit but six in ten think the PM be make a mess of it . and Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon hint she could shelve plan for a second independence referendum if the UK stay in the Single Market . UKIP leader Paul Nuttall and party member of the House of Lords have write to the honour committee ask for Nigel Farage to be knight for his Brexit role . BREXIT Britain Can SHOOT for Stars - James Forsyth l the Sun SAYS : page @card@
show Queen BREXIT Plan ; Tories in PLEA To PM ; ' Disappointed ' over secrecy Tory MP yesterday call on Theresa May to discuss Brexit plan with the Queen . they say her majesty be ` ` the nation ' s most experienced politician ' ' and should be inform . it be claim the Queen be ` ` disappointed ' ' with the secretive PM - the 13th of her reign - when she do not share her plan in a visit to Balmoral in September . instead of a private briefing , Mrs May simply stick to her thin public utterance . the Queen and Prince Philip have hold strongly sceptical view on Britain ' s EU membership for decade . but MP insist yesterday that Mrs May probably keep quiet because Brexit plan be not very advanced . Senior Tory MP Sir Gerald Howarth tell the Sun : ` ` Constitutionally , Her Majesty have a right to be consult - and she should be because she be the most experienced politician in the country . it would appear the Queen be as frustrate as the rest of us . ' ' the ` ` disappointed ' ' claim , in the Times yesterday , be the third time the monarch have be drag into the Brexit fray . in March The Sun reveal a bust-up with pro-EU Nick Clegg . later it emerge her Maj be ask dinner guest for ` ` three good reason ' ' why Britain should stay in .
who do EU Think you be ? ; Judges ' BREXIT Blow loaded foreign elite defy will of Brit voter who be EU ? a Motley handful of EUbased campaigner lead by a foreign-born multimillionaire spark fury yesterday after throw Theresa May ' s Brexit plan into chaos . the PM have want to invoke Article @card@ , start the formal two-year Brexit process , without go to Parliament for a vote . but three judge rule in favour of the group of @card@ ` ` Wrexiteers ' ' - head by Guyana-born fund manager Gina Miller . the dramatic High Court decision threaten to one trigger a must-win vote for Mrs May of MP in the commons on whether Article @card@ should be invoke . but Downing Street play down suggestion that the PM could call a snap general election next year to ensure she have enough supportive MP to get her plan through the House . last night there be fury that Brexit , vote for by 17million brit , could be betray by the tiny group of Remainers . the outfit , back by law firm Mishcon de Reya , also include Brazilianborn hairdresser Deir dos Santos . other be expat Brit Grahame Pigney - base in southern France - and Welsh-Italian environmental consultant Christopher Formaggia , who tweet last night : ` ` Victory against the fascist May Government . ' ' Mrs Miller , @card@ , who set up her own financial investment firm with 52-year-old husband Alan , say outside the High Court that the ruling be ` ` about our United Kingdom and all our future ' ' . the Remainers raise £170,000 online to launch the appeal to block the trigger of Article @card@ . Lord Chief Justice Baron Thomas of Cwmgiedd , Sir Terence Etherton and Lord Justice sale rule the PM could not trigger it alone via the Royal Prerogative . the government immediately appeal and the Supreme Court will hear the case on December @card@ . Ukip ' S Nigel Farage warn of public outrage if Parliament block the referendum result .
Brexit bunch up to summit ; BRITISH-IRISH TALKS ; Border Poll ' NOT ON MENU ' Enda Kenny have rule out the prospect of Britain ' s exit from the EU trigger a vote on a unite Ireland . the Taoiseach yesterday discuss the UK ' s ` ` divorce ' ' from Europe with devolve government leader at the British-Irish Council summit in Wales . speak to the press later , he dismiss report that he have privately comment at a Fine Gael function that Brexit open up an ` ` uncomplicated route ' ' to a border referendum . instead , Kenny insist that the criterion for call a plebiscite have not be meet . under the term of the @card@ good Friday peace agreement , the UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland - currently James Brokenshire - can only call a vote if there be clear evidence that public opinion in the six county be in favour of change . the Taoiseach say : ` ` there be no intention of have a border poll now , there be no indication that a border poll will succeed now . ` ` we have enough on our plate at the moment to deal with , such as Brexit . ' ' the implication for Ireland of a UK outside Europe have become a key issue in Brexit discussion , with EU leader stress that the problem of freedom of movement across the border must be address before other trade concern . the North ' S Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness say he would like to see a united Ireland ` ` tomorrow morning ' ' . and he claim that the majority Northern Ireland Remain vote in June show that there be now crosscommunity support for a border referendum . he say : ` ` the @card@ per cent who see their future in Europe vote to remain - that could n't have be achieve without the support of unionist , nationalist and republican vote together to achieve that . ` ` I think that be very , very significant as we go forward . ' ' McGuinness also reiterate that Sinn Fein would not suspend its boycott of Westminster if MP be ask to vote on the term of Brexit in the come month . Stormont First Minister Arlene Foster maintain the North ' s Brexit vote be ` ` on membership of the European Union , it be not a referendum in term of Northern Ireland or the Republic ' ' . she add : ` ` periodically this come up , and I be sure Enda love it come up periodically ' ' - a comment that draw a ` ` no , I do n't ' ' from the Taoiseach beside her . Kenny have earlier tell the summit that the North ' S heavily subsidise economy invite comparison with the former East Germany - hint unification would carry huge cost for the Exchequer . he also hold talk with Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon ahead of her trip to Dublin on Monday , when she will address the Seanad . Sturgeon say the two nation have ` ` a long tradition of cooperation ' ' , add : ` ` in the post-Brexit landscape , it have become even more important that we work together to protect our shared interest . ' '
shock at Davis ' no deal ' talk BREXIT Secretary David Davis have risk a fresh rift with PM Theresa May after hint we may never leave the EU . speak to member of a think tank at Whitehall , he let slip there be a chance the referendum result could be ignore . discuss the progress of Brexit talk , he say : ` ` my view be that it mean there be less chance of a no deal - and less chance of no Brexit . ' ' a source say : ` ` for the Brexit Secretary to express the thought that it might not happen be not what I expect , even behind closed door . ` ` it do n't square with the PM ' s stand . ' ' Mr Davis ' S spokesman say he back the PM .
Davis BRIBE for BREX WRECKERS ; NEW Bill To BUY Off REBELS David Davis yesterday announce a fresh act of Parliament on the final Brexit deal in an attempt to buy off a massive rebellion this week . the original EU Withdrawal Bill hit the Commons today and face a string of embarrassing defeat by Brexit rebel . but Brexit Secretary Mr Davis last night announce MP will be able to debate and vote on the term of the final arrangement . but he warn it be a take-it-or-leave-it situation - with Britain crash out of the EU with no deal on March @card@ , @card@ if it be vote down . the Bill be likely to hit the commons in late @card@ once the term of a deal have take shape - but could be delay if negotiation go to the wire . Tory MP Heidi Allen tweet that Mr Davis ' attempt at a concession be ` ` pointless if we have enshrine a drop dead date and get a deal at 11th hour ! there ' d be no time ! ' ' Fellow Tory Antoinette Sandbach say : ` ` the announcement be meaningless if , for any reason , the timetable slip beyond March @card@ . ' ' it come ahead of a testy eight day of commons debate on the troubled Withdrawal Bill , which have be bogged down by more than @card@ propose amendment . Labour ' S Chris Leslie say : ` ` it ' S a transparent and fairly desperate attempt at the eleventh hour to save face and avoid lose vote in the House . ` ` it be crucial this meaningful vote take place well before we leave . ' ' Mr Davis insist that Downing Street have listen to concern . he tell MP : ` ` it ' s clear that we need to take further step to provide clarity and certainty both in the negotiation and at home . ' ' he add : ` ` Parliament will be give time to debate , scrutinise and vote on the final agreement we strike with the EU . this agreement will only hold if Parliament approve it . ' '
Brexit be ' insane ' , Bourne star say ACTOR Matt Damon have describe Brexit as an ` ` insane ' ' idea in a speech to graduate at the prestigious Massachusetts Institute of Technology . the Bourne identity star raise concern about a ` ` buffet ' ' of world problem - which also include the refugee crisis and climate change . speak at the MIT commencement address , Damon urge the graduate to help solve the difficulty face the world . he say : ` ` the Brexit - for God ' S sake , that insane idea that the good path for Britain be to cut loose from Europe and drift out to sea . ` ` I mean what be Europe even go to look like in @card@ year ? ' ' Damon , whose Oscarwinning flick Good Will Hunting be set at MIT , tell the student : ` ` this world have some problem that we need you to drop everything and solve . ' '
Brexit can be slow ... long as we get there the Brexit negotiation finally start on Monday . when Theresa May call the election , she hope that her win a big majority would bolster the UK ' s position in these talk . in fact , the opposite have happen . she lose the Tories their majority , there ' s renew uncertainty about what the UK Government ' s Brexit policy be and many in Europe smell blood . the great Tory divide over the EU have be reopen by the election result . inside Cabinet , there be argument rage about what kind of Brexit to seek . ` ` people be have another go at the old argument , ' ' admit one weary No10 www.source.No one be be more vocal in this regard than the Chancellor Philip Hammond . since the election , the Chancellor - who Mrs May would have sack if she ' d win big - have be flex his muscle . Leave-supporting minister be furious about his behaviour . one say that if Hammond succeed in water down Brexit then he will cause ` ` a schism in the Tory party ' ' and multiple Cabinet minister will resign . he complain that the only beneficiary of this will be Jeremy Corbyn . in Downing Street , some suspect that Hammond be most interested in get his own back for the dismissive attitude May and her team take towards him before the election . ` ` he ' S still smart and feel very sore about the way he ' s be treat , ' ' one senior figure admit . this figure say that Hammond be ` ` articulate a strong Treasury opinion which never be that keen on exit the EU ' ' . No10 , though , insist that government policy remain the same : that Britain will still leave the EU , the single market and the custom union . indeed , the Labour idea that the UK should leave the single market but stay in the custom union be absurd . it would mean that the UK would have leave the single market but would not be able to strike its own trade deal around the world , remove one of the big economic opportunity that Brexit offer . but if the policy be n't change , the pace at which it happen be up for debate . ` ` that ' S where the space be , ' ' one senior Treasury source tell me . one of those intimately involve in the government ' s Brexit strategy say that ` ` the PM have always say a transition period be fine . but we can be more candid about that now ' ' . previously , the aim be to have the whole transition wrap up within three year , by the time of the next General Election in @card@ . this mean that the Tories would go into that campaign with UK budget payment to the EU end , the UK fully in control of its own immigration policy and the European Court of Justice no longer have jurisdiction over the UK . but there be now sign that opinion on this in Government be move . when I put it to one of those drawing up the UK ' s negotiate strategy that the transition might have to be extend beyond the next election , I be tell ` ` that argument be become more plausible ' ' . ally of the Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson , who with her @card@ MP be now hugely influential in the Tory party , say she be keen on the idea of a long transition , too . it would also help deliver the ` ` smooth Brexit ' ' that the DUP , on whose vote Theresa May must now rely , want . leaver should not set themselves against any kind of extended transition . as long as it be time-limited - and so ca n't leave the UK in permanent limbo - and result in the UK regain control over policy and the right to make trade deal around the world , it could work . what matter most be the destination , not how quickly we get there . l James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator .
first-class IDEA ; Liam Fox back the Sun call for special Brexit stamp exclusive Trade chief Liam Fox have hail the Sun ' s campaign for commemorative Brexit stamp as a ` ` first-class idea ' ' . Mr Fox , the third Cabinet minister to back us , call it ` ` a great way to mark the next chapter in our history ' ' . his comment heap further pressure on new Postal Services Minister Andrew Griffiths to order a rethink . Royal Mail boss have refuse to put out a stamp to mark Brexit on March @card@ next year , despite mark our EU entry in @card@ . PM Theresa May then move Margot James from the Post Services role after she brand Brexit stamp ` ` divisive ' ' . Mr Fox , who join fellow Brexiteers Boris Johnson and Michael Gove in get behind our campaign , say : ` ` I be massively optimistic about our future outside the EU and all the opportunity this will bring . ` ` within a little over @card@ month we ' ll be leave the EU and as an international economic department can once again start to make trade decision in our national interest as a sovereign state . ' ' and in a message to doom-mongers , he add : ` ` attitude need to change as we go into @card@ . Brexit be not a time bomb to be defuse , but a great opportunity to be embrace . ' ' a spokesman from the Department for Business say : ` ` all commercial and operational matter , include stamp theme , of the Royal Mail be independent of the government .
martyr for BREXIT ; LEAVE Voters STEADFAST ; most will accept economy pain the majority of leave voter would accept significant damage to the economy if it mean finally secure Brexit , a shock poll show . Sixty-one per cent think it would be a price worth pay , YouGov find . and @card@ per cent of Brexiteers say they would not mind if leave the EU cause them , or a relative , to lose their job . but there be a difference of opinion between old and young leave voter . Seventy-one per cent of those age @card@ and above be prepare to see the economy tank - compare to @card@ per cent of @card@ to 24-year-olds . a third of Remainers be also willing to see the economy take a hit - to ensure Brexit do not happen . in a newspaper column yesterday , ex-Tory leader William Hague say there be a danger of Brexiteers underestimate the risk of a sharp economic slowdown when the UK leave . minister last night take another step towards the EU divorce by unveil great power to issue sanction - and make it easy to stop suspected terrorist from access their cash . they will allow Britain to impose and enforce its own action against state such as Russia . Non-UN sanction be currently negotiate through Brussels .
Brexit mean beds-it for us SEX toy retailer Lovehoney yesterday say Brexit worry have not hit brit in the bedroom . the online firm , base in Bath , have see profit surge by two third to £5.1million . owner Richard Longhurst say : ` ` people be have sex before Brexit , and people be have sex after Brexit . ' '
we TAKE ON British Over Lough Claim ; FIRST BREXIT Battle LOOMS BREXIT have spark its first territorial dispute - reignite an old row over Lough Foyle . claim over the estuary between Co Derry and Co Donegal have exist since partition in @card@ . after the Good Friday Agreement , a crossborder body the Loughs Agency Claim ... Brokenshire be hand responsibility for the water , a key naval base during the Second World War . but in the wake of Brexit , Northern Ireland Secretary James Brokenshire be ask in a British parliamentary question how fishing right will be decide in Lough Foyle and Carlingford Lough , which also straddle both jurisdiction . he tell the House of Commons : ` ` the government ' S position remain that the whole of Lough Foyle be within the UK . ' ' Dublin ' s Department of Foreign Affairs swiftly reject the claim . a statement say : ` ` Ireland have never accept the UK ' s claim to the whole of Lough Foyle . ' ' Sinn Fein senator Padraig Mac Lochlainn brand Britain ' s stance as ` ` arrogant and provocative ' ' . he say : ` ` the Loughs Agency task with responsibility for manage Lough Foyle by both government have be repeatedly call for a resolution so that the real tourism and fishery potential of the Lough can be fully realise . ' ' @ Irish Sun Online
Theresa ' no plan ' Tory rap Theresa May be yesterday warn her Brexit dither risk hand control of EU talk to the Tory right wing . Pro-EU ex Cabinet minister Nicky Morgan say the PM be create uncertainty . the Tory storm : ` ` there have be a lack of a plan . the longer the gap be leave , the more likely it be that people be take up position . ` ` Hard Brexit , soft Brexit , there ' s a danger the government will find itself in a position where other people set the term of the debate . ' ' it come after Tory Ken Clarke accuse Mrs May of have ` ` no policy ' ' and say he would vote against a Brexit . the Sun say - Page ten
Let ' s keep all of our Brexit option open the only thing we know about Brexit at the moment be that we face a lot of unknown . Nicola Sturgeon be right to get a sound board about IndyRef2 but that do mean it will happen . she be be responsible in keep all option open even though we all know her preferred choice of action . Simon Clarke Edinburgh Sturgeon say Brexit would cost Scotland £11million . as a part of EU , Scotland have post a deficit of £14.3billion in @card@ and £14.8billion in @card@ . so be she say that the deficit would be bad outside the EU ? what will it be if we go for independence - where we would be out of EU and out of the UK ? James Robertson Grangemouth , Stirlingshire Sturgeon make out the whole of Scotland want to stay in Europe . only half of eligible individual voter vote to remain , whereas the other half - make up of those who vote to leave and the one who abstain - make up the other half who go to the poll . it seem that , because they do n't agree with her , they have become non-existent . john TALLAN Hamilton Jeremy Clarkson be talk absolute drivel about the ` ` danger ' ' of fox . every day people be attack by dog - which Jeremy claim to like - and his beloved car kill about @card@ people per year in the UK alone , many of them child . in contrast , not one human have ever be kill by a fox . Ewen Blake Glasgow I SYMPATHISE with the head who be apply his school ' s uniform policy . I teach in a primary school for many year and can recount many attempt to ignore rule by parent . child witness their parent wrongly challenge rule that be deem sensible . this convey a bad message to youngster . name and ADDRESS SUPPLIED as a self-appointed survival expert , how can Bear Grylls , picture , not know if urine be good for a jellyfish sting or not ? and surely when on his adventure , he could just point out that various reptile could be use to survive - without needlessly kill them . James Kirk by email
' Account for Brexit ' More than @card@ per cent of accountant believe Brexit would have a negative impact on Ireland . the Institute of Certified Public Accountants Ireland survey also indicate a lack of preparedness by Irish business for a possible Brexit decision on June @card@ . warn that a Brexit vote would lead to year of negotiation and therefore uncertainty , CPA boss Eamonn Siggins add : ` ` uncertainty be bad for business , but complacency be bad . ` ` it be important business act now to identify the risk factor specific to their business and to put in place robust contingency plan . ' '
crack in the Tory party ; BREXIT Bantz AT AWARDS do Theresa May lead the banter over Brexit as Tories mock each other at an award do . the PM wear a hard hat and high-vis jacket to receive Politician of the year from host George Osborne , a nod to his habit of be picture in the same on build site . Mr Osborne crack a gag about their last meeting , when she axe him as Chancellor . yesterday he jokily tweet he ' d get back the hard hat . Mrs May also use Tuesday ' s Spectator bash in London to poke fun at ex-No10 spin chief Sir Craig Oliver over his knighthood . Boris Johnson be rib for comment when win comeback of the year . a bit like Heseltine ' S dog , I fear I might be strangle Boris , the dog be put down when the master do n't need it any moreNo time for chit-chat. . bit like last time we speak Brexit will be a titanic success er , Boris ... the Titanic sink ! Craig Oliver retch violently after the Brexit vote . we feel the same when he be knight
BOJO : fund NHS NOT THE EU , PM ; Challenge To May ' S authority ; ' Glorious ' Brexit plan Boris Johnson last night tell Theresa May to forget pay vast sum to the EU after @card@ - insist the cash be spend on the NHS instead . in a huge challenge to the PM ' S authority , the Foreign Secretary map out his vision of a ` ` glorious ' ' future for Brexit Britain . and he say we must slash payment to Brussels as soon as we leave . he insist the government have to make good the Vote leave campaign pledge to increase spending on the NHS by £350million a week . Environment Secretary Michael Gove be also push for more NHS funding . Mr Johnson add that remain in the single market or custom union after Brexit would make a ` ` complete mockery ' ' of the Referendum . it come a week before Theresa May be set to map out her vision for Brexit in Italy . it be rumour she plan to offer to maintain our annual £10billion-a-year payment to Brussels during a two or three year ` ` transition ' ' phase . but in a move likely to spark anger among the PM ' S ally , Mr Johnson set out his own blueprint for the future . he write in the Daily Telegraph : ` ` once we have settle our account , we will take back control of roughly £350million per week . it would be a fine thing , as many of us have point out , if a lot of that money go on the NHS , provide we use that cash injection to modernise and make the most of new technology . ' ' Mr Johnson say he will not accept Mrs May pay £10billion a year to the EU as part of an interim post-Brexit deal . he say : ` ` we would not expect to pay for access to their market any more than they would expect to pay for access to ours . ' ' Brexit will leave the EU with a £30billion shortfall from @card@ to @card@ . steve.hawkes @ www.the-sun.co.uk the Sun say and James Forsyth - Page ten
tony ' S PHONEY WAR ON BREXIT ; Fury AT MEDDLER Blair ; call for ' insurgency ' Tony Blair be brand a ` ` snake oil salesman ' ' yesterday after he urge EU supporter to rise up and fight Brexit plan . the former PM claim quit the EU would be catastrophic and call on ` ` insurgent ' ' to ` ` mobilise ' ' for a second referendum . PM Theresa May have rule out a repeat of the June @card@ vote . but Mr Blair say the people must be give the chance to go back on their decision . he tell the pro-Remain New European newspaper : ` ` now we ' re the insurgent . we have to mobilise and organise , or we face the risk of the bad of all world . ` ` but we ' re a sovereign people . we can make up our mind and we can change our mind . ' ' Tory MP Stewart Jackson , parliamentary private secretary to Brexit Secretary David Davis , call the former Labour leader a phoney . he tweet : ` ` Blair the snake oil salesman will do much to boost the strong case for Brexit surely . ' ' Mr Blair say his discussion with French president Francois Hollande this week have fuel concern about the PM ' S negotiation , which he say would be ` ` very , very tough ' ' . he say : ` ` this be not about an elite over-ruling the people . there be absolutely no reason why we should close off any option . ' ' No10 brush off concern about Mr Blair ' s talk with Mr Hollande . a spokesman snap : ` ` Tony Blair speak for himself . ' ' they add : ` ` Tony Blair be entitle to put his view to whom he so choose . ` ` but what ' S important be the PM have be absolutely clear . the people have speak , we be listen , we ' re go to leave the European Union . and not only have the PM be clear here but she ' S also be clear when she ' S meet European leader . ' ' Tory MP Maria Caulfield , who sit on the Commons Exiting the European Union Select Committee , say : ` ` Tony Blair break his own promise of a referendum on the EU , encourage uncontrolled immigration and now ca n't come to term with the decision of the people of the UK to leave . ' '
may VOWS A Minister for BREXIT ; Bid To Woo LEAVE MP Theresa May will today vow that her first act as Britain ' S next Prime Minister will be to appoint a Brexit Secretary to her Cabinet . the Remain-supporting Home Secretary will issue the pledge as she formally declare she be run for the nation ' s top job . her promise be an attempt to reassure Leave-backing MP there will be no U-turn on last week ' s EU referendum verdict . the Brexit Secretary will be an MP who campaign for leave run a new ministry entirely dedicate to the UK ' S pull-out . Mrs May will also lay out a ` ` One Nation ' ' vision , strive for ` ` a country that work for everyone , not for a privileged few ' ' . she will add : ` ` the job now be about unite the party , unite the country and negotiate the well possible deal for Britain . ' ' Mrs May will also take a hard line on reduce the number of European migrant come in to Britain as part of a trade deal with Brussels after we pull out . two hour later , former London Mayor Boris Johnson will also make his leadership bid official with a speech in Westminster . his bid will be base around a ` ` positive , optimistic vision of the future of our country ' ' . he will also promise to give Britain ` ` a chance to believe in ourselves , a chance to believe in the value of this country ' ' . the showdown come after it emerge David Cameron privately tell EU leader it be a two-way fight between them - despite publicly pledge to stay neutral . meanwhile , pro-Remain Energy Secretary Amber Rudd , a Boris critic , have stun colleague by reveal she will back him in Tuesday ' s first round of voting .
' BREXIT supremo David Davis be [ ... ] ' BREXIT supremo David Davis be apparently ready to give Brussels a say over UK law for year after Brexit - despite the PM ' s vow to ` ` take back control of our law and end the jurisdiction of the ECJ ' ' . the ECJ could seize the opportunity to introduce unwelcome new law bind the UK on anything it like while transition arrangement continue , even after we have officially break free . as top Brexit lawyer Martin Howe QC point out , the ECJ will be an entirely foreign court once we leave the www.EU.No sovereign country should bend the knee to a foreign jurisdiction . a deal like this be the sure guarantee the Tories would lose the next election . '
MEP have Irish plan BREXIT @card@ A PRO-EU Tory MEP face suspension last night after say he could give up his British passport because he be ` ` ashamed ' ' of Brexit . London MEP Charles Tannock , @card@ , have take Irish citizenship in protest at Britain leave the EU . in an interview with the Irish Times he call Brexit a ` ` pack of lie ' ' . Tory MP Philip Davies urge Mr Tannock to resign . he say : ` ` if he ' s ashamed of be British perhaps he ought to start by give up sit as a British MEP . ' '
put the BREX ON ; UK in CHAOS NATS and Tory Chiefs Tell May To Go SOFT ; lNic urge total rethink on Euro split Theresa May must have a total rethink on Brexit after voter ` ` tell her where to go ' ' Nicola Sturgeon warn yesterday . the First Minister say the embattled PM should be force into a climbdown on EU split negotiation in the wake of her General Election humiliation . she insist Mrs May must back a soft Brexit , include stay in the single market and guarantee EU citizen in Britain can keep live here . the Nat leader say : ` ` I have bang my head off the brick wall of Downing Street for the past year for a UK-wide approach and she have refuse . ` ` she have pay the price for her intransigence . she go to the country ask for a mandate and the country tell her where to go . ` ` she can not simply carry on as if nothing have change . ' ' Ms Sturgeon turn the screw on the Prime Minister during a visit to Westminster . ' Brexit should n't mean sacrifice job ' issue a list of demand , she tell Mrs May - who have previously snub devolve administration get a seat at the Brexit table - the electorate have back the Tory into a corner . she say : ` ` the Prime Minister ask for a strengthened mandate and voter across the UK refuse to give her that . ` ` Brexit should n't mean sacrifice people ' S job and sacrifice living standard . ` ` let ' s resolve to stay in the single market and the custom union because that make sense for the economy . ` ` I be call for a cross-party approach that have the single market at its heart . ' ' but Downing Street last night vow there would be no U-turn from the PM despite lose her Commons majority on Thursday . a No10 spokesman say the government be target the good deal for all of the UK , insist there be ` ` no change to these plan ' ' . he add : ` ` we give a commitment at the very outset of this process to consult with devolve administration and that remain the case . ` ` Our position have be set out and that be where we be . ` ` we want to achieve the well possible deal for the whole of the United Kingdom . ' ' the Brexit bust-up emerge as Ms Sturgeon meet her party ' S @card@ MP outside Parliament . the First Minister - wear a blue dress and jacket combo - smile and wave as she join member , include acting Westminster leader Stewart Hosie . she then heap extra pressure on Mrs May by propose a rainbow pact to scupper the imminent Tory and DUP alliance . but the unlikely move - on the day the Queen ' S Speech be delay - would still require backing from the ten right-wing Ulster MP . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` question have be raise about what have be cook up behind closed door and be it possible for this Prime Minister - notwithstanding what she say on Friday - to put together a government that be functional and sustainable . it be an opportunity perhaps . ` ` I know the arithmetic - I be not blind to the hurdle - but it perhaps mean an opportunity for a progressive alternative to a Tory/ DUP government . ' ' but she refuse to discuss plan for a second indy vote after rival claim the SNP ' s loss of @card@ seat be a protest against a @card@ re-run . she say : ` ` I will reflect on the outcome of the election and I will do that carefully and in discussion with colleague across the SNP . ` ` I wo n't do it to a timetable dictate by headline-hungry journalist or base on any overly simplistic analysis of the election . ' '
Brexit work permit will work wonder to slash migration WE be get our first glimpse of how immigration will work after Brexit . that first glimpse be encourage . the new rule look fair , effective , reasonable and well time . fair because they recognise the right of EU national already here . effective because by deny in-work benefit to new entrant , they will reduce overall number . reasonable because key sector of our economy will still be able to hire the talent they need . well time because the new rule will apply to people who arrive after next month . if we wait until Brexit formally take effect in @card@ , there would be a rush to beat the deadline . most brit - include most who vote Remain - want immigration to be regulate . we understand that control our border do n't mean close them . we just want to feel we be in charge of who come in and in what number . the proposal by Theresa May , inset , be ambitious and balanced . EU national want to get job in the UK will be entitle to a five-year work permit , which can be renew . but they will no longer be able to claim payment such as tax credit , income support , housing benefit and help with council tax . nor will they be able to send child benefit to kid in their home country who have never set foot here . it be hard to argue against these restriction . indeed , many EU national already in the UK say they want to tighten up the benefit rule . our welfare system be base on the idea that we fill a common pot with our tax when we be work and draw from that pot at time of need . it plainly can not work if 60million brit be fill the pot but 500million EU citizen can empty it . the wonder be that other EU state be happy to keep the rule on common welfare claim - rule which be , in many case , invent by Eurocrats and Euro-judges rather than approve by their own minister . we shall welcome worker we will still welcome EU national who want to bring their talent here . many of our industry be worldbeating - the chemical , audio-visual , educational , scientific , legal and financial sector , for example . the good and bright people in the world often choose to work here and the new rule will barely affect qualified professional . indeed , while controlling EU immigration , we should make it easy for skilled non-EU national to get work permit in these key industry . there be also sector with shortage at a low wage level . for example , much of the hospitality industry depend on people who come to work here for a time , as do part of the NHS . a lot of agricultural work be seasonal and , in practice , be do by EU national . it be economic to bring in fruit picker by bus from Slovakia or Poland ; it be not feasible to fly them in from Bangladesh . these sector , too , should be happy with the new rule , which will allow them to find the worker they need . overall , number will still fall , though , because the removal of in-work benefit will make British job less attractive to EU worker . if you come to the UK from , say , Romania , and top up your salary with tax credit and other inwork benefit , you be good off on the minimum wage here than on the average wage at home . remove the top-ups and the work become a lot less lucrative . this be especially true because the pound be no longer overvalued , mean a British salary be worth less when convert into Romanian leu . the fall in number will be largely account for by unskilled EU migrant , of whom around @card@ a year arrive without a job offer . it wo n't affect doctor , engineer or scientist . nor will it affect EU national already here , whose right the government be keen to confirm , provide it get the same deal for the much small number of brit live in the EU . my guess be that almost every other electorate in Europe would prefer such a system to the free movement that Brussels insist on . but they be not give that option because their political leader care more about a unite Europe than about sensible immigration control . in refuse to budge , those political leader risk a real backlash . not the moderate reform that Britain be now contemplate , but an outbreak of populist anger that could lead to border closure and expulsion . Britain have find a good way . we shall continue to welcome worker from Europe but we shall do so on our www.terms.No longer will Euro-judges tell us whom we must admit and whom we may deport . we will decide who get to stay . what could be more reasonable ? l Daniel Hannan be a Conservative MEP for South East England Afghan peace can end exodus to UK - Page @card@
call for CALM in POST-EU Storm Britain ' S big firm be ` ` @card@ per cent commit ' ' to make the good of Brexit . Paul Drechsler , president of the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) , will tomorrow pledge to work closely with the government to ensure a smooth departure from the EU in @card@ . he will say : ` ` we must do more than just work together . we must be two partner with a common cause . ` ` Business have a responsibility to be part of the solution on Brexit . ` ` for many it ' s not about hard or soft Brexit but a smooth Brexit which avoid cliff-edge problem . ' ' Business leader at the CBI annual conference in London will be urge to remain ` ` calm , confident and constructive ' ' by Mr Drechsler , who be expect to call for pay restraint in the boardroom . he will back call for a binding vote on executive pay for firm which repeatedly fail to satisfy shareholder and warn : ` ` we need to send out a strong message that rewarding failure be not an option . ' '
BREXIT ' S A Grey Area for Davis THE Brexit Secretary David Davis joke to Tory MP on Wednesday night that there be only two people age over @card@ in his department . he explain that this be why he want to hire some more experienced figure to work on the negotiation , and from outside the civil service if necessary . the old member of the Cabinet might have be exaggerate for comic effect . but the Brexit department , which only have half the staff it need at the moment , do need some old , more experienced type . for Brexit to work , Whitehall need to ensure that the department do n't just have bright young thing , but also those with experience of complicated international negotiation . the presence of 67-year-old Davis do guarantee , though , that there will be at least some grey hair on the negotiate team .
Brexit trio to share mansion Civil servant fear firework after the three Brexit Cabinet minister be order to share the same official retreat . Boris Johnson , David Davis and Liam Fox will all use Chevening , a 17th century pile in Kent , to entertain world leader in Brexit negotiation . the set-up between the Foreign , Brexit and International Trade Secretaries be dub ` ` good sitcom ever ' ' on social medium . the mansion , near Sevenoaks , have traditionally be the Foreign Secretary ' S retreat . quiz on how the share will work , the PM ' S spokeswoman say : ` ` I ' m sure they will be able to work together on that . ' ' in Downing Street , PM Theresa May will take the large apartment over No11 while Chancellor Philip Hammond will live above No10 . Boris Johnson have to bin his £275,000-ayear Daily Telegraph deal and shelve a book say to be worth £500,000 due to his Cabinet role .
May must see Brexit as a great chance , not a problem Theresa May will be Britain ' S next Prime Minister if she can sound confident and optimistic about Brexit . May ' s most obvious weakness in this contest be that she back Remain , while most Tory member go for Brexit . Andrea Leadsom ' S supporter be convince that bang this referendum drum offer her a route to victory . ` ` the membership be sceptical and she talk their language , ' ' say one former minister who be support her . this be why it be imperative that May make clear that now the voter have deliver their verdict , she view leave the EU as an opportunity to be seize , not a risk to be manage . in the next few day , her Brexiteer supporter - include Liam Fox , Priti Patel , David Davis and her campaign chairman Chris Grayling - will all be out and about say that it be she who can deliver exit . but May herself need to sound upbeat , to not let Leadsom be the candidate of hope and change . ` ` the membership know Theresa . but it do n't know Andrea yet , she ' S get room to grow , ' ' one of Leadsom ' S confidant tell me . they want to emphasise her warmth , create a contrast between Leadsom the mother who have a career before politics and May , who first stand for Parliament nearly a quarter of a century ago . the most effective way for May to counter this be to make clear that she have the chop and the will to get trade deal do with the fastgrowing part of the world economy . her trump card against Leadsom be her experience . Leadsom have be a minister for two year . May have be on the Tory front bench for @card@ year and Home Secretary for six . be this moment in Britain ' S history , with the most complex negotiation of the post-war era ahead of us , the right time for a novice ? perhaps , though , the big risk for May be her record on immigration . she have n't hit the Tory target of cut net migration to the ten of thousand once in her six year at the Home Office . this be n't just down to EU migration either , non-EU migration be @card@ a year at the moment . Leadsom - unlike Boris , Osborne and Gove - have n't be an advocate of liberal immigration policy , so will find it easy to attack May for this failure . this will be a very different campaign from the one that May expect to fight . for year , she have be set herself up to run against a male opponent - a Boris or an Osborne . parliamentary boy ' club her message have be that she ' S a serious , unshowy politician who do n't treat politics as a game and be n't part of the Westminster set . but now May be take on another woman , it do n't matter that she be n't part of the parliamentary boy ' club because her opponent be n't either . which be another reason why May ca n't cede optimism to Leadsom . MRS May know that one of her weakness be that she ' s regard as a micromanager . so she ' s be busy this week try to reassure Tory that she ' ll bring back proper Cabinet government and there wo n't be a Blair , or Cameron-style , kitchen Cabinet . one of those who work for Cameron and be now sign up with May have already notice one difference in how the two team work . he have tell colleague that ` ` they even sit round table for meeting ' ' . the era of sofa government might be come to an end . James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator
we vote for Brexit , Lords who do those in the House of Lords think they be when they say they intend to make it difficult for some of the Brexit change to go through ? do they not realise that most of the people want Brexit so they should help this come about . Stephen Wallis Dover , Kent Lords and MP have drive British politics into the gutter with their undemocratic , selfserving and underhand exploit to derail Brexit . we be the laughing stock of the world and all because some people be frightened they might not make as much money when we leave the EU . Gordon Clark Basingstoke , Hants I really hope voter remember the name of the MP who be try to scupper Brexit so they can vote them out when they come up for re-election . terry Scott Broughshane , Co Antrim the only time you see a packed House of Lords be when there be an opportunity to stab the nation in the back . the next call to arm will be to block all aspect of Brexit . Hugh Jones Cardiff in a world go mad , Theresa May have keep her cool . she be not only cope with terrorism and the ineptitude of local government , but also Brexit and extricate us from the error of the past . I hope God give her the strength to finish the job . Pauline Simpson Walton-on-Thames , SurreyUK opposition party want the government to make a unilateral guarantee on the right of EU migrant instead of insist on a reciprocal deal to ensure British expats be protect . it seem the EU Brexit negotiator be have his job do for him and have no real need to attend the talk . they obviously do n't care that their action make the UK negotiator ' s job of get a good deal for the UK that much more difficult . patriotism seem to be think of as a crime in much of the UK . graham TRIMING Chelmsford , Essex it be time the likes of Labour Shadow Chancellor John Mc-Donnell be pull in for incitement to riot . on the eve of the day of rage protest in London on Wednesday he pull back a bit and say to keep it peaceful . what happen to respect for the ballot box ? mike Edge Leicester what a farce the day of rage be . all of Britain be angry over the Grenfell Tower tragedy but to use a protest about it to score political point be way below the belt and even upset a charity support Grenfell victim . it be an ill-advised idea that deservedly fall flat on its face . Adam Irving Newcastle upon Tyne Sun columnist Rod Liddle hit the nail on the head - the socalled day of rage be nothing more than an attempt to subvert democracy and bring violence to our street . these people only believe in democracy if the result be the one they want to see . and they think violence be acceptable to bring down a legitimate government . this be the true face of the Labour Party under Jeremy Corbyn . I hope their voter either vote for someone else or join the fight inside Labour to remove the far leave element and move the party back to the middle ground . Luke Russell Wakefield , West Yorks it be disgusting how militant hijack the march by the grieve , upset and quite rightly very angry people affect by the terrible Grenfell Tower fire . it be right that those affect want to be hear and to demand answer . this be not a march for those of the far leave . they be as bad as the politician they want to oust in think that theirs be the only opinion that matter . shame on them . my thought be with all those affect by the fire . Tim Collins King ' s Lynn , Norfolk TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply SUSPEND all foreign aid and put the million into the poor and needy of our country and build safe home not death traps . mark Mccain , Cardiff note for Prime Minister Theresa May . the people want a Brexit for Britain not a Brexit for Brussels . sort these upstart out . Cecil Calvin , Armagh . I vote to leave the EU , I wish i have n't . none of our MP show any enthusiam for leave so we be bind to end up with a very bad deal . john , Mablethorpe Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
BREXIT Boom ; UK have fast grow economy in the world BREXIT Britain beat the world ' s big industrial nation for economic growth last year , figure show . output , or GDP , leap two per cent despite June ' s vote to quit the EU and be set to beat other tw Ju a ` ` advanced ' ' G7 country like the US , say expert . output in the last three month rise @card@ per cent , double that at the start of the year , say the Office for National Statistics . the body credit the buoyant service sector and high street and holiday spending . it follow ex Chancellor George Osborne ' s warning that a Brexit vote would trigger an ` ` immediate , profound economic shock ' ' . yesterday , Chancellor Philip Hammond say every major sector grow last year , show the economy ' s ` ` fundamental strength and resilience ' ' . he predict ` ` uncertainty ahead ' ' as the UK ' s relationship with Europe emerge , but promise ` ` a competitive economy that work for all ' ' .
Let ' S name MP block Brexit ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think
Let ' s see big picture on Brexit ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think
BREX APPEAL ; MASSIVE BOOST for Brit Economy AT G20 Summit ; China , Mexico South Korea and Singapore join queue for UK trade deal ; ( ..but Japan ' S still dither ) Theresa May hail the UK ' s ` ` Brex Appeal ' ' yesterday as she reveal six country at the G20 summit want to strike a trade deal with an independent Britain . speak at the leader ' summit in Hangzhou , China , the Prime Minister reel off a list of nation which would welcome discussion about boost free trade . she name India , Mexico , South Korea , Singapore and Australia , whose premier insist plan over the term be ` ` already well advanced ' ' . an official UK source later add that China be also keen on explore trading relation after Britain leave the European Union . the official say : ` ` they specifically say China would be open to a bilateral trade deal . that ' S interesting to us as we leave the EU . ' ' Mrs May ' S boast come at the end of her first big overseas trip since move into Downing Street and be charge with negotiate Britain ' s divorce from the EU and journey back on to the global stage . and it follow warning about the negative consequence of the bombshell Brexit vote from US President Barack Obama and the Japanese PM Shinzo Abe . in a summit showdown yesterday , Mr Abe demand to know what Brexit mean for his country ' S factory in the UK . he corner Mrs May at the talk to insist upon ` ` a high degree of predictability ' ' on what Britain ' s trading term with the EU will look like after we leave . and in London , Japan ' S ambassador warn their firm could quit unless the UK remain the good place for them to be base , put @card@ UK job at jeopardy . but as the Hangzhou summit wrap up Mrs May tell a packed press conference that the world be keen to strike new agreement . she say : ` ` what I have find good about the discussion I ' ve have with a number of world leader , include with Prime Minister Abe , be the willingness to talk with the UK about future trade arrangement , and the confidence that they have in the United Kingdom . ` ` I ' ve find it very gratifying . ' ' the boss of two Commonwealth country be the most enthusiastic . Australia ' S PM Malcolm Turnbull offer to do Britain ' s first trade deal outside the EU , insist it should be ` ` very strong , very open ' ' . he say Australia ` ` would be get in to deal with the British early ' ' . ask if the deal could be do while he be PM or in the two year , nine month leave this Australian Parliament , he reply : ` ` absolutely . ' ' India ' S PM Narendra Modi also agree to start joint talk to look at how a London-Delhi deal could be tie down after we leave Brussel . his spokesman say : ` ` the Prime Minister underline that even after the Brexit , the UK remain as important to India as before . ' ' Mexico , Singapore and South Korea ' S leader also talk about remove barrier , the PM say . China ' S President Xi Jinping even open the door to Brexit Britain despite the tension between Beijing and London over the contract for the Hinkley Point nuclear plant . he tell the PM he be open to look at a bilateral trade deal . Brexit Secretary David Davis point to the encouraging message by say they prove Britain could create a ` ` unique ' ' model with the EU in divorce talk with Brussels . speak in the Commons yesterday he say Britain ' S size and trading relationship with the EU mean it could strike a deal that satisfied UK business as well as overseas giant such as car maker Nissan . Brexit still appear on the official summit communique last night as a potential threat to the world economy . pressure have grow on Mrs May over the two-day summit to get on with define Brexit . Italy ' s economic development minister Carlo Calenda say Britain must choose between free trade and immigration control . he say : ` ` we can not waste two year negotiate with the UK how to maintain them inside without them want to be inside . ` ` the more they ' re go to regulate and limit the presence of EU citizen in the UK , the more we ' re go to limit the presence of UK good into Europe . ' ' President Obama say on Sunday the US want to see what Brexit look like before it could do a trade deal with the UK . separately yesterday the head of the Lloyd ' S of London insurance market say Brexit could see some insurance business move to continental Europe . John Nelson say operation may quit before Brexit talk be over unless the government can provide ` ` clarity ' ' about the UK ' s future relationship with the EU . but Mrs May counter at the G20 by warn other world leader they need to up their game to win back voter disillusion with mainstream politics . she say a big effort be need to deliver the benefit of capitalism to see off a grow backlash and convince people they would not be leave behind . anger be mount in the US , lead by presidential hopeful Donald Trump , and across Europe , as poor worker fail to reap benefit while the rich prosper . Mrs May say nation must take ` ` bold action ' ' to stamp out irresponsible fat-cat behaviour . a G20 agreement to further blitz corporate tax dodger must be follow by action on high wage , good infrastructure and excess boardroom pay , she say . Mrs May tell the leader : ` ` it be vital that we deliver action in all these area if we be to retain support for free trade and the open economy which be the bedrock of global growth . ` ` we must do more to ensure that work people really benefit from the opportunity create by free trade . ' ' Mrs May say a number of leader , include Australia ' S Mr Turnbull , be interested in the UK ' s message on corporate irresponsibility . and she say her flagship plan to tackle greedy fat-cats and put worker on company board will be unveil in a few week .
stay power ; Brexit chief hint at Tory ' power grab ' climbdown a Tory minister yesterday signal his government will climb down over a Brexit ` ` power grab ' ' from Holyrood . Robin Walker tell MSPs legislation for all EU power to go to Westminster could be ` ` substantially reduce ' ' . he be speak at a Holyrood constitution committee where he be quiz on the divorce law clause give control of @card@ power exercise by Brussel over devolve area to Whitehall . the UK Brexit Minister say : ` ` there be discussion go on about where common framework be not require to be maintain . it ' S quite possible for the scope of clause @card@ to be substan-tially reduce through agreement between the government . ' ' but Mr Walker stress UK-wide rule would provide ` ` certainty and stability at the point of exit ' ' . he add : ` ` common framework need to be preserve in some form . ' ' Committee convener Nat Bruce Crawford say Mr Walker ' S reply show a ` ` slight change ' ' in the UK Government ' s stance in the long-running wrangle . it come as Tory MSP Adam Tomkins warn his party the EU exit legislation must ` ` respect ' ' devolution and need to be ` ` amend ' ' to satisfy Scottish and Welsh parlies . Labour ' s Europe spokesman Lewis Macdonald say : ` ` Theresa May ' S government know the bill be unacceptable and must change . ' ' Nat and Labour have call for all devolve EU power - on area include fishing and agriculture - to come to Holyrood .
we ' ll wage war on movie chief ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think if maker of the new Robert the Bruce movie have be pay their Scots crew less than English worker - as have be claim - then shame on them . people should be pay for the job they do , fairly and equally , regardless of gender , ethnicity or nationality . boss on the big-budget Netflix film - star Chris Pine - have well get their act together . if they be in the wrong , we should send them homewards to think again ... David Thomson Aberdeen what a bitter man Corky Ballas , the ex-husband of Shirley Ballas , picture , sound . with her now being in the spotlight of Strictly , he like to dish the dirt , reveal Shirley ' S affair even though he do his own cheating . sound like sour grape . Lisa Williams by text I Ca N'T belive Sydney Devine be come back for a nationwide tour at the ripe old age of @card@ . he be n't exactly my cup of tea but fair play to the tiny Bubbles singer . his longevity be a lesson to the current crop of talentless talent show wannabe - permanent , lasting fame require hard work ... and not very much talent ! Jim Evans Inverness Boris Johnson ' S Brexit manifesto be the perfect reply to Juncker ' s ` ` vision ' ' of the United States of Europe . Juncker expose the real nature of the EU , and why we be right to leave it . for over a year the anti-Brexit brigade have try to delay , thwart and ruin Brexit . at last , a positive vision of what Brexit can be . the British people do not vote for a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit or for huge payment to the EU to continue . Philip Roberts by email what a wonderful gesture by comedian Sean Kelly to donate his winning , from ITV ' S Tipping Point : Lucky Stars , to the help the Heroes charity fund . well do . Robert Dowell by text postal union leader Terry Pullinger have vow to smash the Royal Mail to bit if he do n't get his way over pension . not surprisingly , his union the CWU be the Labour Party ' s fifth big donor , give uncle Jeremy nearly £2.8million in donation to date . if he do smash the Royal Mail what be he go to say to the 100,000-plus postie who would lose their job , and their dependent ? harry Hodge by email it be a miracle that no one be kill when the roof be tear off a double decker bus in Edinburgh when it try to pass under a 12ft bridge . but at least it can now be put to good use as an opentop sight-seeing coach for trip around the capital . Kerry Allan Glasgow
the CRAIC Door ; BREXIT Plans UNVEILED UK-Irish border to be ' wide open ' fear of easy route for migrant plan to keep the Irish border wide open after Brexit risk leave a ` ` back door into Britain ' ' for illegal EU immigrant , critic warn . the government ' s detailed proposal on the Ireland dilemma also reveal a vow to keep the 65-year-old principle of free movement between the UK and Ireland . the two pledge be key to uphold Ulster ' s peace process , Theresa May say . the Brexit Ministry ' S paper , reveal yesterday , drop a strong hint for the first time that EU citizen will still be able to come to Britain as tourist without a visa . official concede that mean they will be able to travel to Ireland and then on into the UK unchecked . immigration boss would have to rely on detect illegal once they have arrive - rather than at border . a senior official say : ` ` from an immigration control perspective , it have never be about the physical block of people at the physical border . ' ' Irish senator Mark Daly , of Fianna Fáil , warn open border would create ` ` a smuggler ' charter ' ' for people and good . Lib Dem home affair spokesman Ed Davey brand the government ' s plan as have ` ` more hole in it than a colander ' ' .
EU See ! UK Still LIKED By World ; top player say poll Britain be still see as a major world player despite Brexit , a global poll find . the Ipsos Mori study of @card@ country say a comfortable majority of @card@ per cent view the UK as a positive influence on world affair . three quarter of people in India , the US and South Africa see our role as important and useful . but attitude be bad across EU country angry about Brexit , with just @card@ per cent call Britain positive and @card@ per cent negative . it come as Cabinet minister this week launch a charm offensive to win round sceptical boss at home and abroad to support the UK leave the EU . Spain be the most hostile , the poll of @card@ people find . just @card@ per cent say our global influence be positive . India give the big thumbs-up to britain with @card@ per cent . the UK ' s average score of @card@ per cent be still high than the US , which @card@ per cent see as a positive influence ` ` under President Trump . Britain be also above China on @card@ per cent . but we be low than Germany ' S @card@ per cent and Australia ' S @card@ per cent . Canada top the list on @card@ per cent . Russia be bottom on @card@ per cent . Ipsos Mori ' S Bobby Duffy say : ` ` Britain ' s mid-table rating reflect a general pattern of EU country see us less positively than other . ' '
BREXIT BEGINS ; Brussels DIVORCE fight ; EU talk kick off Britain be seek a ` ` deal like no other in history ' ' as our landmark EU divorce talk finally get under way today , Brexit boss David Davis declare . a year after the referendum , he have travel to Brussels for the opening of negotiation . he will go head to head with chief EU negotiator Michel Barnier for the first time in a day of discussion . the opening skirmish be set to cover the status of expats , the ` ` divorce bill ' ' slap on us by the EU and what to do about the Northern Ireland border . Mr Davis say he would hammer out a ` ` bold and ambitious deal ' ' for the UK . he add : ` ` while there be a long road ahead , our destination be clear - a deep and special partnership between the UK and the EU . a deal like no other in history . I look forward to begin work on that new future . ' ' he speak as his former deputy warn any watering down of our position would be a betrayal of Brits . David Jones , sack as Brexit minister by PM Theresa May last week , write there would be ` ` a whirlwind of public anger ' ' if ` ` Brexit do not mean Brexit ' ' . but split have emerge in the government ' s position as Chancellor Philip Hammond hint border control should play second fiddle to skill and job in Britain . Mr Hammond also warn about the consequence of fail to get a Brexit deal . Mrs May have repeatedly insist the government be prepare to walk away from talk , claim no deal be good than a bad deal . the Chancellor say : ` ` no deal would be a very , very bad outcome for Britain , but there be a possible bad outcome and that be a deal that be deliberately structure to suck the lifeblood out of our economy over a period of time . ' ' Mr Davis say : ` ` as I head to Brussels to open official talk to leave the EU , there should be no doubt - we be leave the European union and deliver on that historic referendum result . ` ` now the hard work begin . we must secure a deal that work for all part of the United Kingdom , and enable us to become a truly global Britain . ` ` Leaving give us the opportunity to forge a bright new future for the UK - one where we be free to control our border , pass our own law and do what independent sovereign country do . ' ' the opening meeting ' S agenda be agree after preparatory ` ` talk about talk ' ' . Mr Davis warn : ` ` these talk will be difficult at point but we will be approach them in a constructive way . ' '
@card@ % Want TOUGH TALKS Four out of five Irish voter believe the government should be more robust in its Brexit negotiation , accord to a new RTE poll . the study , commission for Brexit , Trump and U , by David McWilliams , left , which will air tonight , show @card@ per cent of respondent think our politician should be tough in their dealings with the EU over Brexit . when ask whether voter trust party in the upcoming Brexit negotiation to protect Irish interest , some @card@ per cent of voter trust our own government to do so . some @card@ per cent trust the EU ' s negotiate team and only @card@ per cent believe it of the British government . one of the top priority identify by the EU be a hard border with Northern Ireland , the threat of which have lead to some discussion of a unite Ireland .
ca N'T Let EU Go ; Election @card@ Party LEADERS in the Telly SPOTLIGHT Corbyn ' s nightmare interview refuse to back Brexit @card@ times Labour Jeremy Corbyn raise fear he may betray Brexit voter after refuse seven time to confirm that he would take Britain out of the EU . the under-fire Labour leader spark the fresh muddle during a BBC interview yesterday . it come after he formally launch his General election campaign with a hard-left vow to ` ` demand our money back ' ' from capitalist boss . and Broadchurch and ex-Corrie actress Julie Hesmondhalgh invite ridicule by introduce Mr Corbyn on stage in Manchester as someone who ` ` give a toss about stuff ' ' . on another day of Labour chaos , he have initially declare Brexit as ` ` settle ' ' in his BBC interview . but ask whether this mean the UK would leave the EU ` ` whatever the deal on the table , ' ' Mr Corbyn repeatedly fail to give a definitive answer . he merely say : ` ` there be a clear vote a year ago , ' ' add that a Labour government would ` ` get the good deal with Europe ' ' . Mr Corbyn admit to the BBC ' S Laura Kuenssberg : ` ` I do n't know any more than you do exactly what ' s go to happen in the future . ' ' a Labour source desperately try to draw a line under the confusion by insist : ` ` the issue be settle . ' ' but Brexit Secretary David Davis blast Mr Corbyn ' s ` ` chaotic incoherence ' ' and say his comment expose how Britain ' s EU rival will make ` ` mincemeat of him in negotiation ' ' . lib Dem foreign affair spokesman Tom Brake call Mr Corbyn ' S interview his ` ` Michael Howard moment ' ' - refer to the ex-Tory Home Secretary ' S @card@ TV grill when he dodge the same question from Jeremy Paxman @card@ time . meanwhile Labour fall deep into civil war over candidate selection after Mr Corbyn ' s union backer unite parachute a top official into one of the party ' s safe seat in Liverpool . City mayor Joe Anderson , who miss out , say : ` ` today we be remind the Labour Party be not always a meritocracy . ' ' elsewhere , a student who introduce Mr Corbyn at a campaign launch last month have quit her role with a university Labour group after it emerge she post racist , anti-Semitic and homophobic tweet between @card@ and @card@ . Bethany Barker , who be head of Nottingham Labour student Committee , apologise for the comment when age @card@ . matthew .
the Sun SAYS talk Junck THERE be viper more trustworthy than serial liar Jean-Claude Juncker . Theresa May can learn from his treacherous , one-sided , self-serving leak of the alleged detail of their private dinner at Downing Street . first lesson : never , ever repeat the experience . it be profoundly depress that this bluster Euro-toad have any part in the Brexit process . he be contemptuous of democracy , admit he will cheerfully deceive million of EU voter if it serve Brussels ' blinkered interest . ` ` when it become serious , you have to lie , ' ' read his most infamous quote . we can be @card@ per cent sure , then , that he have grossly distort what go on at No10 and , more seriously , tell Angela Merkel the same tall tale . what be almost as repugnant yesterday be the shameful glee of diehard Remainers as they gullibly swallow Juncker ' S every last syllable , desperate for their prejudice to be confirm . they be will him on , willing Brussel on , hope their own Prime Minister fall flat on her face . why ? because it be more important to them to be prove ` ` right ' ' , to assert what they see as their intellectual and moral superiority over 17.4million Brexit voter , than it be for Britain to emerge with a decent deal and prosper thereafter . ultimately they hope we be humiliate so totally that we give up on Brexit . Juncker do too - he make no bone about it . his team hope brit ` ` wake up ' ' to the ` ` harsh reality ' ' before it ' S too late . talk to this delusional buffoon be therefore a waste of time . even by his own account he say nothing constructive at the meeting . he merely throw up obstacle and patronise Mrs May , leader of one of the world ' s great nation - one Europe have repeatedly rely on , and still do , for the security of its people . since Juncker remain convinced we will bottle out of Brexit if he be objectionable enough , maybe a big majority for Mrs May next month will sober him up . he could certainly do with it . Remainers say this ` ` transcript ' ' be ` ` damn ' ' . for who ? not the PM . she politely but firmly argue Britain ' S corner , be upbeat about overcome hurdle and talk up the need for both side to make Brexit a success . it WAS damn for the EU . it need Brexit to fail because it be petrify of its own collapse . its arrogance be a front for its insecurity . and there will be plenty more of it .
no go back ... so bring on the Brexit prophet of doom in the long war to free this country from our unelected , unwanted master in Brussels , last week we see the Normandy Landings . the point of no return . the turn in the tide of history . the moment when the end - still so far away - seem like a reality at last . MP vote by an overwhelming majority to start the process of leave the European Union . more than this , they vote - by @card@ to @card@ - to honour the democratic will of the British people . before the referendum , the government spend million tell us that our vote be final . yet still there be embitter soul - so use to get their way in their soft , pamper life - that believe they can stand in the way of democracy . but now Prime Minister Theresa May have the authority to trigger our divorce from the corrupt , crumble EU . now we be on the far side of D-Day . May , to her eternal credit , have change the narrative . all talk of ` ` hard Brexit ' ' and ` ` soft Brexit ' ' suddenly seem ludicrously old hat . we vote , in large number than we have ever vote for anything , to leave the EU . there be nothing on the ballot paper about hard , soft or squishy Brexit . there be only in or out . we choose out . and now there be only Brexit . we be make no attempt to cherry-pick the bit we like about EU membership . all we want be to get the hell out of this abusive relationship . ` ` suicide ! ' ' cry Labour MP Stephen Pound , one of those mouth-foaming , eye-swivelling Remoaners , as the vote be read out . yet if anyone be rush to top themselves then it be surely the Labour Party , which now reek with undisguised contempt for the will of the British people . here be Labour ' s great dilemma - it profess to represent ordinary British worker yet it believe the ordinary British worker be racist , stupid and horribly wrong about Brexit . why would anyone vote for a party that despise them ? Forty-seven Labour MP vote to halt Brexit , many in constituency where the man and woman who vote them in also vote to leave the European Union . Jeremy Corbyn ' s most loyal supporter , shadow home secretary Diane ` ` Sick note ' ' Abbott , fail to turn up for the historic vote , cite ` ` illness ' ' . a sudden bout of chronic Brexititis , Diane ? it can be very nasty . she be tweet away like a mad thing just an hour after be too poorly to vote . miraculous recovery ! thank god this repulsive Labour Party will never again be anywhere near form a government . there be nothing quite as sickening as a Labour MP who have suddenly twig that they be on the wrong side of history . guess what , Tulip ? Labour ' S Tulip Siddiq , who resign as shadow early year minister to oppose Corbyn ' s support for trigger Brexit , come out with the tired old Labour lie that the 17.4million brit who vote to leave the EU be xenophobic bigot . ` ` the reason why I ' m take the stand I ' m taking be because , in Hampstead and Kilburn , we do not wince when we hear people speak in a different language on public transport , ' ' simper Siddiq . Tulip Siddiq be my MP . guess what , Tulip ? I hear two language at the breakfast table . my wife be Asian . our daughter be mixed race . and you , Tulip , be exactly the kind of arrogant cretin that lose the referendum for leave . and you , Tulip , be exactly the kind of intellectual pygmy who will prevent Labour from ever win another General Election . so bring them all on . bring on the pompous democracy denier and their fresh legal challenge . bring on the splutter prophet of doom . bring on the Labour MP who loathe their most loyal supporter . bring on the threat of a Scottish Referendum . bring on Tony Blair , look more like a recently exhume corpse with every day . bring on purple-chopped Ken Clarke . bring on all of yesterday ' S man . and bring on the House of Lords - stuff full of democracy-loathing Lib Dem peer who still think they can keep us inside the EU . go ahead , your lordship - make our day ! Brexit be kill Labour and nobody will shed a tear if it also kill the House of Lords . we be off the beach and into the field . and nothing can stop Brexit now .
Trump : a victory be my Brexit PRESIDENTIAL hopeful Donald Trump have declare that if he win the US election it will be like ` ` Brexit time ten ' ' . the tycoon , @card@ , urge supporter to get out and vote as Election Day on November @card@ approach . he promise : ` ` we ' re go to win so big . this will be Brexit time ten . ' ' Mr Trump have praise the UK ' s vote in June to quit the EU . address a rally in Albuquerque , New Mexico , he urge the crowd to vote for the ` ` last chance ' ' for change . Hillary Clinton ' s lead over him crumble after the FBI ' S boss publicly reveal she be face a fresh email probe . the FBI now have a warrant to search @card@ potentially incriminate emails . Weiner ' S wiener - Pages @card@ & @card@
Indyref2 no bluff , Nic tell PM May ; Bluff Nicola Sturgeon will today issue a Brexit ultimatum to Theresa May and warn the PM : ` ` I ' m not bluff on indyref2 ' ' . the First Minister will open the SNP conference with a demand that the Tory chief consider how to keep Scotland in the EU when the UK leave . a source close to Ms Sturgeon say last night : ` ` Nicola will deliver a very plain message to Theresa May . she will make it crystal clear that continue on Page Two continue from Page one she be not bluff about another indy referendum . ' ' Mrs May have stress there would be ` ` no Brexit opt-out ' ' for Scotland in a blast at the SNP . but Nat chief have order government official to continue draw up secret plan for Scotland to stay in both union . it ' S understand these will be present to Downing Street before the Article @card@ Brexit process kick off next year . SNP chief say the PM pledge to consider any idea float by the Scottish government when she meet Ms Sturgeon in July . but the insider add : ` ` the time be fast approach when she will need to make good on that promise . and Nicola will make clear to conference that if the PM do n't , she will not blink when it come to the option of independence . ` ` Every single part of Scotland vote to remain , yet we be threaten with be drag out of the EU by a Tory government with just one MP here . ` ` the First Minister will lay down a clear challenge to the Prime Minister - show us you care about Scotland as much as you say you do . ' '
Phil Yer Boots ; Tories in Birmingham VOW To Make BREXIT SOFTER Cash pledge to help firm ride rollercoaster Philip Hammond yesterday vow to bail out business hit by a Brexit ` ` rollercoaster ' ' - and fight for the well possible EU trade deal . address the Tory conference , the Chancellor insist employer ' EU exit fear be ` ` understandable ' ' . pledge to champion a soft Brexit to protect British job , he tee up a Cabinet showdown on the shape of our exit deal with lead leaver who want a clean break . lay down the gauntlet , he say : ` ` no if , no but - we be leave the European Union . but it be equally clear to me that the British people do not vote on June 23rd to become poor . ' ' Mr Hammond issue a key pledge to take whatever step be necessary to keep the British economy go during the ` ` turbulence ' ' ahead . he also offer support to British business as they adjust to life outside the EU - open the door to major tax cut to keep firm ' profit up . he confirm that his predecessor George Osborne ' s plan to get rid off the deficit by @card@ have be postpone - ease the pace of spending cut and tax rise in another boost for the economy . Mr Hammond pledge to spell out a slow timetable to keep on reduce the deficit during the Autumn Statement mini-budget in November . and he agree to guarantee to match all EU funding to business once we exit . aide to the Chancellor also suggest his big offer may one day mean compensation for company who export to Europe if trade tariff be impose . this be something that Japanese car giant Nissan have demand . in a pointed hint to the Sunderland-based manufacturer , Mr Hammond ' S spokeswoman say Nissan should find his offer ` ` reassuring ' ' . the Chancellor warn there be no room for complacency and negotiation with the other member state will be complex . he strike a markedly different tone to other Cabinet minister ' speech that lay out a more positive Brexit vision . it leave the clearly-angered Tory faithful in the Birmingham conference hall silent for long period of his speech . earlier , Mr Hammond say there be ` ` anecdotal evidence that business be postpone investment decision ' ' . he add : ` ` that be still the central prediction of forecaster - overall leave the EU will still have a negative effect on growth . ` ` Our job be to mitigate that . ' ' International Trade Secretary Liam Fox later hit back at Mr Hammond ' S soft Brexit bid . the pro-Brexit campaigner insist that Britain should not be afraid to take the lead on the world stage , add : ` ` we be inspire , we be embolden and we be ready . ' ' Arch-eurosceptic Tory MP John Redwood say : ` ` I do n't think there be go to be bad turbulence this year or next from Brexit-related activity . ' ' Mr Hammond ' S intervention be welcome by business boss . but CBI Director-General Carolyn Fairbairn say : ` ` the core challenge still remain : to get the good deal for the UK and keep the economy on track . ' ' Work and Pensions Secretary Damian Green will today pledge to help cleaner and handyman start their own firm through the ` ` gig economy ' ' .
Ireland expect an increase of used UK car after Brexit ; lTHE will end roar when a Porsches , Aston Maseratis , exotica gather car datum expert www.Motorcheck.ie have warn that now Brexit be confirm the impact on the Irish Motor Trade be set to be negative . the financial market expect Sterling to weaken against the Euro by between @card@ per cent mean import from the UK become more attractive result in an increase of use vehicle import from the UK to Ireland . the extent of this will be largely determine by economic factor . Michael Rochford , manage director of www.Motorcheck.ie say : ` ` the knock on effect of Brexit be potentially very worry for both the new and use car market in Ireland . firstly , a weakening of sterling and a surge of cheap UK import will mean use car value in Ireland may fall sharply from their current position . at the Ride site on 6.With trade Charles Hurst Isaac Agnew Trust , the over @card@ Supercar open at Park & event run this may leave many car buyer in negative equity as the value of the car they be drive fall beneath what they owe . ' ' whilst the economic impact on the new car dealer and distributor in Ireland could be severe , on the flip side use car sale may begin to boom via a surge in cheap UK import and fall use car value . Sprucefield Park and Sunday , September ti n that support from Specialist Cars , Porsche and Ford organiser have gather supercars together . Sunday ticket sale 1.30pm at the Sprucefield Ride Site and the until 5.30pm . however , Motorcheck caution that ` ` buy a use import have its own risk , as we be all too aware , give the high incidence of clock and write off car , so consumer need to remain vigilant and check the history of any use car no matter how attractive it look on paper . ' ' for more info see www.myvehicle.ie
BREXIT Charge THERE have be a huge surge in support for the Brexit campaign in the UK , an opinion poll find yesterday , with the leave campaign up seven point on two week ago . the ICM phone survey reveal a four-point Brexit lead . the survey suggest a 14-point reversal as , once ' do n't know ' be exclude , Brexit - support by ex-London mayor Boris Johnson , right - be ahead @card@ - compare to Remain ' S @card@ lead a fortnight back .
standoff on Rock ; BREXIT News @card@ Theresa May yesterday refuse a Spanish bid to hold the Brexit transition to ransom over Gibraltar . Madrid persuade EU boss to include a last minute demand that a separate agreement must be strike if the territory be to be cover by the transition deal and not cast out on Brexit day . Spain want to use Brexit to force joint sovereignty on the Rock , as well as make a grab for its airport and lucrative off-shore business . during PMQs , Mrs May insist Gibraltar would leave at the same time and on the same term as the rest of the UK . Gibraltar ' s deputy chief minister Joseph Garcia last night welcome the PM ' S stance .
chief Whip , Or PM ' S WHIPPING Boy ? so , who be to blame for the debacle of the government ' s attempt to put the date of Brexit into the EU Withdrawal Bill ? last week , Theresa May announce the government be put down an amendment to the bill to make clear that Britain be leave the EU on March @card@ , @card@ , at 11pm . this proposal draw a furious reaction from those Tory MP who want the soft of Brexits . they complain that the government be needlessly limit its room for manoeuvre . enough Tory MP have now threaten to vote against the amendment that the government be consider withdraw it . do so would be HUMILIATING . it would also weaken May ' s position in the negotiation with the EU by highlight that she do n't have a reliable majority for her Brexit policy in the Commons . defender of May be try to stick the blame for this carry-on on new Chief Whip Julian Smith . they say he tell No10 that Tory Eurosceptics be become concerned that the Brexit date be n't in the bill . so they should put down an amendment to clear up the matter . the fact May ' S defender be seek to pin the blame on the Chief Whip so early in his tenure be a worrying sign . with no Tory majority in the Commons , the relationship between the Chief Whip and No10 be crucial . if that break down , then the government really will be in trouble .
JUNCKER : I ' LL See EU LATER ; Them ' S THE BREX ... Euro boss warn UK of ' regret ' Britain will soon regret voting for Brexit - but the EU will move on , the European Commission president have insist . in a speech set out the future direction of the bloc , Jean-Claude Juncker say the UK ' S exit would be a ` ` sad and tragic ' ' moment , but it be ` ` not the be all and end all ' ' . and he evoke Queen Liz to describe how Brexit help to make @card@ an ` ` annus horribilis ' ' for the European project . but during the annual state of the union address , he insist that the ` ` wind be back in Europe ' s sail ' ' and country be knock on Brussels ' door to do trade deal . set out hope for close integration , Juncker announce plan to increase passport-free movement around the EU , expand use of the euro and boost the number of member state . but in an hour-long speech , which touch on area as diverse as the quality of fish finger to plan to create a super-presidency role , Brexit be give a notably short slot near the end . Juncker say : ` ` this w ill be a sad and tragic moment in our history . we will always regret this and I think that you will regret it as well , soon . ` ` Nonetheless we have to respect the will of the British people . but we be go to make progress . ` ` we will move on as Brexit be n't everything , it ' S not the future of everything , it ' S not the be all and end all . ' ' in a circulate as he make speech , Juncker say the @card@ month have be ` ` challenging ' ' for Europe . letter his past ` ` chal he man write : ` ` @card@ be in many way an ' annus horribilis ' for the European project . ` ` from the Brexit referendum , to the terrorist attack , slow growth and high unemployment in several of member state , to the ongoing migration crisis , Europe be challenge in many way . ' ' the Queen use the Latin'annus horribilis ' , mean horrible year , in @card@ to describe a torrid @card@ month during which the Prince of Wales separate from Diana , the Duke and Duchess of York split up , the Princess Royal divorce and Windsor Castle be badly damage by fire . Juncker say he want use of the euro , membership of the Schengen agreement - which abolish internal border - and the banking union set up after the eurozone crisis to become standard . he also insist it be ` ` high time ' ' that Romania and Bulgaria be include in the passport-free travel area and Croatia should follow soon .
call for 3yr limbo on Brexit THE Chancellor incense Brexit backer yesterday by demand a ` ` standstill ' ' transition deal with the EU . Philip Hammond declare that ` ` literally nobody ' ' want to see a dramatic fall in migration immediately after Brexit in March @card@ . and , while Theresa May holiday in Italy , he say Britain would seek a three-year transition deal keep our relationship with Brussels ` ` very similar ' ' to now . Mr Hammond tell the BBC : ` ` what people will want to know be the day after we leave they can still go to the supermarket and that French and Spanish produce will be on the shelf . ` ` they will want to know that if they want to go on holiday they will be able to get on a plane to their destination . ` ` the government have to ensure the economy function normally . ' ' MP Andrew Rosindell hit out , say : ` ` the appearance will be that Brexit will not actually mean Brexit . ' '
Tory SUSPENDED for N-WORD BREXIT RANT A Tory backbencher be suspend last night after drop the N-word in a Brexit rant . Anne Marie Morris have the party whip remove after say leave the EU with no deal be ` ` the real n***** in the woodpile ' ' . it mean Theresa ' s May ' s commons majority - back by the DUP - be last night cut to @card@ . the racist slur come at a Westminster lunchtime discussion about Brexit and trade . within hour the MP for Newton Abbot , Devon , apologise ` ` unreservedly for any offence cause ' ' . she insist ` ` the comment be totally unintentional ' ' after a tape of it surface . but face a backlash from her own MP , the PM hit out . Mrs May say : ` ` I be shock to hear of these remark , which be completely unacceptable . I immediately ask the Chief Whip to suspend the party whip . ' ' Politicians on all side call for the MP to be boot out of Parliament for her remark . Tory Heidi Allen say : ` ` we must show zero tolerance for racism . ' ' Lib Dem boss Tim Farron say the comment ` ` have no place in our parliament ' ' . Labour ' S Andrew Gwynne say it be ` ` outrageous and unacceptable ' ' language . the shocking phrase originate from America ' s deep south and refer to a nasty surprise , although it have be deem grossly offensive for decade .
Johnson ' S Lib SWITCH ; Sister Rachel be turncoat Boris Johnson ' s turncoat sister Rachel have sign up as a Lib Dem to try to slam the brake on a Hard Brexit , it emerge last night . the author - who confess she ` ` sit down and weep ' ' after the Referendum - reveal she ' d even toy with the idea of run as a Lib Dem candidate in June ' S General Election . but party rule mean the former Tory be likely to be too late to be consider as a candidate . Ms Johnson , below , who have make a career out of dish the dirt on her brother in a weekly Sunday newspaper column , write last year that Brexit have drive a rift through the Johnson family . she write that quit the EU make her ` ` feel wrong to my stomach ' ' . her former MEP father Stanley and Universities Minister brother Jo also both back Remain . age she claim her teenage son Oliver have blast his uncle ' s role back Brexit , say : ` ` Boris have steal our future . ' ' Ms Johnson join the Tory in @card@ after a dinner party conversation with David Cam-Camo eron . but she desert the party three year later , moan she have be treat ` ` like the brainwash member of a cult ' ' . last year , she write : ` ` in general election I have vote nothing but Tory , and since I have two brother stand as MP for the party , it ' s sort of a matter of family duty . ' ' but one Brexit-backing Tory backbencher defend her last night . James Cleverly say : ` ` it ' S almost as if a woman have a different opinion to her brother be shocking . ' ' source say Ms Johnson have ring Nick Clegg for advice and discuss standing as a candidate in the South West , where she have a home in Exeter . the region have historically be a Lib Dem heartland , but Tory MP clean up in the @card@ election . the Lib Dems be the only major party who want to reverse Brexit . Leader Tim Farron have demand a second referendum on the term of a Brexit deal . last night the Lib Dems decline to comment .
BOJO : 2YRS To Go ; we could have EU exit deal in @card@ , say Johnson BREXIT Shock @card@ Boris Johnson reckon Britain could leave the EU within two year . the Foreign Secretary say he expect Prime Minister Theresa May to trigger the official exit process ` ` in the early part of next year ' ' . he also suggest a deal may be wrap up before the twoyear time limit for Article @card@ negotiation , mean Britain could walk away in @card@ . last night Mr Johnson tell Sky News : ` ` I do n't actually think we will necessarily need to spend a full two year . but let ' s see how we go . ' ' it be the first public confirmation by a senior minister of Mrs May ' s Brexit timetable . but a No10 source insist : ` ` the decision to trigger Article @card@ be hers . ` ` she will be do it at a time when she believe it be in the good interest for Britain . ' ' it come as one of Mr Johnson ' S minister declare Boris do not want Britain to quit the EU . he be also say to be ` ` bumble ' ' and clueless after the shock Brexit vote . Sir Alan Duncan make the claim in the BBC documentary Brexit : a Very British Coup ? in footage film the day before the vote , Sir Alan say : ` ` I ' ve always think that Boris ' S wish be to lose by one so that he could be the heir apparent without have all the ... s**t of clear up the mess . ' ' he say that by champion Brexit Boris , who later quit the race to replace David Cameron as Tory leader , could become the ` ` darling of the activist ' ' . Shadow Brexit Secretary Emily Thornberry say she be appall by the revelation .
kill Phil ; BRUTAL Letter To May ; Boris and Gove reunite to slam Hammond on Brexit Theresa May face a fresh Cabinet war last night after Boris Johnson and Michael Gove reunite to slam the Chancellor . a private letter from the Brexiteers to the PM be leak yesterday , reveal fury at Philip Hammond for not show ` ` sufficient energy ' ' on our EU divorce . they claim the Chancellor be let the EU hold Britain ` ` over a barrel ' ' by not plan for the possibility of a No Deal with Brussels . and they urge the PM to gag Ministers who have ` ` not internalise ' ' Brexit . critic accuse the ex-Vote leave pair of mount a ` ` soft coup ' ' by take advantage of Mrs May ' s weakness to demand a Hard Brexit . but ally be furious at the leak , blame pro-EU civil servant . insider say it be clear Mr Gove and Mr Johnson , who fall out bitterly over the Tory leadership campaign last year , be work together . one senior Tory say : ` ` they ' re still not quite good of friend but they be make a supportive case for Brexit . ' ' the letter be think to date back to early October . it be then when the Sun reveal concern that the Chancellor be refuse to spend money on preparation for the possibility that the UK could crash out of the EU without a trade deal . it be only send to the PM and her chief of staff Gavin Barwell . challenge yesterday , Mr Gove say he be ` ` not go to go into the detail of what may or may not have be say in private correspondence ' ' . but he insist he would not stand in the way of Mrs May sign a large EU divorce bill if it be in ` ` Britain ' s interest ' ' . in a statement yesterday , a No10 spokesman say : ` ` we do not comment on leak . ' '
Brexit wait until @card@ BREXIT would be put back to @card@ under Labour plan for four year of transition . Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell want to double the two year propose by the PM in Italy . he tell ITV ' S Good Morning Britain it would be ` ` three or four ' ' . last month Labour Brexit Secretary Keir Starmer refuse to put a time frame on Brexit , say it should be ` ` as short as possible ' ' .
Brexit wo n't break trade I do N'T struggle to know what Brexit mean - it be to take back control of our own destiny . at the time of vote leave , I be fully aware there might be an economic price to pay . what I do struggle with be the attitude of those who treat as gospel what EU negotiator Michel Barnier and his cohort have to say about the UK in assert its own authority . he ' S like a stuck record , always threaten ` ` consequence ' ' . he say it ' s not possible to achieve a frictionless trade agreement with the UK . this be pure fiction - and daft . last year Canada achieve what Barnier be deny be possible for the British . to top it all , the EU last week agree frictionless border with Japan . Allan Mulholland Balby , South York APPARENTLY , Japan can have a tariff-free relationship with the EU ' s single market because it be ineligible to belong to the trading bloc . but the decision to leave the EU make the UK ineligible to enjoy the same status . the sooner the UK leave on World Trade Organisation term the sooner EU business will lean on their politician to find a sensible solution . john Collins Chelmsford , Essex if you listen to the EU propaganda machine , the BBC , Vince Cable and so on , it ' S like most of the UK do n't want Brexit . this be patently not the case . the US , the large world economy , and Japan , the third large , say they will agree huge trade deal with the UK as soon as Brexit be achieve . these be exciting time for our country and proof true democracy work . micky TUDES Fareham , Hants THE Confederation of British Industry want to stay in the single market and ignore the wish of 17million-plus voter who want to leave the EU . David Cameron , in his attempt to bully the electorate into vote Remain , make it quite clear that vote to leave the EU mean leave the single market . those 17million-plus therefore knowingly vote to leave the single market . the CBI should accept the democratic view of the electorate . terry Stringer Catshill , Worcs Many who vote for Brexit be become frustrated and disillusion that their vote be cast in vain . so it be a real boost to hear US president Donald Trump say he expect a very powerful trade deal with Britain to be wrap up very quickly . these word will be music to many , many ear and will hopefully shut the Remainers up once and for all . David Webster Taunton , Somerset Euro MP have blast Theresa May ' s offer on EU citizen ' right after Brexit as a damp squib . but what have they offer British citizen live in the EU ? she can hardly be expect to play her card when her opponent wo n't reveal their hand . they be clearly take advantage of her political weakness but she be the leader of a country that win even when the odd be overwhelmingly stack against it . Darren Martin Bristol WHATEVER Mrs May offer the EU it will never be good enough . why should foreign worker be able to vote in local election and have a right to stay ? if you want to stay in another country , all you have to do be become a citizen . then you can remain permanently and vote . where be the problem ? Gordon Clark Basingstoke , Hants Like most Remain fanatic , Vince Cable ' s contempt for the will of the British people be breathtaking . here be a British politician who hope Brexit will fail , who even predict Brexit will never happen . the next leader of the Liberal Democrats ? he should resign . Philip Roberts Tanyfron , Wrexham WITH politician like Tory ` ` Plebgate ' ' MP Andrew Mitchell , of all people , claim Theresa May be ` ` dead in the water ' ' , Jeremy Corbyn and Co be the least of her problem . Brexit be as important as ever . anything that will hamper or slow down the process be bad news for Britain . Dave Swann Newcastle upon Tyne TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply it ' S like listen to schoolground bully with MP constantly attack the PM . this have to stop . grow up and get a grip . Ann , Derby PLEASE can someone gag Katie Price ? she be a looker once and a decent person but she have morphed into an objectionably vile woman . Chris , Richmond , SW London be N'T the point of Brexit to put British citizen first ? no deal be go to appease Brussels . we should walk away now . we have the vote and we want out . gem email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
scotch ; May ' No ' To 2ND Indy Bid PM : now be not time for vote Theresa May have tell Nicola Sturgeon to stop call for a second independence vote as she will not change her mind on allow one soon . during showdown talk in Glasgow yesterday the PM insist : ` ` my position be n't go to change . ' ' just @card@ hour before Mrs May trigger Brexit , she again tell Scotland ' S nationalist First Minister that ` ` now be not the time ' ' for another referendum . she also refuse to be pin down on any future date for it , say Scot must first be able to see how leave the EU work out . instead Mrs May call on the nation to join the rest of the Union in ` ` pull together to make sure we get the well possible deal ' ' for the UK . the PM ' S visit come before the Scottish Parliament vote today on whether to back the call for a referendum . SNP leader Ms Sturgeon say she be ` ` disappointed ' ' with Mrs May ' s refusal to discuss an independence vote . and she say the PM also fail to offer Scotland any new power once EU control on area such as fishing , agriculture and energy end after Brexit . Ms Sturgeon also claim to have trap Mrs May by force her to admit Britain ' s trading relationship with the EU would be know by the autumn of @card@ - when she want the referendum . the First Minister say : ` ` it make it very difficult for the Prime Minister to maintain a rational opposition to a referendum in the timescale I have set out . ' ' Brexit Secretary David Davis last night refuse to commit to a cap on EU migrant after Brexit , tell a BBC Question Time special : ` ` from time to time we will need more , from time to time we will need less . ' ' he also say of rumour the EU will demand £50billion from the UK as part of the split : ` ` I do n't think we be go to be see that sort of money change hand . ' ' Research by think-tank Demos yesterday reveal Wales be the region most at risk from the consequence of a hard Brexit with no deal , follow by Northern Ireland . meanwhile , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier admit all of the EU and the UK will face ` ` severe consequence ' ' if Britain leave without a deal .
MERCI-LESS ; BREXIT MEMO Leak GAFFE French threat as UK plan ' have cake and eat it ' deal FRANCE be the big threat to a good Brexit deal because it want to steal our key service industry , a leak memo last night reveal . the document also suggest the official tactic to be use by the UK in EU exit talk be ` ` have cake and eat it ' ' . an aide to Tory MP Mark Field reveal what appear to be the government ' s thinking by flash note after his meeting with Brexit chief yesterday . it be suspected Mr Field go to the Brexit Ministry at no @card@ Downing Street , for a briefing from its boss David Davis . the note say a deal for the manufacturing sector would be ` ` relatively straightforward ' ' . but it add : ` ` Services hard because French hope for business . French likely to be most difficult . ' ' EU leader insist Britain will not get access to the Single Market if it have immigration control . the memo also hint at tension with the EU Commission ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier , leave , add : ` ` Very French negotiating team . ' ' and ` ` Canada Plus ' ' refer to hope of a good EU trade deal than Canada . No10 say : ` ` these individual note do not reflect the government ' S position . ' ' a Pro Remain think tank will launch a judicial review on whether Single Market membership end when the UK quit the EU .
May wo n't really be in charge until she win election the time have come for Theresa May to call a General Election and bury all the whine , cheating , antidemocratic , Brexitdenying pussy that would love to thwart the will of 17.4million British people and keep us in the European Union . call a General Election now , Prime Minister , and bury for all time the referendum denier in your own party . call a General Election and bury Nick Clegg , Ed Miliband , Peter Mandelson , Nicola Sturgeon , Keir Starmer and the rest . call an election and confront all the mealy mouth hypocrite who would deny our democracy . bury the lot of them , Prime Minister . repeal Clegg ' S Fixed-Term Parliaments Act of @card@ , which mean the next General Election be not until @card@ , and call an election today . be there an appetite for a General Election ? not really . after that long , bruise - and totally decisive - referendum campaign , it feel like the British people crave a period of stability and calm while we set about make Brexit work . many insist the Prime Minister should simply ignore the delusion of the anti- Brexit crew . but increasingly it feel like Theresa May have no option but to go to the country . the time be now . May be a hugely popular Prime Minister who have a majority of just @card@ . it be not enough for the battle ahead . there could hardly be a good time for an election . every other party be in disarray . the work class will never vote Labour again . the Lib Dems have be annihilate by Nick Clegg and Ukip be a brawl , bitch shamble without Nigel Farage . and north of the border - contrary to Nicola Sturgeon ' s virulent anti-Brexit rhetoric - the SNP be by far the most Eurosceptic party in Scotland , with @card@ per cent of their own voter back Brexit . there will never be a good time than Right NOW for Theresa May to get the mandate she so desperately need . a General Election now would give the Prime Minister the thumping majority she will need to deliver the clean break from the EU the British people so clearly want - and vote for in great number than we ever vote for anything in our history . but without an election , and with a majority of just @card@ , I have my doubt that may - for all her popularity across the country - can even get her grammar school legislation through Parliament . and if she ca n't deliver grammar school , then how will she deliver the sovereign nation we want to be ? Brexit-denying rabble do not support EU referendum Those who would love to keep this country under the cloven hoof of Brussels be not real democrat . there be not one of that Brexit-denying rabble that support a referendum on the EU . how can sore loser like Tony Blair , Clegg and Miliband bleat about democracy now ? they do n't want democracy . they do n't want real debate . they just want to keep us inside the corrupt , job-destroying , anti-democratic , fail EU , by fair mean or foul . they would , I have no doubt , all gleefully see a General Election as a last chance to wipe out the decision we make on June @card@ . yet the case for call a General Election now seem overwhelming . May ' s majority of @card@ will simply not be enough . so have the courage to call an election now , Theresa . and I would bet my last euro you will win it by a landslide .
enjoy applause now , Theresa , it ' ll get hard Theresa May be the Tories ' Harry Kane . like the Spurs striker , below leave , she be one of their own . she join the party as a teenager , meet her husband at a Tory disco and still go out leafletting on the weekend . she be also much closer to the activist in age than Cameron be : he be @card@ when he become leader , she be @card@ today . all this help explain the rapturous reception she will get when she take to the stage tomorrow to address the conference for the first time as leader . but Mrs May should enjoy the applause , because her job be about to get a lot harder . she be take the unusual step of speak on the opening day of conference because she want to get Brexit out of the way as soon as she can . number @card@ hope this will clear the deck for talk about domestic policy for the rest of the week . in her main address on Wednesday , Mrs May plan to focus on how she want a , ` ` Better deal for ordinary working people ' ' . but those hope for specific on Brexit be go to be disappoint . one Downing Street source tell me Mrs May ' S speech will be about ` ` show momentum ' ' , emphasise how she have be engage with business and foreign leader . number @card@ say Mrs May will not set a date for invoke Article @card@ , the two-year process for leave the EU , tomorrow . her Cabinet ally be dismissive of those push for a timetable on this . ` ` it be not grip the country . but it be grip minister who feel the need to say something quotable , ' ' one tell me . I understand that when the Brexit Cabinet Committee last meet a couple of week ago , minister be still give their view on what to do , rather than try to settle the government ' s negotiate position . Mrs May close the meeting , with the message : ` ` no run commentary please . ' ' ` ` have tell everyone else not to provide a run commentary , she ca n't do so herself , ' ' say one committee member . but diplomatic negotiation ca n't be conduct entirely in secret these day . not least because some on the other side of this negotiation be keen to put the bad possible spin on Britain ' s position as they try to poach business from this country . industry and the City also need to know , at least , what the British government be try to achieve . without that , they warn , they be simply go to have to assume the worst-case scenario . the Brexit minster have try to give more definition to what Brexit mean . but their attempt have be slap down by Number @card@ . this have cause some unhappiness . ` ` we be be do for state the bleed obvious , ' ' one of them have be hear to protest . part of the problem , as one Cabinet minister explain , be that Number @card@ be , ` ` still work out who it can trust ' ' . but Mrs May need to sort this pronto . for there be an increase view among minister that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' ca n't hold as a line for that much long , and certainly not past the New year . Mrs May want the conference message to be that her government will deliver ` ` a good deal for ordinary working people , and a good deal for Britain abroad ' ' . but she need to start show voter how she be go to do that . James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator Worst possible spin
Blair must keep his nose out of Brexit ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think S2
£3bn stash for EU farewell BREXIT A £3BILLION war chest have be earmark to cover ` ` every possible outcome ' ' for Brexit . the Chancellor be under intense pressure from Brexit support MP to prepare in case Britain exit the EU in @card@ without a trade deal . the cash , which may never need to be spend , will be split between department include the Home Office . Philip Hammond say of Brexit : ` ` we face a choice - embrace the future or reject the change . we choose the future . ' '
hook , Line & STINKER ; BREXIT TRAWLER BRAWL Phil & Gove fish row a new Cabinet split emerge after Philip Hammond and Michael Gove clash over whether to use fishing right as a Brexit negotiating pawn . the UK will take back control over its territorial water in March @card@ . but a major division have open over the issue between the Chancellor and new Environment Secretary Mr Gove , who clash during a recent Cabinet Brexit committee . Mr Hammond say the government should use the new power as a powerful card in exchange for trade concession with Brussels . but Mr Gove be adamant that Britain must retain full control of who get permit to fish in UK water . a Cabinet source say : ` ` Philip and Michael have quite an exchange on what to do with fishing right . this will be one of the major Brexit division line in Cabinet . ' ' Territorial water extend to either @card@ mile offshore or the median line between a neighbour country . keep British water open to French , Dutch , Spanish and German trawler be a priority for their government . Germany ' S Angela Merkel pledge to protect her fisherman ' S access during an election campaign visit last week . French fishing minister Stephane Travert say there would be no deal with the UK without fishing access . Singapore may renegotiate a free trade deal with the EU if Brexit mean access to UK financial market be not part of it .
Trump : if I win race it ' s Brexit time ten by Lauren Probert PRESIDENTIAL hopeful Donald Trump have claim if he win the US election it will be like ` ` Brexit time ten ' ' . the tycoon urge his supporter to get out and vote before Election Day on November @card@ . he promise : ` ` we ' re go to win so big . this will be Brexit time ten . ' ' Mr Trump have praise the UK ' s vote in June to quit the EU . the 70-year-old be address a rally in Albuquerque , New Mexico , on Sunday . he urge the crowd to vote for the ` ` last chance ' ' for change in America . Mr Trump take aim at rival Hillary Clinton after the FBI ' S boss publicly reveal she be face a fresh email probe . her lead over him in the poll crumble after the news and the FBI now have a warrant to search @card@ potentially incriminate emails . Mr Trump say : ` ` when we win on November @card@ we ' re go to Washington DC and we be go to drain the swamp ' ' . the crowd chant back : ` ` Drain the swamp ' ' . Weiner ' S wiener - Pages @card@ & @card@
pound HOG Day ; currency Claim ; Nic : we ' d use sterling if indy v ote after Brexit Scotland will still use the pound if the UK split after a Brexit vote , Nicola Sturgeon claim yesterday . the First Minister re-ignited the currency debate from the @card@ indy referendum as she be quiz on the impact of Britain leave the EU . the SNP leader have warn a re-run of the poll be ` ` almost inevitable ' ' if most Scot back Remain but the weight of English vote result in Brexit , as some poll predict . ask if an independent Scotland in the EU would have to use the Euro , she say : ` ` no . the pound be Scotland ' S currency just as it be England ' S currency . that ' s the currency I think all part of the UK should use and it ' S the one I ' d want Scotland to use . ' ' Ms Sturgeon be speak in a BuzzFeed debate at the Facebook HQ in London . she say : ` ` I ' m not really here to talk about hypothetical upon hypothetical . I ' m here to try to persuade you to vote Remain , wherever you live in the UK . ` ` but , Scotland use the pound . it ' s our currency just as it be your currency or anybody ' S across the UK and that ' s the currency I think we should continue to use . ' ' but last night Tory MSP Alex Johnstone claim : ` ` it ' s plain for all to see that , by remove itself from the UK , Scotland would not be able to use UK currency . ' '
@card@ boss say Brexit will hit UK ' s start-up biz ; Exclusive More than @card@ of Britain ' s top entrepreneur today warn a Brexit will threaten the UK ' s standing as one of the good place in the world to start a business . boss behind firm such as Jawbone , Jack Wills , Net-a-Porter and Lovefilm have throw their weight behind David Cameron ' s bid to remain in the EU . in an open letter see by the Sun , they warn a Brexit will cut off access to a single market of more than 500million consumer . the letter , below , come two day after the Sun reveal the big fear over the referendum for @card@ per cent of voter be what will happen to the economy . the entrepreneur write : ` ` the EU be n't perfect , but rather than cut off from the opportunity it offer , it be good to be on the inside help shape the rule . ` ` a vote to leave could lead to lose investment , miss opportunity and lose job . ` ` the UK be currently the good place in Europe to launch and grow a business . leave the EU will undoubtedly undermine the ability of Britain ' S entrepreneur to start up , innovate and grow . it be simply not worth the risk . ' ' the @card@ entrepreneur include Martha Lane Fox , below leave , who help set up www.Lastminute.com , Yo ! sushi ' S Simon Woodroffe , centre , and Julie Deane , right , who set up the Cambridge Satchel Company . Niamh Barker , founder of the Travelwrap Company , say : ` ` it be critical we stay in the EU so we can sell to other European market without face barrier . ` ` I do n't want my small business to suffer because the UK leave . ' ' a no @card@ source say last night : ` ` this letter be absolutely clear , Britain be strong and well off remain in a reform EU . ' ' we be the founder and CEO of some of the UK ' s most entrepreneurial business - from early stage start-up to household name . every day , as we build our company , we see the benefit of be able to do business within Europe ' s single market of @card@ million consumer , with one set of regulation across @card@ country , and the ability to recruit the bright people here and across Europe . once the late round of British-backed EU reform have be complete , the European market for service , as well as digital product , will create even great business opportunity for our firm . of course the EU be n't perfect ; but rather than cut ourselves off from the opportunity it offer , it be good to be on the inside help shape the rule of this market instead of just be subject to them . the economic shock of a vote to leave the EU would also be hugely damaging to our business . leaving could lead to lose investment , miss opportunity and lose job . the UK be currently the good place in Europe to launch and grow a business ; leave the European Union will undoubtedly undermine the ability of Britain ' S entrepreneur to start-up , innovate , and grow . it be simply not worth the risk .
Nat jibe at trade ' fantasy ' f the Tory vision of Britain as a ` ` glorious trading nation ' ' after leave the EU be a fantasy , Nat Mike Russell claim . ra-The Brexit Secretary blast Theresa May ' s government after the PM say it be up to Brussels to break the divorce talk deadlock . and she claim the UK would get a deal to prove anti-Brexit ` ` doomsayer ' ' wrong . but Mr Russell dismiss her comment , and Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson ' s claim of a ` ` glorious Brexit ' ' , as nonsense . he add : ` ` they be pursue a fantasy . there be n't a good Brexit . ` ` it ' s base on a fantasy of some buccaneering , glorious trading nation which do n't and ca n't exist . ' '
' Jet WRECK ' JIBE SNEERING Eurocrats have mock Theresa May ' s Brexit talk as a plane crash , with one tell the Sun : ` ` London be our black box . ' ' the official make the sly dig as the EU ' S top Brexit negotiator attack the PM ' s claim the ` ` ball be in the EU ' S court ' ' for further progress . Michael Barnier , right , wag his finger , say : ` ` Brexit be not a game , do n't forget . ' ' the slapdown come as Brexit Secretary David Davis host a lunch for his negotiate counterpart at the UK ' S official Brussels residence .
Brexit will not break our trade ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter I do N'T struggle to know what Brexit mean - it be to take back control of our own destiny . at the time of vote leave , I be fully aware there might be an economic price to pay . what I do struggle with be the attitude of those who treat as gospel what EU negotiator Michel Barnier and his cohort have to say about the UK in assert its own authority . he ' S like a stuck record , always threaten ` ` consequence ' ' . he say it ' s not possible to achieve a frictionless trade agreement with the UK . this be pure fiction - and daft . last year Canada achieve what Barnier be deny be possible for the British . to top it all , the EU last week agree frictionless border with Japan . Allan Mulholland by Email THERE have be a lot of talk about trade post-Brexit and how we will struggle to replace EU deal . therefore it have be encourage to hear the US , Japan and other say they be ready and wait to do deal . john Ferguson Paisley WE have a number of politician who seem keen for the Brexit talk to fail . they do n't seem to realise that they also have to live with these failed deal . so they should be happy that Japan can have a tariff-free relationship with us , America be determine to do a deal and other be in the pipeline . so much for the doom-mongers . Brian Marshall Edinburgh THE Confederation of British Industry want to stay in the single market and ignore the wish of 17million-plus voter who want to leave the EU . David Cameron , in his attempt to bully the electorate into vote Remain , make it quite clear that vote to leave the EU mean leave the single market . those 17millionplus therefore knowingly vote to leave the single market . the CBI should accept the democratic view of the electorate . terry Stringer by Email HAVING be a Question Time viewer , I would love to see an edition with my favourite panellist . the brilliant Jacob Rees-Mogg , historian David Starkey , broadcaster Julia Hartley-Brewer and for belly laugh , Diane Abbott , picture . bill TRIPPIER by Email Well do to Gilles Muller on his great win over Rafa Nadal with pure www.tennis.no annoy mannerism , no grunt and no shouting . Muller be a joy to watch and let his racquet do the talking . William Simpson by email I WAS shock and disgust by the violence at Magaluf . it be bad enough when the place be know for its X-rated exploit , but this be so scary for holidaymakers -and worse that it seem to involve bouncer and police . Lisa Walker Dundee
final OK for BREXIT Bill A Tory revolt be quash by Theresa May last night to finally pass a law authorise Brexit after a five-week battle with Parliament . the Commons throw out two major condition slap on the bill by the Lords last week . and Labour peer last night back down and agree not to tamper a second time with the landmark power - order by the Supreme Court - end the constitutional stand-off . the vic-tory mean the PM will be free to formally trigger the start of two-year Brexit talk as soon as the Queen give it Royal Assent . Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson call it a pivotal and exciting moment . eleven Tory MP who campaign for Remain defy the PM ' s three-line whip to abstain over the issue of whether to give Parliament a veto on the Brexit talk ' outcome . the government win the Commons showdown by @card@ to @card@ , a majority of @card@ . the Commons also throw out a second Lords amendment to grant EU citizen already live here immediate residency right when we leave , by @card@ to @card@ . in the Lords , two Lib Dem bid to keep the ` ` ping-pong ' ' process between the two house go be defeat when Labour order all its peer to abstain . we WO N'T Fall Off A Cliff - Matt Ridley , page ten be it time we all get Brexit ? behind Better Call Paul @card@ @card@ @card@ on DAB , the TALKRADIO App or www.talkradio.co.uk
Phil ' s Brexit bombshell SO much for Mr Boring . the Chancellor come to Scotland yesterday and lob a hand grenade into the Brexit debate . he be only state the obvious - in no uncertain term . there will be no McBrexit deal , no special treatment for the Scot . but be he play into the SNP ' S hand ? his bold statement that the United Kingdom have vote for Brexit , no matter what the Scot decide , might be no more than the truth , but it do n't exactly chime with what have go before . when she stand on the step of Downing Street as Prime Minister for the very first time , Theresa May talk about the ` ` precious bond that bind our United Kingdom together ' ' . only two day ago , she issue a video message for St Andrew ' S day , bang on about Scotland ' s ` ` special place at the heart of our historic union of nation ' ' . the very first thing she do when she become PM be to rush up to Edinburgh to assure Nicola Sturgeon that Scotland would be treat with respect and play a full part in Brexit . then , yesterday , her most senior lieutenant come along to tell us we can like it or lump it . a government that want to drag us back to @card@ condemn the SNP as ` ` backward look ' ' . and minister who think they can persuade @card@ other country to allow us free access to their market while block all immigration say Nicola Sturgeon be ` ` clutch at straw ' ' . it ' S all so predictable . before the Scottish Government have even publish its plan for what might be achieve for Scotland , the UK Government have rubbish them - just as Nicola Sturgeon expect . whatever deal be impose on Scotland , however brutal the separation with our key European market , she already know that Westminster would reject any alternative , just because she suggest it . and she know too that , no matter what happen , Scotland Secretary David Mundell and Tory leader Ruth Davidson will agree that it ' S a jolly good idea . but Ms Sturgeon have already plan for that . in a couple of week , Scottish government proposal will be make public . everybody will see what they be worth and they will be on the table in front of the leader of all four government from around the UK . if Theresa May want to rip them up there and then , that ' S fine , but she will have to do it in public and with Scotland watch .
NI Brexit legal bid reject by court NORTHERN Ireland ' S High Court have dismiss the UK ' s first legal challenge to Brexit . Mr Justice Paul Maguire rule there be nothing in the @card@ good Friday peace agreement to prevent the government from trigger exit negotiation with the EU . he say the implication for Northern Ireland be still uncertain . a cross-party group of politician have claim the Stormont Assembly should have a say on whether to begin talk . Raymond McCord , whose son be murder by loyalist paramilitaries , have a separate Brexit challenge surround its impact on the peace process hear alongside that of the politician at the Belfast court . Mr Justice Maguire say : ` ` while the wind of change may be about to blow , the precise direction in which it will blow can not yet be determine so there be a level of uncertainty , as evidence by the discussion about how the Northern Ireland land border with Ireland be affect by withdrawal from the EU . ' ' the court do not consider the role of Parliament in the calling of talk - separate legal proceeding be take place in England . some @card@ per cent of northern Irish voter back Remain but some unionist-dominated area support leave .
BREXIT in @card@ year ; Tories hand PM ' Route Map ' to speed up pullout See EU LATER @card@ Britain could quit the EU within two year under plan by four top Tory . the ex-Cabinet minister have also call for a work permit immigration system . Iain Duncan Smith , Owen Paterson , Peter Lilley and John Redwood want PM Theresa May to speed up the move to Brexit . their report contain plan for a swift trigger of the Article @card@ exit process and the draw up of a ` ` repeal bill of the @card@ European Communities Act ' ' . last night one of the author tell the Sun : ` ` Everybody keep ask what Brexit mean , so now they can find out . ' ' Former Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith also want a benefit ban until migrant have be in the country for five year . and ex-Welsh Secretary John Redwood urge ` ` an early agreement ' ' to help boost trade . Labour ' S Chuka Umunna say the ` ` blasé and simplistic ' ' plan be ` ` nothing more than a blueprint for the hard of hard Brexits ' ' . Iain Duncan Smith deny claim the NHS will get £350million from Brexit be mislead . he tell ITV ' S Good Morning Britain : ` ` we will take decision about what happen to that money when we leave . ' '
TRADING place ; PM : no Brexit law until I get a good trade deal E.U . exit @card@ Theresa May will not make the Brexit divorce deal law until she win a good trade deal . the PM tell EU chief she will not commit ` ` until we know exactly what we be legislate for ' ' , her official spokesman say yesterday . it come as it emerge the @card@ EU leader will try to force Mrs May to make her promise legally bind . a leak Brussels document suggest they will act at tomorrow ' s summit to sign off the start of trade talk . EU figure say the leader ' stance have ` ` hardened ' ' after Brexit Secretary David Davis claim the PM ' S deal be open to change . chief EU negotiator Michel Barnier warn any agreement depend on Britain honour its promise . Mr Davis later vow to have the deal ` ` convert into legal text as soon as possible ' ' . EU Council chief Donald Tusk say it would be ` ` a furious race against time ' ' to get a Brexit deal by next autumn . Britain and Israel will need a quick tariff-free post-Brexit trade deal as one in seven drug the NHS buy be from Israeli pharmaceutical firm , say think tank Bicom .
regret ? he ' S Had A Few ... ; BOOZY Euro Chief BLASTS BREXIT ; lJuncker say Britain will be sorry ; lThen he unveil new power grab Euro chief Jean-Claude Juncker yesterday say Britain will regret Brexit - then unveil his vision of an EU superstate . the Commission President , dog by rumour over booze , admit member state will feel the impact of us leave . but he signal it be nothing compare to the pain come the UK ' S way , say : ` ` you will regret it as well soon . ' ' Cognac-loving Mr Juncker tell MEPs of plan for a power grab to ` ` unite ' ' Europe . he signal Brussels should seize great control over corporation tax and VAT , create a European FBI and an EU army by @card@ . Mr Juncker add that he want more member state to adopt the euro , and the passport-free Schengen zone to be expand to include Romania and Bulgaria . he speak of his desire for the EU to expand beyond @card@ country post-Brexit by welcome western Balkan state such as Serbia . in his state of the Union address in Strasbourg , he say : ` ` Europe be not make to stand still . it must never do . ' ' the bureaucrat detailed plan for a summit on March @card@ , @card@ , in Romania - the day after Brexit - to confirm plan to ` ` move on ' ' and map out the future of the bloc . he then name check France ' S Jacques Delors , godfather of the European project , say : ` ` he teach me Europe only move forward when it be bold . now be the time to build a more united , strong and more democratic Europe for @card@ . ' ' the speech thrill Europhiles but Brexit supporter and former minister Ian Duncan Smith say : ` ` this tell you why the vote last year make sense . ` ` Juncker ' s bar room utterance have give the game away . it ' s the future of the EU - the march of the superstate . ' ' Ex-Ukip leader Nigel Farage add last night : ` ` thank God we ' re leaving . ` ` it ' S the most worrying speech I ' ve hear in all my year . ' '
' I ALREADY Miss you ' By EU Chief by Matt DATHAN Political Correspondent GLUM EU chief Donald Tusk bid an emotional farewell to Britain after receive Theresa May ' s Article @card@ letter . he end his short threeminute response to Mrs May trigger Brexit by tell the UK : ` ` we already miss you , thank you and goodbye . ' ' Bitter European Commission chief Jean-Claude Juncker strike a pessimistic tone , predict Britain ' s decision to cut tie with Brussels be a ` ` choice they will regret one day ' ' . German Chancellor Angela Merkel immediately snub Mrs May ' s call to thrash out an exit deal and a new trade arrangement in parallel . outgoing French President Francois Hollande send a depart shot to Britain declare Brexit would be ` ` painful for the British ' ' . but there be a more upbeat response from Emmanuel Macron , the favourite to replace him in May ' s French election . he vow not to punish the UK after Brexit , while German foreign minister Sigmar Gabriel say ` ` let ' s stay friend ' ' should be a motto for the upcoming divorce talk . there be outright anger from European Parliament chief who be the most hard-line in their opposition to Brexit . chief negotiator Guy Verhofstadt blast Mrs May for threaten to weaken security agreement if Britain be deny a free trade deal with the EU . he say security , which the Prime Minister mention @card@ time in her Article @card@ letter , be ` ` too important to bargain with ' ' . but Syed Kamall , the Tory leader in the European Parliament , hit back , say : ` ` it must not be about winner and loser . ` ` a bad deal for one side will also be bad for the other . ' ' Mr Tusk , one of the main player who will represent the @card@ EU head of state in Brexit talk , take a soft tone than a leak draft version of the document signal . a key line threaten to walk away from talk without a deal be ditch at the last minute . Mr Tusk have write : ` ` Should the negotiation fail , we will make sure that the European Union be ready for such an outcome even though we do not desire it . ' ' instead Mr Tusk take a pessimistic approach , warn there be ` ` nothing to win in this process ' ' and say Brexit talk would be about damage control . he have open his remark by say : ` ` there be no reason to pretend that this be a happy day neither in Brussels nor in London . ' ' EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier declare his Brexit team be ready and warn of a very long and difficult road ahead . the European Parliament warn Britain would not be offer a free trade deal before the process of leaving be complete . and its leak resolution also vow not to agree an interim deal that last more than three year . it say any transitional deal must be ` ` strictly limited in time , and should not exceed three year , and in scope as they can never be a substitute for Union membership ' ' . it mean any transitional deal with Britain would have to end by early @card@ . Mr Verhofstadt say the deal must show that being outside the EU be bad than be inside .
right to have a fund to fight EU HOW shrewd of the Chancellor Philip Hammond to set aside a fund to tackle Brussels ' opposition to Brexit . instead of splash out to celebrate our improve economy , Mr Hammond have think ahead , realise that Brussels will spitefully throw all it can at us and have prepare for the occasion . he be n't promise a great or revolutionary budget . but as the Sun say , he ' S plan smart and careful spending on our most vital issue . good on him . Susan Durrant by Email Philip Hammond , like the rest of the Cabinet , be terrify of Theresa May . the Chancellor be be push into produce a budget that be n't his at all . he ' S just do what Mrs May tell him . most MP forecast that Brexit would be bad for our country . do you really think they ' re bother about you and I ? while they keep get above-inflation pay rise why should they worry about us ? David Rose Address supply Theresa May come to Scotland and lecture the SNP about the NHS . what a cheek . English hospital be in desperate strait with many closing and other do not have enough staff.should get back to England and take Ruth Davidson with her . Anne Forrest Edinburgh if Scotland have vote for independence in @card@ it would have take us out of EU . if Brexit be such a disaster for Scotland that it be worthy of another referendum , do this mean independence in @card@ would have be a disaster for Scotland or be Nicola Sturgeon use Brexit as an excuse to achieve her dream ? James Robertson Grangemouth , Stirlingshire All the politician who be block Brexit be put through smoothly be a bunch of upper- crust snob who do n't respect the wish of the ordinary working people . john Wilkinson Menstrie , clack the extreme hatred show by David Haye and Tony Bellew over the past few week turn to kiss and cuddle follow their encounter . so much so that Bellew then offer his bitter rival a rematch . the young and strong underdog deserve his victory . can n't wait for Anthony Joshua ' S battle next month . Hamish Leishman Kilsyth , Lanarkshire Adele , picture , have come out say she be married . fair play , but if he keep her happy what be she go to sing about ? carl Battison by email
PM BREX THE Ice ; May ' S SPEECH BREAKS DEADLOCK in EU TALKS ; lBritain offer 2yr transition ; lRussell : deal must go further Theresa May ' S new Brexit compromise be last night welcome by the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier - boost hope she may have break the stalemate . the PM want a two-year transition period after Britain leave in @card@ , which will mean more free EU migration and an extra £18billion of fund to Brussels . a vow to ` ` honour ' ' all financial commitment during our membership could also send the final Brexit bill soar to £40billion . Mr Barnier say her speech in the Italian city of Florence have be ` ` constructive ' ' and praise her ` ` willingness to move forward ' ' . but hardline Brexiteers be leave furious by her offer , and accuse her of betray 17.4million leave voter . in two further major concession offer by Mrs May yesterday : l Britain will continue to help protect Europe ' s security via defence and intelligence cooperation , with or without a deal ; l future decision by euro judge after Brexit will be applicable to EU citizen live in UK . sum up her ` ` grand bargain ' ' offer , Mrs May insist Brexit be not a threat to the EU . instead , she declare : ` ` we do n't want to stand in the way . ` ` we want to be your strong friend and partner as the EU , and the UK , thrive side by side . of no wfr th psh fu si ` ` a partnership of interest , a partnership of value ; a partnership of ambition for a shared future : the UK and the EU side by side deliver prosperity and opportunity for all our people . ' ' oEn ` ` but Mrs May also warn Europe would be damage if her new term be reject . Sh say : ` ` we should be in no doubt , that if our collective endeavour in these negotiation be to prove insufficient to reach an agreement , it would be a failure in the eye of history and a damaging blow to the future of our continent . ` ` if we be to fail , or be divide , the only beneficiary would be those who reject our value and oppose our interest . ' ' she say keep the current status quo until @card@ be vital to protect British and continental business from a cliff edge . Mrs May give no precise figure , but no @card@ last night say it expect the total amount for @card@ and @card@ would be £18billion . the final Brexit bill could also soar by ten of billion more after she say the UK ` ` will honour commitment we have make during the period of our membership ' ' . the EU be demand £50billion for future liability , such as Brussels staff pension and spending project already start . the PM say : ` ` I do not want our partner to fear they will need to pay more or receive less over the remainder of the current budget plan as a result of our decision to leave . ' ' EU chief previously accuse her of try to blackmail it over security . but she pledge Britain will remain ` ` unconditionally commit to maintain Europe ' S security ' ' - which would establish ` ` a tone of trust ' ' between them . she also say British court will always have to ` ` take into account ' ' the European Court of Justice ' s ruling for EU citizen - a major Brussels sticking point in negotiation . at the end of the twoyear transition , the PM say she want ` ` an economic partnership ' ' without tariff on trade , plus border as frictionless as possible . but she rule out a Norway-style alignment with EU law or a simple Canada-style free trade deal , insist : ` ` we can do so much good than this . ' ' Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson tweet afterwards : ` ` PM speech be positive , optimistic and dynamic - and rightly dispose of the Norway option ! forwards ! ' ' Scots Brexit Minister Mike Russell welcome the ` ` change in position ' ' from Mrs May but demand she go further and ` ` commit to a long term future ' ' in the single market and custom union to protect the economy . even ultra-federalist Brexit coordinator Guy Verhofstadt give Mrs May ' s speech a qualified welcome , say the UK ' S position ` ` be become more realistic ' ' . ahead of Monday ' s fourth-round of Brexit negotiation , Mr Barnier say the PM have show ` ` a constructive spirit ' ' . however , he say problem with Ireland ' S border have not be address and seek clarity on the full extent of our EU financial commitment . he add : ` ` we stand ready to discuss the concrete implication of this pledge . ' ' some senior Tory warn Mrs may she must not offer Brussels any more compromise . Tory MP and the Chancellor ' S aide Kwasi Kwarteng insist she must not ` ` pay a penny more ' ' . former Ukip leader Nigel Farage also accuse her of try to fudge Brexit . he say : ` ` what we ' ve do today be we ' ve kick it into the long grass for another two year . it ' S two finger up to 17.4million people who vote for Brexit . ' ' but business leader be delight - with the CBI heaping praise on the PM ' s ` ` positive tone ' ' .
the Sun SAYS Brexit realism Ireland have every reason to fear a Brexit deal that damage Britain , since its economy desperately need us to thrive . it be only a few year , after all , since we lend them billion to prevent collapse . but we advise Irish PM Leo Varadkar to accept that Brexit Will happen and plan accordingly . he seem to be in denial , hope to stall negotiation and pray for a second referendum . it would help if he stop see 17.4million Brexit voter as a small rabble of troublemaker instead of the big democratic mandate in our history . that say , it be good to see Mr Varadkar suggest the sort of free trade deal with the EU we have long argue for . it will only be scupper by Brussels ' foolish desire to punish us to deter other .
Minister in Beeb bias row BREX Factor @card@ Trade Secretary Liam Fox spark a row by claim the BBC be talk down Brexit . Dr Fox say part of the medium would rather see ` ` Britain fail than see Brexit succeed ' ' . he tell the commons : ` ` I can not recall a single time in recent time when I have see good economic news that the BBC do not describe as ' despite Brexit ' . ' ' Dr Fox speak as he unveil record foreign investment figure . but the Lib Dems insist job create by foreign investment be down nine per cent in the year . Party chief whip Alistair Carmichael say Mr Fox be try to ` ` deflect from the failing of his Department ' ' . he add : ` ` a government minister attack the medium in this way be a dangerous and misplace intervention . ' ' the BBC insist it take ` ` impartiality incredibly seriously ' ' .
may ' S BREXIT DEFEAT No2 in Lords Peers last night inflict a second Brexit Bill defeat on the government . the House of Lords vote @card@ to @card@ to amend the legislation - rule that Parliament should be able to block a ` ` bad ' ' agreement with Brussels and send PM Theresa May back to the negotiate table . the amendment , back by @card@ Tory , be the big vote in Westminster ' S Upper Chamber . it set up a knife-edge commons vote next week when Mrs May will ask MP to bin the amendment and push ahead with trigger Brexit talk by the month ' s end after the vote , Brexit chief David Davis say : ` ` it ' s clear that some in the Lords would seek to frustrate that process . it be the government ' s intention to ensure that do not happen . ` ` we will now aim to overturn these amendment in the House of Commons . ' ' up to @card@ Tory MP , include former minister Anna Soubry , be threaten to rebel against the PM and back the Lords ' call . government sour-ces say last night they be confident their majority would still hold . but Ms Soubry urge Tory colleague to abstain at the least . she say : ` ` this be not a revolution . ask Parliament to approve a deal or no deal be at the heart of what this great country of ours be all about . ' ' Rebel Tory peer Michael Heseltine say the vote give Parliament a ` ` critical role ' ' in determine the future for generation of young people . the Lords last week pass an amendment demand the Government guarantee EU citizen the right to remain once Britain leave the EU . @card@ peer vote to amend May ' S Brexit Bill
Blair Battle Tony Blair will today urge Remoaners to ` ` rise up and fight Brexit at any cost ' ' . the Europhile ex-Labour PM will use a speech to slam Theresa May for put the British economy at risk with a hard Brexit . Mr Blair , @card@ , be expect to repeat his call for voter to have a final say on any Brexit deal through another referendum at the Open Britain event in central London .
' Transition ' be not Brexit LEAVE mean leave . now we have to cater for big business and the City . this be what the transition be for , not for the British people have to fork out billion to the European Union , as well as the billion in foreign aid . little wonder the NHS be cripple , the police be non-existent on the street , Armed Forces cut , service cut , more austerity and tax on the way . these politician be a cancer on the democracy of this country - self-centered , out of touch and , sadly , in Westminster . Richard Knight Newcastle it be obvious the EU be out to make an example of the UK for dare to leave the club . they think the way to stop the mutiny be to shoot the www.ringleader.No amount of concession will please them . time for some stick . George Wilkinson Romford , Essex here we go . just as expect , Theresa May be n't do what the people want . if what she say in her speech be agree , she have sell us down the river . we Brexiteers want to be totally away from the EU in a hard Brexit , not to give in at the first hurdle . when the next election come , Theresa May wo n't be see for dust . I ' ve always vote Conservative as I think they be the one to be trust , but I be wrong . there be no way I would ever vote again as democracy in this country mean nothing . Christine Barrett Kettering , Northants like it or not , Theresa May simply have to compromise over Brexit . those cloth-eared EU boss be determine they would n't bow to Britain ' S demand , so Mrs May have pamper them with a sensible compromise . her decision on free movement will undoubtedly enrage brit for whom immigration be the key reason they vote for Brexit . but the day will come when Brexit , include a cap on immigration , will fall into place . without Mrs May ' s wise decision to help smooth the troubled water of the Brexit talk , another stubborn stalemate would have be the inevitable outcome . carol Davies Stannington , Northumberland once again Mrs May show her lack of business and negotiate skill . the Florence speech leave Britain ' s kitchen window unlock for the felon of Europe to once again break in and rob us blind . we need someone who put our country first at all time , as Donald Trump do for the US . Barrie CROWTHER Walton , West Yorks have Mrs May just sign the death warrant for her government , thanks to the likes of Philip Hammond and Amber Rudd ? for the first time ever , I vote for them . never again . remember , Brexit mean Brexit . ray Whitehouse Redditch , Worcs How absolutely pathetic . with a timescale from June @card@ to March @card@ , after @card@ month the only action the government can take be to beg the EU for another two year . there be another @card@ month before the end of the current process and already our negotiator be wave the white flag . I do not vote for five year of EU control . I do not vote to contribute billion of our money into the EU coffer to pay for their pension and mansion . for goodness sake , grow a pair and walk away in March @card@ with whatever deal we can strike . if the EU want to punish us and themselves , so be it . David HOROBIN Little Twycross , Leics MRS May seem to have forget what she tell us - that no deal be good than a bad deal . it now appear we will be stay in and contribute some £40billion for a further two year beyond our separation date . if that be not a bad deal , I fail to comprehend the meaning of what we be tell . neither Brexiteers nor Remainers vote for this option . Pete Aldous Brentwood , Essex TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply Let ' S delay Brexit a few more year . it suit Remainers . then if Trump lose the next US election , we wo n't have a great trading deal with the world ' s rich country . be this part of the Tory plan ? Phil , Swansea the result of the German election should be a warning to politician everywhere : listen to the voter . but they wo n't . bob Dixon Does Labour ' S Clive Lewis not consider the fact Britain be too full ? nothing racist in face fact , Mr Lewis . john Sisson , Kimberley , Notts
Brexit ' S pay ' lie ' TRADE union unite say company be attempt to limit pay rise by blame the uncertainty of Brexit . a West Midlands car part company offer worker a @card@ per cent wage hike , blame Brexit , but when the union complain , boss agree to raise the offer to @card@ per cent . unite general secretary Len McCluskey say : ` ` employer need to realise that if they use Brexit as an excuse for attack worker ' pay and condition , we will challenge and expose them . ' '
BREXIT STAND-OFF ; SNP and Tories clash on devolve power ' grab ' NATS and Tory chief square up last night ahead of Brexit talk with both issue climbdown demand . SNP chief Mike Russell tell the UK Government to abandon its ` ` grab on more than @card@ ' ' repadevolved triated EU power link to devolve area such as fishery and farming . but Theresa May ' S No2 Damian Green issue a veiled warning tell SNP chief to be ` ` serious ' ' and ` ` constructive ' ' during the summit in Edinburgh today . the comment come amid a stand-off between Holyrood and Westminster over where power , return from Brussels , should go . Scots Brexit Minister Mr Russell say : ` ` we know the UK Government have its eye on more than @card@ policy area . ` ` it ' S a direct threat to the devolution settlement . there ' s no sign of power we be tell during the EU referendum would be come - instead we have an attempted power grab . ' ' but First Secretary of State Mr Green say a Britainwide approach be need . he say : ` ` there will be area where both government can make progress but we want a positive and open dialogue to ensure no new barrier emerge for people . ` ` I be look forward to serious , constructive talk on this vital matter . ' ' Westminster plan to take power then set UK-wide rule before hand them to Holyrood . but SNP say they wo n't agree to the repeal bill unless they back down .
song contest hit bum note again ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter what do we expect ? European judge to give us load of vote after Brexit ? anyone who think this be not a politically-motivated competition be fool themselves . like Brexit , it be time we pull out . Paul James Edinburgh Well do to Portugal for win Eurovision , but a serious song contest ? come on . it be the usual joke of tactical voting and the British entry be pan because of Brexit . I do n't know why Lucie Jones want to make a fool of herself by take part . Anne Morris Aberdeen it be a bit rich of Louis Walsh to slag off the Italian entry and say that it be all about the voice and the song . that be ironic give that it be his act , Jedward , that beat Lucie Jones in an X Factor sing-off . be it their song or the voice that win it for them ? I would have to say neither and that Lucie be rob . William Simpson by email the inadequacy of Graham Norton as presenter of Eurovision be cruelly expose . he do not have the wit and spontaneity or the preparation of the late Sir Terry Wogan . be he present too many programme ? no one begrudge Portugal their first victory but why be there no mention by Graham of the daily Portuguese medium update on the singer ' s medical fragility ? the unfair voting system be never criticise either . john Lloyd Inverkeithing , Fife it be hardly surprising that the NHS have be hack when successive UK government keep farm out it contract to foreign company who then subcontract to other . Lionel Mcmillan Falkirk in reply to Mr Marshall ' s letter about Nicola Sturgeon fail to use the word/words ` ` British ' ' or ` ` British ' ' , I would say that many English people , include personality , TV presenter , sport people , politician and even Prince Charles repeatedly use the word England or English , when they should say Britain or the UK . Gordon Ford Newton Mearns , Scotland/North Britain So multi-millionaire footballer Wayne Rooney , picture , lose £500,000 in a casino . so what ? it be his money and he wo n't miss it . the moral and ethical argument be different - how someone can throw away so much money be , quite frankly , disgusting . jess FRANKLIN Edinburgh
blah BLAH Blair ; ER , HI Guys ! look who ' S Back Fury at Brexit block bid Boris Johnson rip into Tony Blair over his contempt for voter as the former PM launch a new bid to block Brexit . BoJo hit back after Mr Blair say brit be wrong to want to leave the EU and call for a new movement to ` ` rise up ' ' and reverse the decision . the Foreign Secretary say Mr Blair be try to undermine democracy with a lengthy speech watch by wife Cherie in the City of London yesterday . Mr Blair claim voter do not know the ` ` true term of Brexit ' ' and PM Theresa May do not have a mandate to push through ` ` Brexit at any cost ' ' . he also say Brexiteers win by ` ` hideously abuse ' ' patriotism . Mr Johnson - who lead the Brexit campaign - mock the ex-PM ' s ` ` spectacularly wrong ' ' track record on the Iraq War and his desire to drag Britain into the fail euro . he say : ` ` I call on the British people to rise up and turn off the TV when Tony Blair next appear with his condescending campaign . ` ` everywhere I go I find people who admire the British people for stick up for their democracy . everywhere I go I meet people who think Brexit will be a spectacular success . we hear these argument last year . not a thing have change . ' ' he add : ` ` it be insult the intelligence of the British people to say they get it wrong . this country have a phenomenal future . people be wake up to that . ' ' fellow leave campaigner Michael Gove say : ` ` people want politician to get on with the job of make a success of leave the EU rather than fight old political battle . Tony Blair have his say during the Referendum . he should now respect the fact that the British people vote to leave . ' ' Tory MP Dominic Raab add Mr Blair ' S comment be ` ` the height of arrogance ' ' . and fellow Brexiteer Iain Duncan Smith say it be n't right for the ex-PM to try to ` ` bully ' ' people and call for a ` ` neverendum ' ' . Mr Blair also launch a blister attack on Labour ' s leadership say the ` ` debilitation of the party be the facilitator of Brexit ' ' .
Brexit bunch up to summit ; BRIT-IRISH TALKS ON EU DIVORCE ; Border Poll be ' NOT on the MENU ' LEADERS from both side of the border have rule out the prospect of Brexit trigger a vote on a unite Ireland . the UK ' s divorce from Europe dominate discussion at the British-Irish Council summit in Cardiff yesterday . speak later , Irish leader Enda Kenny dismiss report he have comment privately that Brexit open an ` ` uncomplicated route ' ' to a border referendum . instead , the Taoiseach insist criterion for call a plebiscite have not be meet . under the term of the @card@ good Friday agreement , the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland - currently James Brokenshire - can only call a vote if there be evidence that public opinion be in favour of change . Kenny say : ` ` there be no intention of have a border poll now , there be no indication that a border poll will succeed now . ` ` we have enough on our plate at the moment to deal with , such as Brexit . ' ' EU leader have stress that the problem of freedom of movement across the border must be address before other issue can be deal with . Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness say he would like to see a united Ireland ` ` tomorrow morning ' ' . and he claim that Northern Ireland ' S majority Remain vote in June show cross-community support for a border referendum . he say : ` ` the @card@ per cent who see their future in Europe vote to remain - that could n't have be achieve without the support of unionist , nationalist and republican vote together . ` ` I think that be very , very significant as we go forward . ' ' however , he acknowledge successive secretary of state have make clear they ` ` be not interested ' ' in test public opinion . and First Minister Arlene Foster maintain the Brexit vote be ` ` on membership of the EU , it be not a referendum in term of Northern Ireland or the Republic ' ' . she add : ` ` I be sure Enda love it come up ' ' - to which the Taoiseach beside her reply ` ` no , I do n't ' ' .
why UK need a sharp Brexit ; Tory ' LEAVE ' Advocate ON DITCHING EU let us be clear . the EU referendum be the big vote in the democratic history of our country and it deliver a clear result - a majority of well over a million in favour of Britain leave the EU . since take office the Prime Minister , Theresa May , inset below , have be admirably clear , too , that Brexit have to mean Brexit . almost everybody in the House of Commons accept that the people ' S decision be final . so what be we wait for ? article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty can and should be trigger within week . within the same time frame , Britain should start negotiation for access to the single market - and strike our own trade deal with country outside the EU . it be already apparent that a lot of the dire consequence of a vote to leave that be put forward by the Remain campaign as part of Project Fear have prove unfounded . Britain ' s economic strength remain unaffected . consumer confidence be high and key indicator have not plunge in the way we be tell would happen . nevertheless , what do risk cause damage , for as long as it continue , be uncertainty . business face decision about expansion and growth and investor want to put money into this country need to have a good idea of what the arrangement be go to be with Europe and the rest of the world once Britain leave the EU . it will take time to agree but the sooner we start , the sooner uncertainty will be remove . trigger Article @card@ be the beginning of the process , not the end . it be the start gun and fire it will signal that serious negotiation be under way . there be bound to be a lengthy period to carry out those negotiation but as long as we delay their start there will be some people who will suggest there can be a fudge , second thought or further obstacle place in the way . as the Prime Minister have make clear that be not the case and we be go to leave , the sooner we fire the gun the well . nobody have give any good reason for delay . our aim be clear . we want to maintain access to the single market and to trade freely with Europe just as they will still want to trade freely with us . however , this will be subject to negotiation and we must set three key condition . first , we have get to regain control of our border and our immigration policy . we can choose who should have the right to enter and to work here . but I would like to see any such policy apply equally to everybody and on the basis of who will make a contribution to our society - not accord to whether or not they happen to be a national of an EU member state . and we must be able to set a control on overall number and deliver on our promise to reduce the net figure to ten of thousand . second , as long as we delay we continue to give huge sum to the EU every month as our membership fee - money which could be well spend in this country . as soon as we can conclude these negotiation , we will have the dividend of that money to spend on our priority . third , we need to free company that do not trade with the EU as quickly as possible from have to comply with European regulation . it be a simple measure to amend our own law so that all existing EU regulation continue to apply . once that be do , we can then go through them , department by department , to decide which be sensible and we want to keep , and which we want to get rid of - those that simply add cost without deliver any benefit , and there will be quite a lot of those . this do not require negotiation . once we be no long member of the EU , it will be a matter solely for the British government to decide . of course , Europe will still be a major trading partner . but the great opportunity lie in our relationship with the fastest-growing economy outside of the EU . at the moment we be hold back from develop trade and investment deal with those country because , while we be in the EU , they have to be agree across all @card@ country . that be why it have prove impossible so far for Europe to make deal with China , India or the USA . outside of the EU , we can get on with negotiation for bilateral deal which will be much easy and quick to achieve . we can also ensure they cover area in which Britain be strong , such as financial service and creative industry . already , a number of country have indicate they be keen to reach agreement . before we can begin to do any of this we need to get the formal process under way , and that mean trigger Article @card@ . I do n't say that it have to happen tomorrow , but I see no advantage in delay . we need to get on with it now so that all those who wish to invest in this country , to trade with us or to come and work here , know how they stand . my blueprint for QUITTING TRIGGER Article @card@ of the Treaty of Lisbon . 1 that give us the right to quit unilaterally and give us two year to negotiate an exit deal to be approve by a ` ` qualified majority ' ' of EU member state and subject to a possible veto by the European Parliament . @card@ Start negotiation for access to the single market . @card@ Regain control of our border and immigration policy . negotiate visa arrangement that suit us . @card@ stop pay into the EU budget as soon as possible . @card@ Transfer EU regulation into British law then decide which we want to keep and which one we wish to repeal . @card@ Begin negotiation of bilateral trade deal with country outside the EU .
IFA plea for Brexit ' No ' from UK Irish Irish farmer have weigh into the Brexit debate by urge friend and relative in the UK to vote to stay in the EU . Agriculture leader say the stake be high for their sector with export from the Republic to Britain and into the North worth ( Euro ) 4.4bn a year . the Irish Farmers ' Association say sale into the UK of half of Ireland ' S beef , @card@ per cent of the country ' S cheese , almost every mushroom and ( Euro ) 350million of pork product be at risk from Brexit . IFA president Joe Healy say : ` ` with a long history of emigration to the UK to find work , all Irish farm family have family member , relative and friend live in the UK and eligible to vote . ` ` we be ask farm family , family in rural Ireland and across the country to communicate the concern and risk . ' '
BREXIT Battle FUNDS A NEW ( Euro ) 300million loan scheme be among a raft of new Budget measure aim at cushion the impact of Brexit on Irish business . Finance Minister Paschal Donohoe tell how low-cost borrowing would specifically help farmer and food firm who will face cashflow issue when the UK split from the single market . he say : ` ` small and medium business will need to innovate and increasingly look to new European and international market other than the UK . ' ' another ( Euro ) 75million be allocate to Brexit fallout initiative for the agri-food sector , which employ @card@ people . and Ireland ' s embassy team will get a ( Euro ) 23million boost to help open new market . Joe Healy , president of the Irish Farmers ' Association , welcome the announcement . he say : ` ` it be important that this funding be available to farmer across all sector for investment and work capital , and must include farmer in enterprise that be under particular pressure , include the tillage and mushroom sector . ' ' Business lobbyist the British Irish Chamber also give a guarded thumb up to ` ` positive measure ' ' in readiness for ` ` one of the big economic shock in the history of the state . ' ' Chamber chief Eoin O'Neill say : ` ` Greater funding for the state agency will go some way towards support those business that be particularly expose to Brexit . ' ' and he single out the continued freeze of the nine per cent VAT rate for the tourism and hospitality sector as ` ` sensible and necessary ' ' . but O'Neill also express disappointment that there be no boost for tax incentive for UK worker relocate to Ireland . he add : ` ` in order to make certain that Ireland be well prepare for Brexit , we need the government to make brave choice that will help improve the competitiveness of Irish business . ' '
rock Solid ON BREXIT ; Rock Solid Gibraltar have make a U-turn on Brexit and be now ` ` hugely optimistic ' ' about Britain ' s future trade deal with Brussels . Rock leader Fabian Picardo tell the Sun : ` ` it ' s a change of plan - but sometimes a new plan be well even than the original plan . ' ' in a speech yesterday to celebrate the territory ' s national day , the Chief Minister declare : ` ` Britain stick with us , and we stick with Britain . ' ' on the EU he add ` ` we leave with the UK ' ' and insist Gibraltar would ` ` prosper greatly ' ' . Gibraltarian vote to be British rather than Spanish @card@ year ago . Mr Picardo tell a cheer crowd : ` ` we stick with Britain in @card@ and we will stick with Britain through Brexit . ' ' and he tell the Sun he be ` ` hugely optimistic that we will be able to negotiate our way through this difficult moment in a way that do not affect our prosperity ' ' . last year @card@ per cent of the @card@ brit in Gibraltar vote Remain . Mr Picardo have say Brexit pose a threat to the Rock . but it be claim he have since tell business chief - who do @card@ per cent of their trade with the UK mainland - ` ` maybe we get it wrong ' ' . Foreign Office Minister Sir Alan Duncan welcome the shift in feeling say : ` ` they be be extremely positive , constructive and thoughtful . ' '
May can tame EU ' s bully boy ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter it seem they have already make up their mind , but the more they speak , the more you feel they fear Britain get the good deal by go it alone . David Francis Edinburgh THE President of the European Commission , Jean-Claude Juncker , can not be trust on Brexit . he have already make his mind up that it be not on his agenda to get a good deal for the UK . German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Juncker will try anything to scupper Brexit and want to bully the UK into pay a ridiculous amount of money to leave the EU . Merkel and Co have be select to inflict Project fear on the UK , but it will not wash with the British people . Jackie Lewis by Email Juncker and other EU leader be try to bully Theresa May . if she hold her nerve it wo n't be long before European manufacturer demand some negotiation on trade deal . they ca n't afford to lose the British market . Stephen Walker by email in February Theresa May and Ruth Davidson urge Scottish voter to vote Conservative in the council election and send a message to Nicola Sturgeon , say ' no to a second independence referendum ' . the SNP still win , with more vote and more seat . the Tory be fight the General Election with the same strategy . but it be anticipate the SNP will still finish as the large party in Scotland . if this happen one hope May will do the honourable thing and meet Sturgeon as soon as possible after June @card@ to make arrangement for another referendum . Alex Orr Edinburgh I WAS reading about the Tynecastle stadium upgrade and John Robertson state in Saturday ' S inside Sport ` ` I ' ll miss the old lady . . . . .but she have be show her age ' ' I think this be a touch disrespectful until I realise he be refer to the stadium not Ann Budge . Jim DUNLOP Ayr the interview with Brad Pitt , picture , be both an eye-opener and inspirational . many people ca n't accept their addiction . to have a Hollywood A-lister say : ` ` I do n't want to live that way any more , ' ' give other hope that they too can quit drink and drug . I admire his courage . ivy JONES by email
brit ' DELUDED ' in BREXIT TALKS British Prime Minister Theresa May have brush off Brussels claim that her Brexit strategy be wildly optimistic , insist : ` ` I ' m not in a different galaxy ' ' . but the Tory leader concede that talk ` ` be go to be tough ' ' after detail of her disastrous No @card@ meeting with Jean-Claude Juncker last week be leak . German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung reveal May tell the European Commission president , ` ` let us make Brexit a success ' ' , to which he reply : ` ` Brexit can not be a success ' ' . to underline the complexity of negotiation to come , he brandish copy of Canada ' s free trade agreement which run to @card@ page . and when May warn that the UK could n't be force to pay a ` ` divorce bill ' ' for leave the EU , she be bluntly tell there would be no trade deal in that event . as he leave , Juncker be say to have tell her : ` ` I leave Downing Street ten time as sceptical as I be before . ' ' he later tell German chancellor Angela Merkel that May be ` ` delude herself ' ' and her approach be from a ` ` different galaxy ' ' .
rival ready to trade blow Theresa May ' s Brexit speech today be a head-on challenge to Nicola Sturgeon . she be throw down the gauntlet with long await detail on her EU divorce plan . and it ' s quite clear the Prime Minister be willing to settle for the very hard of hard Brexit deal . it ' S a crucial moment and a test of nerve for both woman . if Ms Sturgeon play it right could this help pave the way for a second referendum on Scots independence ? or will forge ahead with a hard Brexit leave the SNP stick on the back foot ? Mrs May be make her speech buoy by an endorsement from Donald Trump , but be there really any reason for encouragement ? at the same time as the US presidentelect be suggest a UK trade deal , he threaten European car manufacturer with a massive import tariff on every vehicle . why on earth would he impose punitive tax like that on German vehicle and not on British vehicle ? last year a record number of Britishmade car go for export - more than 1.2million vehicle , make up more than three-quarter of all motor produce here . more than half of those go to the EU and half the remain car be ship to the US . madness but we ' re suppose to believe that Donald Trump will let these UK motor roll in at the expense of BMW , Audi and Porsche . in a few day Mr Trump will be invest with enormous power . even without the authority of Congress , he can legally impose tariff of up to @card@ per cent for @card@ day . he have say nothing to suggest that he want to make export to America easier than it be now . instead he have threaten to get tough with China , withdraw from talk on the 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership and renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement - or scrap it entirely . three year of talk between the EU and US over the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership have now be bin . and now Mr Trump be threaten EU exporter with massive trade barrier . it ' s madness to think Europe would not hit back in a trade war which could quickly cripple the world economy - and that include Britain . Donald Trump can no longer be ignore , but he ca n't be rely upon . instead we need a dose of reality from our political leader north and south of the border . it ' s time for some simple , clear fact and figure or perhaps just the stark admission that nobody have a clue what be go on .
price on the cake ; we may still pay into EU as part of trade deal BREXIT SHAME Britain could still pay into the EU after Brexit to secure the ` ` good possible ' ' trade deal , David Davis say yesterday . the staggering concession by the Brexit Secretary send the pound ' s value soar to its high level in @card@ week . just hour later , Mr Davis signal Britain could even keep an element of the EU ' s free movement immigration rule to protect the economy . his soft Brexit hint come after a secret strategy paper appear to show this week the plan be to ` ` have our cake and eat it ' ' . Eurosceptics hit the roof . Tory Peter Bone say brit would be ` ` outraged ' ' if the UK keep pay into the EU after a referendum campaign in which voter be tell we would save £10billion a year in contribution by leave . Leave.EU ' s Arron bank call Mr Davis ' s commons statement on trade ` ` incredibly foolish ' ' . but Chancellor Philip Hammond back the Brexit Secretary , say we ca n't expect to achieve everything and concede nothing . he say : ` ` David Davis be absolutely right not to rule out the possibility that we might want to contribute in some way . ' ' on immigration last night , Mr Davis insist to business leader in Wales that Britain will take back control of decision . but he say of end free movement : ` ` we wo n't do so in a way that be contrary to the national and economic interest . ' '
CZECHS ' BREXIT BOUNCE ; @card@ More EAST EUROPEANS TAKE UK Jobs AFTER EU Vote the number of East Europeans work in Britain have surge by more than @card@ since the Brexit vote . it mean that over the past year foreign-born national account for @card@ per cent of the net rise in employment , more than @card@ job . expert say it prove that despite fear of a post-Referendum exodus there have be a huge rise in worker from nation such as the Czech Republic and Poland . the Office for National Statistics say the number of East European employ in the UK rise by more than @card@ to nearly 1.4million between July and September . the number from western EU Snations fall . but overall in the past year , of a @card@ net rise in employment , only @card@ role go to UK bear national . nearly @card@ go to people bear in the EU ' s eastern European state and Romania and Bulgaria . it fuel claim they be rush here before Brexit border control take effect . migration Watch chair Lord Green of Deddington say : ` ` it help explain why Britain vote for Brexit . ' ' yesterday ' S figure also reveal the unemployment rate fall to @card@ per cent in the three month to the end of September , the low since @card@ . the jobless total drop to @card@ million . nearly @card@ migrant reach Italy after cross the Med in October - the high total for one month - as smuggler try to beat winter weather .
Brown ' S blue all because of Brexit it ' S not just David Cameron who have be suffer a headache since the Brexit result . the sequel to the @card@ Mrs Brown ' S boy film have be throw into disarray by Britain ' s decision to leave the EU . the follow-up to Brown ' S boy D'Movie have be postpone because of rocket cost since June ' S referendum . in an exclusive interview , Brendan O'CARROLL , below as Mrs Brown , creator and star of the hit BBC1 sitcom , say : ` ` we be plan to do it this year but the number be n't right . the Brexit drop in Sterling make it a lot more expensive for the studio than it would have be previously . ` ` they will wait until the pound stabilise before they make any plan . ` ` the plot and outline be there and ready to go . we know what ' s go to happen and how we ' re go to do it . ` ` that ' s the only way you can price it and make a budget . other than that it ' S just a question of , ' be we go or not go ? ' . ` ` we need ten month notice on that and so far there ' S nothing . ' ' there be huge demand for a sequel after the original film top the box office on opening and go on to make £20million worldwide . but with the pound ' s fluctuation since the British public vote leave , fan will have to sit and wait patiently . not that Brendan be too bother . the Irish star be secretly please to have some downtime after recently complete a mammoth Mrs Brown stage tour in Australia . he explain : ` ` we just do @card@ night in Australia and we be exhaust , so it suit me not to do it this year . ` ` it suit me absolutely fine as we have be work our a***s off . ' ' Fingers cross Brendan and the elderly Mrs Brown find the cash soon . she ' ll be in a old folk ' home before long .
low-skill migrant face axe at Brexit ; EU MIGRANT Clamp leak the number of lowskilled EU migrant enter Britain be set to be cap after Brexit , a leak Home Office paper reveal . boss may also be force to recruit British worker first . the radical proposal - certain to enrage Brussels - be in an 82-page document date last month and mark extremely sensitive . it confirm the government will bring free movement to an end post Brexit . a new immigration system will herald far tight control , seek to prioritise job for brit by require ` ` employer to recruit locally first ' ' . the paper say measure to bring down migration could include ` ` limit ' ' number of EU citizen allow into UK for low-skilled work . this could be either ` ` through a salary threshold , an assessment of the skill-level of the occupation and/or through a direct cap on number ' ' . last night Migration Watch say the move could slash EU migration by @card@ a year . Lord Green who chair the think tank , say : ` ` this be excellent news . completely unskilled immigration from the EU can not be allow to continue . ' ' Whitehall source say there have be ` ` at least six ' ' update version of the document since the draft - which be reveal by the Guardian . but expert say they believe the draft be still ` ` very close ' ' to the late one . the Pro-EU Open Britain group say the proposal would threaten our economy and put public service at risk . No10 would not comment . everyone Wants Deal with UK - P12 100,000cut in EU arrival MigrationWatch think plan could trigger
Norse case scenario ; @card@ ... ... ... ... ... Monday , May @card@ , 20171SM LOAD of BALLOTS AS Nic ADMITS 1SM Monday , May @card@ , @card@ ... ... ... ... ... EU ENTRY COULD Be BLOCKED ... ; lSNP Split Vote KO ' D , Say RIVALS ; l'NORWAY ' Plan B for Indy SCOTS Nicola Sturgeon yesterday admit an independent Scotland might not walk straight back into the EU . the First Minister say join the European Free Trade Association like Norway may end up a ` ` necessity ' ' because of a Brussels block . critic insist her comment show her stance on Europe ` ` have descend into chaos ' ' . and they claim it destroy the SNP ' s reason for demand a second independence referendum - to keep Scotland in the EU . the backlash come after she be grill by the BBC ' S Andrew Marr ahead of the General Election . he ask if she be consider join the four-country bloc of Norway , Switzerland , Liechtenstein and Iceland , which allow free movement of people and follow Brussels ' rule . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` my position be I want Scotland to be in the EU . ` ` we have to set out , if we ' re in an independence referendum - and we ' re not in that right now - the process for regain or retain EU membership , depend on where we be in the Brexit process . ` ` it may be that we have a phase approach to that by necessity . ' ' press by Mr Marr on whether that mean being in Efta first then the EU later , she reply : ` ` it may be by necessity , but we do n't want that . ` ` we have to set that out at the time because there be still some uncertainty , many uncertainty , around the Brexit process . ` ` but in this election if we want to have a chance of protect our place in the single market on which @card@ Scottish job depend , then vote SNP to strengthen our hand to try to do that . ' ' the Nat have recently court Efta member for an apparent back-up plan if an Indy Scotland can not retain EU membership . it come after Brexit Secretary David Davis dismiss an SNP proposal for Scotland , as part of the UK , to join Efta to stay in the single market after we vote @card@ against leave the EU . et s-ds , in yesterday ' S interview , Ms Sturgeon also admit many SNP voter back Brexit , despite the party ' s pro-EU stance . s-f d Uwould poll have suggest a third of Nat voter want to leave the EU and critic yesterday accuse Ms Grilled ... Sturgeon of try to woo back Brexit Nat . Tory deputy leader Jackson Carlaw say : ` ` her position on Europe have descend into complete chaos . ti Vo si ` ` in a cynical attempt to win back leave voter who have desert the SNP , she now refuse to say whether an independent Scotland would go back in . and her flirtation with Efta would leave us with all the obligation but no voice in decision-making . ' ' Labour leader Kezia Dugdale say : ` ` this be a bruising interview for Nicola Sturgeon . Ksa bvi S ` ` she be try use Brexit as the excuse for another divisive referendum but wo n't be straight to th an re with Marr with people about her position on EU membership . the reality be the nationalist have quietly shift away from a policy of immediate EU membership . ' ' and Scottish Liberal Democrats leader Willie Rennie say : ` ` Nicola be sell out pro-Europeans to win back Brexit supporter with this watered-down policy on Europe . ` ` for the SNP , it be always about independence . the EU and a vote on the term of Brexit be the late excuse . ' ' Senior EU figure have say Scotland would n't be able to inherit the UK ' S membership and would have to join a lose of five ` ` candidate ' ' country - Albania , Macedonia , Serbia , Montenegro and Turkey . however , it ' S also be suggest that Scottish EU membership could be fast-tracked as the country have be an established part of the bloc . the Sun say - Page ten
Nat aim attack at ' EU cash grab bid ' Nicola Sturgeon warn of a Westminster cash grab after Ruth Davidson suggest farm subsidy would be pay by Holyrood tax after Brexit . the First Minister claim the UK Government want to keep all the money that would no longer go to Brussels and leave Scotland to replace EU payment to farmer . ll ode . at us te ' ' . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` that be absolutely outrageous and completely unacceptable . they intend to use Brexit to seize power . ' ' Holyrood and Westminster be battle over who will control current EU power over farming and fishery after www.Brexit.no Ud Ms of rut ay al eg on the subsidy , Davidson say ahead the Scottish Tory conference : ` ` do it come out of the Scottish Parliament ' S budget and they have to levy additional taxation for that ? or be we assume it ' s come from the Treasury ? ' '
Nicola ' S OUR Ace in BREXIT SHUFFLE I WAS delight to see Nicola Sturgeon , the First Minister of Scotland , address the Seanad yesterday . in my opinion she be one of the most skilled politician in Europe at the moment , and an important ally for Ireland in the forthcoming Brexit negotiation . I work a bit with her when I be European Affairs Minister . as the Scottish Deputy First Minister at the time , she be responsible for EU Affairs within the devolve Scottish government and so we meet several time . during that period the Scottish independence referendum be take place , and Nicola , above , play an important role in that campaign . she prove herself to be an effective and impressive political operator and medium performer . while the referendum be lose , Nicola ' S star rise and she replace Alex Salmond as the leader of the Scottish National Party and the country ' S First Minister . since then the SNP have sweep the deck in the Westminster election , and Nicola have become a more prominent political figure in the UK than ever before . with Brexit now on the way , she will also become a much more important figure on the European scene . her threat to hold another independence referendum be real . it have the potential to really upset the planned Brexit and internal UK politics . and if she go ahead with the vote I believe she will win . I also believe that if Scotland secure independence , they will be welcome into the European Union . Ireland should take a very clear position on this . there be a long way to go in this Brexit process , and Scotland would be a key ally around the EU decision-making table . a lot of people believe the threat of another referendum be just bluff . know Nicola Sturgeon though , I be certain that she be a woman of great determination . I would not bet on her blink first . British Prime Minister Theresa May have more than meet her match .
BREX OFFENDERS ; Fury at House of Lords plot to keep us in EU UNELECTED peer be slap down by Theresa May yesterday for threaten to block Brexit . a House of Lords plot be reveal to try and force a second referendum . but the PM ' s official spokesman say peer should instead ` ` focus on get behind ' ' Brexit . baroness Patience Wheatcroft say there be dozen of peer who want to stop or delay the official trigger to leave the EU . in an interview she say it be ` ` imperative that we do n't press the button on Article @card@ ' ' . the Tory peer say she hope delay in the Lords of any potential Brexit law would lead to a second vote . a legal challenge on whether the government can trigger Article @card@ without the prior authorisation of Parliament be set to be hear in the High Court in the autumn . baroness Wheatcroft say : ` ` if it come to a bill , I think the Lords might actually delay thing . I think there ' s a majority in the Lords for remain . ' ' ask if she would support peer delay Brexit legislation she reply : ` ` Yes I would . ' ' but eurosceptic Tory MP Bill Cash insist there be ` ` no justification ' ' to ` ` face down the people ' ' . he say : ` ` it would be absolutely outrageous . ' ' Mrs May ' s official spokesman say yesterday : ` ` the British people have make their decision . ' '
' Happy PUTIN ' Scare TACTICS Over BREXIT Vladimir Putin would welcome Britain leave the EU , Labour claim yesterday . Shadow Foreign Secretary Hilary Benn warn that Brexit would hinder Europe from makdent ing a unite stand against Russia as its leader threaten world peace . his comment be leap on by leave campaigner who brand them part of Project Fear - a bid to scare voter into back an EU future for the UK . Mr Benn say : ` ` Presi-Putin would shed no tear if Britain leave . ` ` he would see Brexit as a sign of our weakness and of the weakness of European solidarity at the very moment when we need to maintain our collective strength ' ' . he insist Britain could defend our national interest well by stay in the EU . defence Secretary Michael Fallon make the same argument in a speech last week . meanwhile Eurosceptic Tory MP and commons leader Chris Grayling have warn against scare tactic . his comment be see as a veiled attack on David Cameron who have argue a Brexit could lead to migrant camp move from Calais to Kent .
Kenny : BREXIT Bad for US & EU ; TAOISEACH in LONDONEnda spell out our close tie in speech Enda Kenny look set to back some of the UK ' s demand for EU reform - as a Brexit would cost us billion . in an address to business leader in London , the Taoiseach give economic and political reason for our near neighbour to stay . he say : ` ` I have always be clear that Ireland will be open and pragmatic when it come to sensible proposal to improve the EU . ` ` in general , where the UK seek reasonable and achievable adjustment , we will be sympathetic and supportive . ' ' the Taoiseach ' s appearance at the Confederation of British Industry event come on the eve of Prime Minister David Cameron set out his case for EU reform . offer a qualified support for the UK position on Europe , Kenny say : ` ` give the breadth and depth of ( our ) overlapping interest , it be perhaps not surprising that Ireland regard the prospect of the UK leave the EU as a major strategic risk . ' ' he say a Brexit be not something the Coalition want to ` ` see materialise at all ' ' , add : ` ` the Irish government ' s strong view , back up by independent economic research publish last week , be that a Brexit be not in Ireland ' s economic interest . ` ` the research show adverse impact across a range of heading , include Prime mover ? ... Cameron will Trade , Energy and the Labour Market . it also debunk the myth that there would be some foreign direct investment bonanza for Ireland if Britain leave the Union . ' ' Kenny be set to hold talk with his British counterpart in Downing Street . but he also say yesterday it be extremely worry that Northern Ireland could be bad hit by a Brexit . he add : ` ` I believe that Northern Ireland can leave the past behind and become a dynamic economy that will benefit not only the UK but the island of Ireland . ` ` there must also be cooperation to build the island economy through overseas investment , trade , tourism , and utilise a competitive , common corporation tax rate . ` ` now be not the time to weaken the cohesive , stabilise influence and outward focus share EU membership bring to Northern Ireland . ' ' CBI President Paul Drechsler say : ` ` the link that bind Ireland and the United Kingdom be strong than ever before . the booming trade partnership that our two island enjoy drive growth , create job and increase prosperity and competitiveness across our country . ' ' he add : ` ` the Taoiseach ' s willingness to consider open and pragmatic EU reform proposal from the UK be welcome . when the PM come back with his EU reform package , the CBI will consult its member again . ` ` we agree with the Taoiseach that the voice of business need to be hear . ' ' @ IRISHSUNONLINE we ' re open op n en to sensible proposal to improve the EU we see the h UK leave the EU as a strategic risk
may : EU Ca N'T Lay Down LAW ; PUTTING Foot Down ON BREXIT PM wo n't let Euro Court dictate to UK DEFIANT Theresa May today unveil plan for a joint-run panel to settle post- Brexit row with the EU . the move be design to ensure Euro judge will no longer be able to boss Britain around . in a key moment for the Brexit talk , the PM will again refuse repeated Brussels demand for the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) to oversee the final deal . instead , Brexit Secretary David Davis will propose dispute be mediate by panel , which could include an independent party such as the European Free Trade Association . Mrs May ' s stand will ratchet up tension ahead of the third round of face-toface talk next week . London and Brussels be at loggerhead over the ECJ , with EU leader adamant that the court must still preside over the right of their citizen live in the UK . but a Government spokesman say : ` ` we have long be clear that in leave the EU we will bring an end to the direct jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European union in the UK . ' ' the phrase ` ` direct jurisdiction ' ' be seize upon by critic who say it leave open the possibility of apply ECJ ruling in some case . Lib Dem leader Sir Vince Cable say : ` ` it show Theresa May ' s red line be become more blur by the day . ' ' meanwhile Ireland ' S PM Leo Varadkar issue his big blast yet at no @card@ , say he be ` ` confuse and puzzle ' ' by its Brexit demand . he add : ` ` what they seem to be suggest be that they have all the advantage of be in the EU but none of the responsibility and cost . that ' S not realistic . ' ' EU lead negotiator Michel Barnier fuel fear trade talk will not start as schedule in October by claim quick progress on a divorce bill , the Irish border and citizen ' right be ` ` essential ' ' . Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon and Welsh counterpart Carwyn Jones yesterday brand a vital piece of Brexit legislation an ` ` unashamed move to centralise power in Westminster ' ' .
UK back in control of human right law ; UK be back in Control Britain take back control yesterday as David Davis dump a hate European Union human right charter . the Brexit Secretary unveil plan to switch every piece of EU law into UK legislation before we leave the bloc in early @card@ . but he say the UK would not be adopt the EU ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights - oversee by judge in Luxembourg . he say lawmaker in Parliament and Supreme Court judge would rule once we cut our tie with the EU . the move - @card@ hour after PM Theresa May trigger Article @card@ to formally launch divorce talk - be welcome by Brexit-backing Tories . it come as : French president Francois Hollande tell Mrs May Britain would have to settle Brexit term before the EU discuss a new trade deal . Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon accuse the PM of use the great repeal bill to grab a stranglehold over Scotland . MRS May write about Britain ' s wish to remain a strong partner and ally in newspaper column in EU country . EX-PM David Cameron be accuse of try to rebrand himself a Brexiteer by say he never like the European Parliament . millionaire Gina Miller say that she be consider a legal challenge to the great repeal bill . labour ' S ex-EU Trade Commissioner Lord Mandelson call for a nationwide Brexit ` ` resistance ' ' . under the great repeal bill more than @card@ EU regulation will be transfer into UK law to help pave the way for a ` ` smooth ' ' Brexit for business . the EU Charter bring together fundamental right protect in the EU . it have be blame for force the government to allow entry to a know terrorist and for give the European Court of Justice the mean to grab control over immigration , defence matter and home affair in member state . Mr Davis tell MP the government be deliver its promise to end the ` ` supremacy of EU law in the UK ' ' . ex justice minister Dominic Raab tell the Sun : ` ` remove the charter stop skewed human right obligation be impose on the UK . ' ' Mr Davis insist Britain have no plan to pull out of the European convention on Human Rights . Kill Bill - Pages Eight and Nine S
may : there ' s no way back ; BREXIT SHOWDOWN Theresa May last night blast Remainers for try to block her Brexit demand , declare : ` ` the people have speak . ' ' the PM insist end EU free movement rule be central to deliver Brexit ` ` in full ' ' . her tough message to pro-Brussels MP and peer come just two day after former Lib Dem chief Nick Clegg vow to lead an alliance block a Brexit vote unless the government commit to a ` ` soft ' ' deal and a second referendum . but speak in New Delhi ahead of a summit with India ' S PM Narendra Modi , Mrs May storm : ` ` the people speak on the June @card@ . ` ` an important aspect that underpin people ' S approach to that vote be a concern that they have about control of movement of people from the EU into the UK . ` ` we see the result of that and it ' s now our job to get on and deliver it . ' ' Mr Clegg and Labour ' S Owen Smith hope to thwart Brexit in the wake of a High Court ruling that there must be a vote in Parliament before Mrs May can trigger official EU divorce talk . yesterday Gina Miller , the hedge fund manager who bring the case , appear to compare Mrs May to a ` ` tin pot ' ' dictator . and she say everyone in the country should be her ` ` big fan ' ' for ensure the PM have to get MP ' approval to invoke Article @card@ . the former model say : ` ` the case be that she can not use something call the Royal Prerogative to do it because we do not live in a tin-pot dictatorship . ' ' Ukip boss Nigel Farage hit back at Ms Miller on BBC ' S Andrew Marr Show by ask her : ` ` what part of leave do n't you understand ? ' ' and he warn if voter feel cheated there would be a backlash of ` ` political anger the like of which none of us in our lifetime have ever witness ' ' .
budget for BREXIT Blues ; Hammond ' s drastic bid to beat jitter Chancellor Philip Hammond have warn he may have to draw up a drastic new budget as the first sign of a Brexit economic wobble emerge . he say he will reset all tax and spending plan ` ` if we deem it necessary to do so ' ' . it come as a survey of @card@ company executive yesterday reveal a sharp decline in output and order . IHS Markit ' S Purchasing Managers ' Index for July warn of a ` ` dramatic deterioration ' ' in economic activity four week on from the EU Referendum . it show the big month-on-month slump in confidence since the financial crisis in @card@ . if the slowdown last , hundred of thousand of job could be put at risk . the grim news also send the pound into a new tumble yesterday . but it contrast sharply with the Bank of England ' s assessment this week that it have find no evidence of a Brexit slowdown yet . Mr Hammond ' S warning come during a trip to China where he be try to drum up post-Brexit trade . he say he will use the Autumn Statement later this year to redraw predecessor George Osborne ' s plan if datum show the economy look to be head into trouble . Mr Hammond say this ` ` period of uncertainty ' ' have dent business confidence . but the new Chancellor add : ` ` Our job be to restore that certainty . ' ' IHS Markit ' S chief UK economist Dr Howard Archer warn there be ` ` a very real danger ' ' that Britain could be in a recession by the end of the year . but the report also reveal British export have be give a boost by the weak value of the pound . yesterday Mr Hammond sign an agreement with South Korea to open up financial technology trade between the two nation .
can David fill in the blank ? you may have notice there have be a bit of a row at Westminster over @card@ report which the UK Government have carry out on the impact of Brexit . pay attention at the back , this be go to get complicated . in December last year , Brexit Secretary David Davis tell MP that his official be busily prepare ` ` about @card@ set of analysis ' ' on the impact of Brexit . in a BBC interview last June he say : ` ` we ' ve get @card@ , nearly @card@ sectoral analysis already do . ' ' in front of MP again in October he say the report offer ` ` excruciating detail ' ' . in fact , they be so detailed that the Prime Minister have n't quite manage to read her way through them all . then , a month ago , MP vote to have the report hand over to the Brexit Committee . it be a unanimous vote and the entire Tory Party stay away in the hope that , by ignore the decision , it might just go away . the Speaker have other view , however . he rule the vote be valid and the government have well cough up . but then a very strange thing happen . Mr Davis , leave , declare that ` ` as we ' ve make clear ' ' it be ` ` not the case ' ' the report even exist . OK , fair enough , hand up , there be ` ` a range of document develop at diff-erent time since the referendum ' ' but it would need time ` ` to bring together this information in a way that be accessible . ' ' so , on the one hand , Mr Davis have nearly @card@ intensely detailed report but , on the other , he do n't . you may think it utterly beggar belief to imagine that the government would have do absolutely no homework on the impact of this momentous policy decision - but that be now the official position . you might think that , if they have do any homework , they would want to boast to everybody about what a fantastic success Brexit be go to be . eventually Mr Davis do hand over a pile of paper . but they have lot of page blank out because he do n't want sensitive information fall into the wrong hand - and that ' s what this late Westminster row be about . remember , Brexit be suppose to be about ` ` take back control ' ' . but now the actual commons committee in charge be n't even allow to see the homework the government maybe have n't do . and all this in the week when the PM agree to pay an unknown sum , likely to be about £50billion , in order to secure a bad trade deal with Europe than the one we already have . but I have good news . your own government may not want to tell you what Brexit mean but we now have this thing call the Internet . and it reveal the European Parliament have do lot of homework , even if David Davis leave his on the bus . the report on fishing alone take up @card@ page . it make clear there will be ` ` a fishery agreement that will enable the continuity of fishery activity at a level and under condition similar to those currently in place . ' ' so , no change in foreign vessel in our water . they also want ` ` preferential access ' ' for EU vessel , add : ` ` Withdrawal from the EU will not eliminate the UK ' s obligation to negotiate fishing quota , but rather will increase it . ' ' I wonder what the British version say - if it exist , of course .
return I.S . must face jail ;
' end row or Jezza will win ' Tory big beast Ken Clarke and Lord Hague urge the Cabinet to stop their feuding over Brexit yesterday - or see Jeremy Corbyn storm into No10 . in a direct assault on Boris Johnson , lifelong rebel Ken Clarke say ` ` sound off personally ' ' be unhelpful and warn him not to ` ` exploit ' ' Theresa May ' s weakness as a PM without a majority . the Europhile MP , who vote against Brexit in the Commons last week , also say of Bojo ' s Brexit article : ` ` normally a Foreign Secretary would be sack for do this ' ' . meanwhile William Hague warn continued in-fighting would divide the party and lead to defeat at the ballot box , he say : ` ` Jeremy Corbyn will be Prime Minister ' ' .
we ' ll block Brexit ; SCOTS Ministers DEMAND EXTRA Powers Scottish minister last night renew threat to ` ` block ' ' Brexit unless they get extra power . they berate the PM ' S second-in-command Damian Green in Edinburgh talk . he be warn Scotland must get full control over its fishing , farming and environmental policy after the UK quit the EU . Scotland ' S Brexit Minister Mike Russell say they will ` ` not budge ' ' and call the EU Withdrawal Bill a ` ` blatant power grab ' ' . he add : ` ` we remain absolutely clear that , as thing stand , we will not recommend to the Scottish Parliament that it give its consent to the EU Withdrawal Bill . the current proposal be a direct threat to the devolution settlement . ' ' First Secretary of State Mr Green say after the talk that both side agree to work on their position . he reveal there would be further discussion in a few week , add : ` ` we be also unite on the aim that the Scottish Parliament have more power at the end of this process . ' ' but source last night accuse the Scottish government of ` ` whip up a constitutional crisis out of nothing ' ' . BREXIT Secretary David Davis accuse the EU of fail to match the government ' S proposal on each other citizen ' right - label recent talk ` ` difficult ' ' .
£20bn Brexit blow for EU ; Funding HIT May ' S BOOST BREXIT could leave the EU with a £20billion hole - hand Theresa May a huge trump card . Brussels official say £10billion a year lose from the UK may double because of the need to spend more on defence and migration . Budget Commissioner Gunther Oettinger warn the EU may have to slash the £35billion-a-year handout to farmer . he also outline option for an ` ` own resource ' ' system - effectively EU-wide tax levy directly by Brussels . and a border levy could be place on tourist or businessman enter the EU . Tories say it show the PM have a major bargaining chip in Brexit talk . the EU want an £88billion divorce settlement , say to be effectively the price of a free trade deal . Tory MP Suella Fernandes say : ` ` we be significant in term of contribution and this strengthen Britain ' s bargaining position . ' '
BREXIT HIJACK Bid Lords , pro-EU MP and even the Scottish Parliament be last night line up to halt the PM ' s raft of new Brexit law . Theresa May unveil eight bill in the Queen ' s Speech yesterday to pave the way for Britain ' s EU divorce . with a series of other Tory pledge dump after the election fiasco , the annual address confirm Brexit will overshadow everything else in Westminster for the next two year . Mrs May extend a fresh appeal to rival MP to help her pass the law , tell the commons : ` ` we will do what be in the national interest , and we will work with anyone in any party who be prepare to do the same . ' ' but in a controversial move , the Lib Dems declare their @card@ peer in the House of Lords will not honour the long-standing Salisbury Convention , where they agree not to block manifesto promise . the party ' s chief whip Alistair Carmichael tell the Sun that Brexit bill will be ` ` fair game ' ' , add : ` ` the government ' s go to have one hell of a job get its business through the House of Lords . ' ' Downing Street later insist the convention should be respect if the government pass the Queen ' s Speech in a crunch vote next week . Mrs May also concede the Scottish Parliament will have to consent to the great repeal bill , set to shift EU legislation into UK law . it could see the SNP-dominated chamber vote down major element apply to Scotland . BREXUAL HEALING - Pages @card@ & @card@
BREXIT be No1 Issue ; Poll BREXIT be the top General election issue for northern Irish voter . a survey for the Sun reveal that Sinn Fein ' S Michelle O'Neill , leave , and the DUP ' S Arlene Foster , right , will Continues on Page Two continue from Page one face an electorate where @card@ per cent place Brexit above any other concern as they prepare to cast their vote . but the EU breakaway debate be expect to make little difference to the eventual outcome . the Sun ' S survey reveal it be likely there will be no change in who Northern Ireland elect to be its MP - although one constituency be split . the tug-of-war in Fermanagh-South Tyrone be on once again between sit MP Tom Elliott of the UUP and its previous MP , Sinn Fein ' S Michelle Gildernew . the tussle in that constituency , where the DUP have stand aside to allow the UUP a clear run , have come down to a handful of vote in recent poll . our survey by Lucid-Talk rate health and education as the second most important issue with voter . equality , job and the economy come next . the Irish language be seventh , with @card@ per cent say it be at the front of their mind , while a united Ireland be next with @card@ per cent . the burning issue of RHI , which lead to the collapse of Stormont in January , be ninth on the list at @card@ per cent , while union with the UK be tenth at @card@ per cent . our survey also reveal that less than half of all voter want the Northern Ireland Assembly , with a first and deputy first minister , back up and run after the June General Election . it show that @card@ per cent of the public would like thing back up and run right away at Stormont , while @card@ per cent of people would like to see some form of Joint Authority between the British and Irish government . only @card@ per cent would prefer permanent direct rule from London , while @card@ per cent say they would be happy with a period of it . the survey also reveal the total unionist vote be likely to rise by @card@ per cent , while the nationalist vote be on course to dip by @card@ per cent . l LUCIDTALK ' S online poll use a weighted , representative @card@ full response over @card@ hour online last week . all data result produce be accurate to a margin of error of +/-3.0 % , at @card@ % confidence .
May ' s set for Welsh exit pain Theresa May face a fresh Brexit storm in Wales as she arrive to shore up support for the UK before push the Article @card@ Brexit button . the PM ' S visit follow comment by Wales Minister Guto Bebb who describe Scotland as an ` ` another country ' ' . Mrs May , who have dismiss call for a second Scottish independence vote before the Brexit deal be finalise , will be in Wales with Brexit Secretary David Davis . it will coincide with the signing of the £1.3billion Swansea City Deal between the UK and Welsh government which aim to create more than @card@ job . speak ahead of the visit , Mrs May say : ` ` from my first day on the step of Downing Street , I make clear my determination to strengthen and sustain the precious union . ' '
king BACKS BREXIT ; Let ' s go for hard exit , say ex-Bank chief Mervyn EX-Bank of England boss Mervyn King have call for a hard Brexit . and Lord King say Britain should be more confident of our chance outside the EU . the UK should leave the single market , and he warn there be ` ` real question mark ' ' over whether we should seek to remain in the custom union . in a blast at Remoaners , Lord King say of Brexit : ` ` I think the challenge we face mean it ' S not a bed of rose , no one should pretend that . ` ` but equally it be not the end of the world and there be some real opportunity that arise . ` ` we should look at it ( Brexit ) in a much more self-confident way than either side be approach it at present . ` ` be out of what be a pretty unsuccessful EU , particularly in the economic sense , give us opportunity as well as obviously great political difficulty . ' ' Lord King , who lead the bank from @card@ , say Europe face huge problem over migration and the euro but have answer to neither . the crisis over the EU ' S future be so big that Brexit amount to little more than a ` ` minor irritant ' ' by comparison . he add that the single currency be flaw from the start , and it might have be good to create two monetary union for premier league and second division economy . but it be too late to change now , he claim . former Ukip leader Nigel Farage say : ` ` Wise word from Lord King . ' '
8YR INFLUX ; SOFT BREXIT Cabinet RIFT ; leu migrant still let in until @card@ lPlan blast by leave minister a Fresh Cabinet row have erupt over a bid to delay the full introduction of a tough immigration system by as much as five year . Home Secretary Amber Rudd have draw up plan for a visa-based scheme to block unskilled worker from the EU . but Ms Rudd be ally with Chancellor Philip Hammond to also insist it could only be bring in gradually . the ` ` soft Brexit ' ' duo fear a sudden end to British business ' access to cheap foreign worker could be a hammer blow to the economy . instead , they be push for a gradual transition into the visa-based system - which be debate by the Cabinet ' s Brexit sub-committee last week . one Cabinet minister who back their plan say : ` ` Withdrawing unskilled EU labour instantly would create a cliff edge for the hospitality and construction industry . ` ` Soundings from those sector be make it clear we will need a transition period into the new immigration system to protect vulnerable area . ' ' Britain will not leave the EU until @card@ at the early , mean the country face eight more year of a big Eastern Europe influx . but the proposal have anger leave campaigner in the Cabinet , such as Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and Development Secretary Priti Patel . immigration campaigner say firm should start prepare for workforce change now . migration Watch UK boss Lord Green say : ` ` a transition period be completely unnecessary . ` ` it ' S not as if all three million EU worker already here be go to disappear in a puff of smoke . ' ' Migration Watch UK be also today call on farmer to boost worker ' wage so they can employ some of the 1.6million jobless brit instead of migrant . the Home Office last night say it do not comment on government meeting .
Fox ' domino ' out alert for Euro leader Trade Secretary Liam Fox predict yesterday Brexit would spark a domino effect across the EU unless Brussels change its way . he say European leader have to understand that million of voter across the continent be ` ` dissatisfied ' ' with the way the EU be run . and he warn that member state would look at Brexit and see the UK decide the only way it could regain control be by leave . in April , former Justice Secretary and Brexit chief Michael Gove say an Out vote would trigger the ` ` democratic liberation ' ' of Europe as other nation demand change . Dr Fox say : ` ` I really want the EU to succeed as I want it as a stable political , economic and security partner . ` ` other country in Europe will say , ' the people of Britain want more control and get it . be there other mechanism by which that can happen short of leave ? ' ' ' l Hungarian vote by @card@ per cent against Brussels ' plan to make them take in a set refugee quota . but the poll flop as @card@ per cent of voter turn out . rightwing PM Viktor Orban need @card@ per cent for the result to be valid .
Tory FAITHFUL Order Cam To Back BREXIT David Cameron have be warn he could split the Tory if he ignore grassroots member ' wish for a Brexit . more than @card@ councillor have tell him that campaign for leave the EU be the ` ` only honest and responsible thing to do ' ' after his failed negotiation . their letter , to be deliver next week , say they want out as the PM ' S renegotiation meet none of the promise set out in the general election manifesto . the warning come as Labour claim Vladimir Putin would welcome Britain leave the EU . Shadow Foreign Secretary Hilary Benn say Brexit would stop Europe from make a unite stand against Russia as its leader threaten world peace . Mr Benn say : ` ` President Putin would shed no tear if Britain leave . ' ' leave campaigner brand his comment a bid to scare voter into back an EU future for the UK . Downing Street yesterday fend off claim the PM ' s draft deal will leave bank at the mercy of Brussels watchdog . Anti-EU ex-Cabinet minister Dr Liam Fox have top a Tory activist ' poll for next leader .
we get ta open up about our Brex life regular reader of this column - both of you - will recall that I recently point out how the UK Government be refuse to confirm or deny whether it have do any work in how Brexit will impact the Scottish economy . minister reckon that reveal the awful truth about whether or not they have do any calculation could have a terrible impact on Brexit talk . that ' S because , if we have n't do the work , EU negotiator might laugh at them and call them name . whereas , if they have do the work , EU negotiator might laugh at them , call them name and say , ` ` Tellt you ! ' ' . now the Department for Food and Rural Affairs have join in too . jam their finger in their ear and shout ` ` la la la , we ' re not listen ' ' Defra have turn down a Brexit-themed freedom of information request from Unite the Union . the reason they have turn it down be that answer the question be ` ` not in the public interest ' ' . and the top secret thing that Unite want to know be how much Defra have estimate your shopping bill might increase in the five year after Brexit . but the government say it ' s not in the public interest - not in YOUR interest - to know that kind of stuff . why worry your pretty little head about it ? there ' s no point cry over spill milk . what ' S do be do . well just to keep on go to the shop - for as long as you can still afford to . why do this stuff matter ? well , apart from the obvious , this week see another round of EU-UK Brexit talk and it would be fair to say that the EU ' s chief negotiator be only slightly more lukewarm this time than he be a month ago . follow the soft tone of Mrs May ' s Florence speech , Michel Barnier say : ` ` we ' ve have a constructive week - yes - but we be not yet there in term of achieve sufficient progress . further work be need . ' ' that ' s crucial . if the EU decide - and they be the only one who can decide - that there be not yet ` ` sufficient progress ' ' on the big issue of right of EU citizen , outstanding payment and the Irish Border , there will be no trade talk . that mean they wo n't even start to talk about a trade deal until there be ` ` sufficient progress ' ' . and the announcement of M. Barnier ' S decision will probably come on the same day that Mrs May make her big speech to the Tory conference so it should be interesting . trade deal count . remember how we be tell that we be about to scoosh the bestest , lovely easy trade deal in the whole world ever with America ? it be about the time that Mrs May go trip hand in hand down the stair with Donald Trump . ` ` Trade deal will open door to US job ' ' the headline say . anyway , we get an insight into how that ' S go this week when the United States slap a @card@ per cent import tax on plane build in Northern Ireland . this week ' S headline say ` ` May threaten trade war with US ' ' . the PM say she be ` ` disappointed ' ' about the squabble but not quite as disappoint as the thousand of worker whose job be now on the line . in the past the EU would probably have come out to fight for the UK - maybe hit back with some import tax of their own . now , not so much . just give me cake Barnier ! you need to be more generous Theresa
FF Hail ' EU27 ' BREXIT Deal Fianna Fail ' S Darragh O'Brien have back the agreement reach by the EU27 to recognise the unique situation that Ireland face in the wake of Brexit . the guideline agree in Brussels include a guarantee that the North would automatically rejoin the EU in the event of Irish reunification . the Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesman say : ` ` the agreement reach yesterday reflect the concern which we have be raise since the Brexit vote last June . Fianna Fail have be to the forefront of call to ensure that a special status for Ireland be include in any deal . ` ` we have be work with our partner in Europe , Alliance of liberal and democrat for Europe , in raise these issue and I welcome the work undertake by the government to achieve this . ` ` however , this be only the beginning of a very complex process and the government must ensure that Ireland ' s distinct concern be not sideline or downgrade in the month and year ahead . ' '
what SHE Said ... and what SHE MEANT ! Theresa May have set out her objective for Brexit as she launch her opening salvo for renegotiation with the EU . here the Sun ' S Westminster Correspondent Harry Cole look into what she really mean in key part of her historic speech . 1 . ` ` we will take back control of our law and bring an end to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice in Britain . ' ' what she mean : Britain ' S parliament will be sovereign now and judge at the European Court of Justice will not be able to make law by the backdoor too - the buck will stop with Britain after Brexit . 2 . Brexit must ` ` strengthen the precious union between the four nation of the United Kingdom ' ' . what she mean : she be try very hard to reassure the people of Scotland and Northern Ireland - area of the UK where the majority do not vote leave . she hint that the devolve parliament could get more power when they ` ` be return to Westminster from Brussels ' ' in a bid to see off Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon from demand another referendum on Scottish Independence . whe ot min Nico anot Inde cont com @card@ . Brexit mean we must ` ` get control of the number of people come to Britain from the EU ' ' . what she mean : the government will probably set a cap on the number of low-skilled migrant come from the EU after we have leave . but she clearly do not rule out keep some unskilled EU migration in the public sector and if boss need it - sign that she may base the system around job offer . 4 . ` ` not only will the government protect the right of worker out in European legislation , we build on them . ' ' what she mean : the PM move to shoot Labour ' S fox here - as the opposition claim Brexit will lead to a watering wa down of right for worker such as Health and Safety legislation secure at a European level . 5 . ` ` we will pursue a bold and ambitious Free Trade Agreement with the EU . ' ' what she mean : we be quit the EU Single Market which insist on free trade in good , service , capital and people but she still want tariff-free trade to be ` ` as frictionless as possible ' ' . Britain would be prepare to pay for trade access , but could no longer ` ` contribute vast sum to the EU budget ' ' . we be also quit the Customs Union which erect common tariff against the rest of the world - because it would stop us strike our own free trade deal . @card@ . ` ` all of us in Europe face the challenge of cross-border crime and a deadly terrorist threat . ' ' what she mean : Britain lead the world on intelligence and security matter and the former Home Secretary know other EU country will want us to continue share our knowledge - an ace in her renegotiate pack . @card@ . we will not find ` ` ourselves stick forever in some kind of permanent political purgatory ' ' . what she mean : PM say she be happy to have a phase introduction of a new deal so there be no cliff edge - but we will walk away if there be no deal .
Brexit Britain need hero ... unleash Boris Theresa May like to hedge her bet until she know for sure which horse to back . but by seek and win the job as our post-Brexit PM , she have not just pick the favourite - she be in the saddle and gallop at full speed . the question for the country she now lead be whether she be relish the ride of her life or cling on like grim death . Brexit mean Brexit , say Mrs www.M.No weasel word will stop it . so why do n't she act like the leader of a cause she truly believe in ? why do n't she offer it her wholehearted embrace ? OK , she speak up for David Cameron ' s Remain campaign - but almost under her breath . previously , she often hint at deep scepticism about the mess Brussels be make . but whatever her view before June @card@ , she be our Prime Minister now and we need to hear her say clearly and distinctly why Brexit must be good for Britain . Downing Street insist there will be no run commentary . this be top-drawer diplomacy , conduct discreetly with card close to the chest . ` ` it keep me awake at night , ' ' admit Mrs May , and she be entitle to our sympathy . Brexit be the tough political challenge face by Britain in peacetime . but diplomacy be war by other mean . and in wartime , keep up public morale be as crucial as send troop into battle . right now , Britain need a cheerleader . it need not be Mrs may herself who take on this role . she have a Foreign Secretary who be design and build to keep up public spirit . it be Boris Johnson ' s breezy brio that give million the confidence to vote out in the first place . he should be unleash without constraint on his joke or his ripe language . they be what give him star quality . EU negotiator pretend to be grumpy , but they love him , too . he speak their language , after all . in any case , we do n't need to keep our card close to our chest . we hold nearly all the trump . we can tell Brussel what we want and let them decide how to respond . the UK have plenty of ammunition . pessimist search for dark cloud behind the silver lining but nobody can ignore our boom in job , growth , export and retail sale since the referendum . Jaguar plan @card@ new job and a million new car a year . Google be invest £1billion and @card@ job . America , Canada , India and Australia be queue to sign trade deal . China want to splurge £4billion on a new Canary Wharf . these global giant be choose to invest their billion here , not France or Italy or even Germany . indeed , German firm want to expand here too and be beg Chancellor Angela Merkel to cut a deal with us . these be hard , cheer fact , not gloomy forecast by thumb-sucking ` ` expert ' ' . in addition , the PM have more subtle card to play . the EU be perhaps already in a death spiral . chief negotiator Guy Verhofstadt admit Brexit might be the trigger for disintegration . next week ' s Italian referendum could mark the beginning of the end of the euro . squabble EU state need us more than we need them . Chancellor Merkel be terrify of be leave alone with France and the other without our £14billion a year to keep them afloat . all the angry word and threat from Brussel be ... just word . ghostly has-been such as Tony Blair and John Major make total clot of themselves by denounce the ` ` tyranny of the majority ' ' and call for another referendum . with Project Fear eclipse by so much economic sunshine , the Brexit majority would turn into a landslide . yet , thanks to the BBC , the Moaning Minnies who refuse to accept the June @card@ verdict be fill the government ' s silence with black propaganda . worried voter need to see and hear Theresa May and her Brexit minister out there on the front foot , speak up enthusiastically about Britain ' s prospect of freedom and prosperity . why do n't Theresa give Blair and Major a piece of her mind ? and all those useless EU leader who have get it so wrong on so much ? she ' S quite capable of it . there be a strong , confident story to tell . it need to be tell with clarity and conviction , not timorous caution . we put Theresa May on the Couch - Pages @card@ & @card@ ' LOONY lefty include Jeremy Corbyn , Red Ken Livingstone and Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell fawn over dead Cuban dictator Fidel Castro . ` ` for all his flaw , ' ' opine Corbyn , ` ` Castro be a huge figure of modern history . ' ' the ` ` flaw ' ' include murder thousand of opponent by fire squad , hound homosexual and ruthless Press censorship . for the hard Left , the end - no matter how bloody - always justify the mean . Stalin and Mao do what they have to do . give the chance , it be possible to imagine Livingstone and McDonnell follow Castro ' s ruthless example , with puppet Corbyn cheerfully act on order . ' Black propaganda
gun powder clot ; REMOANER BREXIT Delay ' CONSPIRACY ' ; Clegg PLOT WOULD Blow PM ' S Plans and THWART Voters Nick Clegg and a band of pro-EU MP have be accuse of plot to overturn the will of the people by try to delay the Brexit process by a year . the former Lib Dem leader and a cross-party group of ally be demand Parliament be give a veto over the Prime Minister ' s negotiate strategy . that would force Theresa May into publicly reveal her hand in the Commons before she go into battle with Brussels to thrash out term of the new relationship with the EU . but Brexit campaigner yesterday label the move ` ` incredibly stupid ' ' . Mr Clegg be front the call for campaign group Open Britain , which want to stay in the single market . the former Deputy PM be be back by pro-EU plotter include ex-Labour leader Ed Miliband , Shadow Home Secretary Keir Starmer and Eurosceptic Tories Stephen Phillips and Nick Herbert . and yesterday he say it would be a ` ` very good thing ' ' if Mrs May be force to wait before invoke Article @card@ , which will trigger divorce talk with the EU . but Tory MP Steve Baker tell the Sun : ` ` Imagine buy a house and tell the seller in advance how much you ' d be prepare to pay . ` ` Imagine send an army into battle but give your plan to the enemy first . it ' s utter nonsense . ' ' Mr Clegg insist he be not try to re-run the EU referendum . he claim it be crucial that Brexit be pursue in a workable way that do not ` ` throw the single market out with the EU bath water ' ' . but challenge whether a defeat in Parliament for the PM would delay the process , ` ` way , that would ` ` Theresa fundamental that she ' S to trigger @card@ in March next year . he say : ` ` Yes and , by the uld be a very good thing . May have already make a tactical error by say go article ch of ready , , lose uarter iating cause in tell g be meanappen nd of after elecdoes ` ` she ' s already , in do so , about a quarter of her negotiate timetable because anybody Europe will you , nothing go to meaningfully happen until the end next year the German election . ' ' ` ` if the PM do wait untilthe German to trigger @card@ , it would Britain will be able to formally cut tie with Europe late @card@ . after vote article mean not forty until alSec-Patel accuse Mr Clegg rliament as a vehicle to democratic will of the e ' ' . on the BBC ' s Andrew after Mr Clegg , Ms Patel international Development Secretary Priti of ` ` use Parliament subvert the British people ' ' . Speaking Marr show insist debate be already happen over Brexit and that the government be not ignore anyone . and she be support by Tory backbencher who urge Mr Clegg and Europhile MP to respect the referendum result . Charlie Elphicke , MP for Dover , say : ` ` the Prime Minister have a mandate of the mass - to deliver on Brexit . it ' S extraordinary that people like Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband , who be hardly ever see in Parliament these day , suddenly ant to use Parliament to frustrate want the will of the people . ' ' Fellow Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg say the Bremoaners should be ` ` ashamed ' ' . he add : ` ` these people want us to stay in the single market , to stay in the custom union , ideally they want us to stay in the EU . ' ' the Sun on Sunday be first to reveal the call for a parliamentary veto on the PM ' s Brexit strategy . Arch Brexiteer Iain Duncan Smith brand the move a ` ` sick block tactic ' ' . last night he add : ` ` Letting MP determine every detail would be a recipe for chaos . ' ' Open Britain yesterday say an online poll of @card@ people find @card@ per cent back its veto plan . Mr Herbert say : ` ` the public rightly expect us to debate how the well possible Brexit deal will be achieve . ' ' EU leader have tell Britain it must accept free movement if it want to remain in the single market .
BREXIT None of YOUR Business ; CBI chief blast for 1m job axe claim CBI boss Carolyn Fairbairn be blast last night over a warning that Brexit could cost nearly one million job . Eurosceptics tear into the chief of Britain ' s big business group after she claim a report show leave the EU would clobber live standard , job and growth by @card@ . veteran Tory MP David Davis say the Confederation of British Industry - which once fight to scrap the pound and join the euro - should not interfere in the debate because it have no credibility on Europe . he storm : ` ` yet again , the CBI have demonstrate how untrustworthy it be on the subject of Brexit . ` ` all they be concerned about be protect their own market and executive bonus while ignore opportunity deny to other company because mar many other non-euro market be close to us . ' ' Vote leave chief Matthew Elliott say : ` ` the EU-funded CBI be desperate to recreate the same scare story they spread when they urge Britain to scrap the pound and join the euro . ` ` they be wrong then and they be wrong now . ' ' critic of the CBI also say the report quote by director-general Ms Fairbairn admit wage for the low-skilled would be likely y to rise after a Brexit because of low migration . the study , by accountant PwC , also say a ` ` significant ' ' slice of its predict job cut would be due to few migrant arrive . the CBI have vow not to tell brit how to vote in the run-up to the referendum on EU membership but Ms Fairbairn have insist it will still make the ` ` economic case ' ' . she say last night of the report : ` ` the finding explain why y of U the majority UK business be in favour of remain within the EU . ` ` even under optimistic assumption an exit trigger serious disruption . ' ' the PwC report calculate a loss to the UK economy of vote to leave while new free trade deal be secure . its gloomy estimate be @card@ job to go by @card@ with a £100billion cost to the economy and a £3,700 hit to household income .
out of the loop a Clear pattern have emerge from the government ' s Brexit negotiation . after every round of talk , UK minister emerge to say how fantastically successful discussion have be and what huge progress have be make . then the EU team say the opposite . not www.successful.No progress . that pattern continue yesterday when a UK Government delegation meet colleague from the devolve administration to talk about Brexit . First Secretary Damian Green , the PM ' S deputy , be clear in his view . he announce that the talk be a great success . ` ` talk of a ' power grab ' be now behind us , ' ' he say . and Scotland Secretary David Mundell say the meeting be ` ` very constructive ' ' and that ` ` key principle ' ' be agree . they must have be at a different meeting from the one attend by Holyrood ' S Brexit Minister Mike Russell . he say the talk be deadlock and SNP source describe UK minister as ` ` delude ' ' . that do n't sound much like a recipe for agreement . obstacle the roadblock have come because of Westminster ' s plan to take control of all the power return from Europe after Brexit - even if they be currently devolve . over @card@ possible obstacle have be identify and most of them be trivial - but many be not . it really matter how Scotland ' s farm subsidy be handle . it matter who control Scotland ' s environmental legislation . it matter who hand out Scotland ' s fishing quota . First Secretary Green say there ' s no doubt that Holyrood will end up with more power than it now have . that ' S not really the point . the point be which power come back - the trivial one or the serious one . quite clearly the devolve administration have not be convince by Mr Green ' S reassurance . they have not drop their demand for change to the Brexit Bill . they remain unconvinced . and , once again , the rest of us be on the outside look in , give just a glimpse of what ' S really go on . the politician be discuss our future . we deserve to be in the loop .
Boris be be bold on Brexit ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter Boris Johnson be to the Tories what Jeremy Corbyn be to Labour . what a good interview on the four red line for Brexit . Theresa May should stand behind her Foreign Secretary and echo those sentiment . it would send out the emphatic message to the EU that we will not succumb to their bully and blackmail - and it would also regain the initiative from Corbyn . ray Walter by Email Boris may be a Marmite figure but he be clear about his Brexit aim . it be a shame the rest of the Tory Party ca n't be as decisive . Mary Cooper Edinburgh Boris Johnson have just wait his moment until he could stab Theresa May in the back . Ruth Davidson have well prepare her speech - instead of go for First Minister , she should be aim to be party leader . Stephanie Barnett Aberdeen Theresa May be let Brussels bureaucrat walk all over her so no wonder Boris Johnson have break rank to hold her foot to the fire . a big problem for her be Ukip . they have finally find a credible leader and with Brexit in disarray they could easily win back the million of vote they lose at the last election . this would see the PM join the grow list of Tory leader destroy by the spectre of Europe . Neil Smith by Email I WAS disgust by the scene in Spain over the Catalan referendum . I be also disturb by the fact that some people claim they be clash between protester and police . that suggest two side fight . what I see be people be beat by the cop as they be sit on stair . a sad day for democracy . Amy Fowler Paisley the fiasco at Ryanair could spell the end of the firm . people be say they will recover because folk love cheap seat , but I be not sure they will go to a firm that ca n't be trust . ask the passenger of Monarch flight how they feel about be left strand . Dave GIBBS East Kilbride the achievement of triple amputee Mark Ormrod , picture , who win four medal at the Invictus Games , be undoubtedly spectacular . but there be a lack of skilled prosthetics technician to make and fit the good socket for stump on the NHS . we should bring some in from the US , or train people here , to give our disabled veteran quality of life . Keith Breslauer by email
Nat plea for Parly to reject Brexit Bill MSPs be be urge to reject Westminster ' s Brexit law this week over claim they be an ` ` outrageous power grab ' ' . SNP Europe spokesman Peter Grant insist the UK Government ' s bid to claim control of farm and fish ignore devolution agreement . the MP speak as Nat warn Holyrood and Westminster parliament be head for a major constitutional crisis . Mr Grant say : ` ` the Tory mantra on Brexit have be about ' take back control ' . ` ` however , the government be intent on not just take back control from Brussels , but also from Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland in one of the most democratically outrageous power grab . ' ' it come as the House of Commons Library , an impartial research centre , agree with Nat that the move ` ` effectively re-reserves ' ' devolve power . MSPs will be urge this week to reject the bill - although Westminster can snub the vote . Tory MP Ross Thomson add : ` ` Voting against it now be just a grubby attempt to thwart Brexit . ' '
( EURO ) @card@ TO Print ONLINE BOOKLET THE Government spend more than ( Euro ) @card@ printing @card@ copy of a Brexit brochure which be available to download online . more than ( Euro ) @card@ be spend in total on design and print brochure and booklet in a bid to explain Ireland ' S interest follow the trigger of Article @card@ by British prime minister Theresa May . it cost ( Euro ) @card@ to develop the document , a response to an FOI request reveal , with ( Euro ) @card@ spend on printing @card@ copy of the 22-page booklet , Ireland ' S priority . some @card@ be hand out to our embassy . other Brochure be give to civil servant , politician and other Brexit stakeholder . the booklet give a short history of Ireland , explain how the good Friday Agreement help achieve peace and the importance of our neighbour as a trading partner . the Department of the Taoiseach say : ` ` due to the importance of Brexit , and the need to communicate Ireland ' S priority to a wide range of audience , it be imperative to produce document to communicate key aspect of Brexit and its impact on Ireland . ' ' ... May
thank you & GOODBYE ; BREXIT BEGINS British Prime Minister Theresa May yesterday pull the plug on the EU . she declare it be ` ` an historic moment from which there can be no turn back ' ' as she formally trigger the two-year Brexit process . the declaration under Article @card@ of the EU treaty be personally hand-delivered to European Commission President Donald Tusk in Brussels by the UK ' s permanent representative to the EU , Tim Barrow . May tell the House of Commons in London the move be one of the ` ` great turn point in our national story ' ' and say she be act ` ` on the democratic will of the British people ' ' . however , Tusk say there be ` ` no reason to pretend this be a happy day ' ' . he tell a conference in ` ` there be nothing win in this process and I be talk about both side . essence , this about damage control . ` ` we already miss you . thank you and goodbye . ' ' the UK and now @card@ to ritain ' s he bloc , eriod can be a unanimous vote er state the EU have until @card@ negotiate Britain ' s exit from the though the period extend by of EU member state . the trigger of Article @card@ see opposition party here claim the government ' s failure to call for special status for the North be increase the danger of a ` ` hard economic border ' ' . both Sinn Finn and Fianna Fail slam our negotiate strategy on Brexit , say Ireland must argue for a special status for the six county , allow them to remain in the single market and the custom union while also remain in the UK . however , our negotiator have only point out that the North have ` ` special and unique circumstance ' ' and be refuse to seek a ' special status ' arrangement . speak in the Dail , Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams say : ` ` the intention be to drag Ireland out of despite the democractic will of people in that of the island . this have a profound effect . June clear Ireland people of North reject Brexit last June . it be Nothern should get spec nated sta the EU an the wish of be respect . specific designate status within and ensure the people meaningless to call for frictionless border when there will be a hard economic border . ' ' in response , Minister Paschal Donohoe - stand in for the Taoiseach - say the government be call for ` ` recognition of the Goo Friday Agreement , no return to a hard border of the past and recognition of free movement of people between Ireland and the UK ' ' . he add : ` ` the government be absolutely clear on the need to recognise the unique circumstance of Northern Ireland . ' ' Earlier , Fianna Fail ' s Brexit spokesman TD Stephen Donnelly also demand negotiator call for a ' special status ' deal . he insist : ` ` this must be a wake-up call for the government . it need to be more active in protect the interest of the citizen of Northern Ireland . ` ` this mean seek agreement that any future control on the flow of people , good and service would be move to the Irish Sea , allow North-South trade and movement continue unfettered . ` ` the stake for Ireland be rise , with both the UK and EU talk up the prospect of a disorderly Brexit . if a ' cliff ' be reach in two year , with no agreement in place for the on-going relationship between the EU and UK , we be look at enormous economic , political and social ramification on the island of Ireland . ` ` it ' S no surprise two third of the Irish public believe the government be clueless on Brexit . ' '
' Brexit be a threat to peace process ' BREXIT have provide a boost for dissident republican oppose to the peace process in Northern Ireland , British MP have be tell . the UK ' s vote to leave the European Union be be use as a rally call by group try to get a grip on community unhappy with the referendum result . Professor Peter Shirlow , director of the Institute of Irish study at the University of Liverpool , tell a Westminster government committee yesterday : ` ` if you look at the dissident , Brexit have be a boost to them in term of their organisational capacity . ' ' ` ` there be a section of our society which be rub its hand at Brexit for its own end and they be entrepreneur who will try to use that propaganda to influence young mind . ' '
may BREXSPLIT ; Tory civil war as PM ban Commons Brexit vote Theresa May spark fresh Tory civil war last night by refuse MP a vote on her Brexit plan . furious senior MP turn on their own minister in a heated six-hour commons debate . Pro-EU Conservative Claire Perry accuse Brexit Secretary David Davis of ignore the national interest to put his ` ` narrow ideological interest first ' ' . four ex-ministers also side with Labour to demand MP have the right to water down a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' clean break . back up the PM , Mr Davis pledge Downing Street would take in all MP ' view . but he insist : ` ` what I wo n't allow be any party to have a veto on the decision to leave the EU . ' ' the government will go to court today to try to stop a bid by lawyer to force a Commons vote on when Mrs May can trigger Article @card@ .
Brexit will let Britain champion free trade Boris ON BREXIT THE Foreign Secretary have declare he support a hard Brexit , want the deal to ` ` liberate us to champion free trade ' ' . Boris Johnson ally himself today with International Trade Secretary Liam Fox as he back a clean break to broker new agreement . in an exclusive Sun interview , he say : ` ` I be confident we can get a deal that be exhilarate for this country . ' ' Mr Johnson describe Britain ' s Brexit strategy as ` ` have our cake and eat it ' ' . he insist that the country would take back control of immigration while continue open trade with the European Union .
now May have to deliver on Brexit I Hope the people of this country will give Theresa May the time she need to unite the party and the country . I vote to leave the EU and after listen to Theresa May I believe her when she say : ` ` Brexit be Brexit and we be go to make it work ' ' . but it will take time and the UK need stability . an election will cause more mayhem and uncertainty when what the country need right now be a strong leader to guide us through leave the EU . Maureen Rogers by Email May seem to be the good candidate for the job , but she have to deliver on Brexit otherwise we will play straight into the hand of the SNP and their desire for another indy referendum . James Sinclair Stirling GIVE Theresa May two or three week to see if she ' S get the right leadership quality . if she stick to policy like deport foreign criminal back to their own country , put worker on business committee board , banish inequality across the UK and get a a good deal for Brexit then she will do for me . Allan Goodwin Inverness Well do to Theresa May on become PM . for Andrea Leadsom to say she have kid and would be good for the job be clutch at straw . it do n't help , as child always must have a no-nonsense attitude and I wish her all the good . Lucy Mackinnon Glasgow So we have a new PM without even a vote in her party . great . however , I do wonder whether May be a silent Leaver anyway and this have be her reward . Stuart Harris East Kilbride Well do to Erin Sandilands on win her case against the restaurant that try to make her wear a skirt instead of trouser . as a male waiter , I wonder what would happen , if I wear a dress , high heel and make-up . would I get the same reaction from a judge ? Andrew Clark Edinburgh Well do to Gordon Reid on his terrific win at Wimbledon . Gordon , picture , deserve just as much praise as Andy Murray . Keith Cassidy
UK vote may sink sterling ; BREXIT Risk Cash GURU ' S Fear A BREXIT would cause a Black Fridaylike collapse of sterling and badly hit Irish exporter , it be claim . wealthy currency speculator George Soros give the warning as British people prepare to vote tomorrow on whether to quit the EU . with the poll neck and neck , he say : ` ` Sterling be almost certain to fall steeply and quickly if leave win . ` ` I would expect this devaluation to be big and also more disruptive than the @card@ per cent devaluation that occur in @card@ . ` ` a vote to leave could see a Black Friday , and serious consequence for ordinary people . ' ' the billionaire make a fortune by bet against the pound in the so-called Black Wednesday in September @card@ . and he warn even big ` ` speculative force in the market ' ' would ` ` exploit any miscalculation by the British government or British voter ' ' . he say : ` ` a vote for Brexit would make some people very rich - but mo st voter considerably poor . ' ' the Economic and Research Institute say Irish exporter be already suffer . it have cut its growth forecast for the year by @card@ to @card@ per cent due to the uncertainty cause by speculation of a Brexit . there could be one positive , however . some expert say a British exit could see multinational base there move their base across the Irish Sea . @ IrishSun Online
pm : EU Global Trade Falling David Cameron be force to admit that the EU ' s share of global trade have fall since Britain sign up for the common market in the early 1970s . and he agree that the UK desperately need a trade deal with India , as we currently export more ` ` service ' ' to tiny Luxembourg than one of the fastest-growing economy in the world . press by a member of the BBC studio audience , the Prime Minister admit the EU ' s share of global trade have dip by a quarter - from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent - since we sign up . he insist this have more to do with the meteoric rise of China than the EU ' s own failing . but Brexit backer last night say it show how Britain can thrive if it be allow to negotiate trade deal outside of Brussels . Tory MEP and Out campaigner Dan Hannan say it be scaremongering by the Remain campaign to suggest EU state would slap tariff on the UK under a Brexit . the UK buy £291billion of EU good each year , compare with the £240billion we sell to other EU state . Mr Hannan tell the Hannan . . campaign Sun : ` ` the point be , salesman rarely bully or threaten their customer . and find me any EU country where they restrict their market ? ' ' the PM admit he have say Britain would ` ` survive ' ' if the nation vote out . but he insist that while Britain always ` ` find a way ' ' he firmly believe a Brexit would be the wrong choice . Mr Cameron add there would be ` ` no go back ' ' if Britain vote out . ` ` it be an irreversible decision . ' ' he say he be ` ` absolutely convinced ' ' the UK economy would suffer if we leave and stand by Chancellor George Osborne ' s threat of a ` ` punishment ' ' Brexit Budget . Mr Osborne last week warn Brexit would force the government to raise tax and slash spending .
Brexit bar tab fear Ireland ' S drink and hospitality industry could be hit for ten of million if sterling drop in value because of Brexit , a new report have claim . the study for the Drinks Industry Group of Ireland estimate crossborder shopping to take advantage of exchange rate could cost the economy as much as ( Euro ) 60million this year . Secretary of Digi Donall O'Keeffe say : ` ` the drink and hospitality industry be feel the tremor of Brexit . ` ` this government must prioritise protect the Irish industry that be disproportionately expose to Brexit , like drink and hospitality . ' '
the Sun SAYS Labour shame Labour must be hope their Brexit supporting voter be n't follow their party conference . otherwise they ' d have hear Corbynista MP Clive Lewis brand them as racist for want to end freedom of movement . and they ' d have hear him essentially trash Labour ' S manifesto which he stand on in June that commit Labour to , um , well , leave the EU . he must ' ve forget that @card@ per cent of Labour supporter vote leave . Jeremy Corbyn ' S party have also bottle debate Brexit during the Brighton conference . what kind of party ca n't have a conversation about the single big issue we face ? earlier this month , Brexit chief David Davis accuse Labour ' s Brexit policy as be motivate by ` ` the pursuit of chaos . ' ' he be spot on . but we doubt he realise they ' d end up cause quite so much chaos for themselves , though .
food for fraught ; BREXIT WORRIES for Trade WITH UK Irish consumer be face a big hit to their pocket if the UK leave the EU without an exit deal . the average basket of everyday grocery could leap in price as a result of tariff impose on import good . and a new government report make a strong case for a deal to protect our trading relationship with Britain , which be currently worth more than ( Euro ) 4billion a year . a so-called ' hard ' Brexit would see the UK leave two EU mechanism - the single market for free internal trade and its custom union , which set external tariff - and fall back on World Trade Organisation rule that carry high tariff on certain product . because of our two country ' close link , Ireland would be the most affect of all EU member by this approach . not only would price of import from the UK rise , hard Brexit could also put ten of thousand of export-focused Irish job at risk and hamper economic growth . yet it seem that our business leader be still struggle to get their head around the size of the challenge ahead . a Bord Bia survey of @card@ company in the food sector - which be heavily reliant on the UK market - find that the majority feel there be strong potential for growth in sale there . but while @card@ per cent face competition from UK supplier , @card@ per cent do n't have a marketing strategy to defend their market share . worryingly , almost a third of company have limit or no experience in the import and export rule govern non-EU market . Bord Bia chief Tara McCarthy , leave , warn : ` ` Brexit will demand a nuanced and concerted response from every level of the food industry . ` ` we will need to be innovative , agile , inform and prepare as never before . ' ' here , we look at how a hard Brexit could impact on each food sector ... DAIRY Ireland ' S milk , whey , butter and cheese producer be heavily dependent on export , which account for @card@ per cent of total revenue . many be adept at manage currency risk - key if sterling plummet and make product pricey for Brits . but two-third do n't have a UK marketing plan , while @card@ per cent have n't factor in new tariff cost . pigmeat the UK be the main market for Irish pigmeat last year , take @card@ per cent of our total export . however , price be a big driver , with company more likely to switch to other supplier for a good deal . despite this , Irish supplier be optimistic about grow sale in the UK by expand current product range and introduce specific marketing campaign . beverage Irish brewer and distiller export around the world and have plenty of experience deal with custom . it ' S a different story for our non-alcoholic beverage , though , which typically end up on UK shelf . the majority of producer believe they have a chance to increase sale in Britain , but only one in five believe they currently have the resource to target new opportunity . seafood SIGNIFICANT sale to other country afford some protection against Brexit . however , the UK be often use as a transport hub , and a hard Brexit could create supply chain havoc due to the short shelf-life of some product . furthermore , there could be huge implication for our trawler fleet if access right , quota or territorial fishing limit be change . beef Ireland ' S beef and cattle export be value at ( Euro ) 2.48billion last year - with about half be sell in the UK . give the size of its exposure , hard Brexit side-effect such as increase lead time and supply chain cost could hit this sector badly . many business have be try to grow sale in the UK and other EU market like Germany to minimise the impact . lamb the UK receive around @card@ per cent of Irish lamb export , with @card@ per cent go to other EU country . one huge issue be the number of sheep our farmer import from the North - some @card@ every year , account for up to @card@ per cent of the Republic ' S throughput . this could be jeopardise by a hard Brexit which would restrict the trade of live animal . prepared Foods This sector could face significant challenge in the event of a hard Brexit because of the introduction of certain custom requirement . furthermore , a majority of processed food business admit they have little or no experience in the rule for trading with non-EU country . most nevertheless believe they can sell more of their current and new range in the UK . horticulture OUR mushroom and soft fruit business - key player in this sector - be hugely reliant on UK sale . in fact , @card@ per cent of them earn more than threequarters of their revenue in sterling . for the mushroom industry , annual British sale of ( Euro ) 80million represent @card@ per cent of export income . many fear they will be unable to find alternative market .
BLOCKDOWN ; here WE Go Again Storm AFTER PM REJECTS Nic ' S Vote DEMAND ; lTories vow to halt IndyRef2 till @card@ at early ; lNats ' rage at snub ... as Brexit battle escalate Theresa May ' S Tory launch a bid to put Nicola Sturgeon ' s Indy-Ref2 plan into lockdown until at least @card@ . the PM spark SNP fury by reject the First Minister ' s demand for a vote to be hold in as little as @card@ month . Scots Secretary David Mundell then set out a plan make it impossible to go to the poll until after the next Holyrood election in four year . as the row escalate yesterday , Mr Mundell and Scots Conservative boss Ruth Davidson refuse to say when - or if - a new independence vote will be sanction by Westminster . Ms Davidson say : ` ` we be not set timetable . we be not pin this to year . ` ` I believe it be only right that people have the opportunity to examine the UK ' s new relationship with the European union once it be up and run . people should only be ask to make a judgment about whether to leave or remain within a 300-year-old union of nation when they have see for themselves how that Union be function , follow Brexit . ` ` they should also know what the alternative entail , and we have see no clarity from the SNP on even the basic question of their proposition . ' ' Mr Mundell add : ` ` we be not get bogged down in arbitrary date or somehow construct a shadow referendum campaign that would go on for year . ' ' when Mrs May fire the start gun on Brexit at the end of this month it begin a process which , accord to EU treaty , must be complete by March @card@ . but Mr Mundell say there may be ` ` transitional arrangement ' ' which would push a poll further into the future . he say : ` ` we do not believe the Brexit process would be conclude by that point . ` ` you ca n't offer the people of Scotland a fair , informed choice about the alternative without know what the Brexit process have deliver . ` ` it would be completely inappropriate to set date but , if there be ever to be a referendum , it have to be on the basis that there be a fair choice by which people understand the option . ' ' Ms Sturgeon planned Indy-Ref2 for autumn @card@ or spring @card@ - when ` ` the UK leave the EU ... or at least within a short time after it ' ' . she announce the plan on Monday as it will take around @card@ month to get the legislation for a referendum vote in place . the campaign itself will stretch the date to approximately two year from now . but the Tory plan - which kick in some time after Britain leave the EU in @card@ - will push any possibility of a referendum back to Spring @card@ - the schedule date for the next Holyrood election . Ms Sturgeon ' S spokesman add that the SNP mandate for a referendum would run out at the next election . he say : ` ` the mandate be clear - the mandate be for the parliamentary term . ` ` the First Minister have make clear her preferred timescale and that be the timescale we ' re work to . ` ` that be the basis on which this government be elect and the manifesto cover the parliamentary term . ' ' but Labour leader Kezia Dugdale back the Tory block and say : ` ` there should not be another referendum until after Brexit . ` ` we have no idea what Brexit look like , or how it will impact on Scotland . ` ` people can not be ask to make a decision about the future of our 300-year-old union in the dark . ` ` if there be to be another vote , the people of Scotland deserve clarity on what they be be ask to vote on . ' ' ' Biggest recruiting sergeant for indy ' but in a stinging rebuke , Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` when people have a choice to say what kind of future they want , I will be argue for this country to be in charge of its own finance and of build a fair society and a strong economy . ` ` Kezia Dugdale will be on the side of Ruth Davidson and Theresa May yet again , and her party will continue to die as a result . ' ' Mrs May ignite the row yesterday by say ` ` now be not the time ' ' for a referendum as the UK will be mire in Brexit negotiation . she say : ` ` we should be work together to get that right deal for Scotland and the UK . ` ` that ' s my job as PM , so for that reason I say to the SNP : now be not the time . ' ' the First Minister initially respond to the referendum block on Twitter , say : ` ` the Scottish government be not propose a referendum now ... but when Brexit term be clear and before an alternative path be too late . ' ' she say a section @card@ order need to approve a poll must be discuss with the government now to nail the timescale . and she warn : ` ` if the Tories refuse to do so , they would effectively be block Scotland ' s right to choose when the Brexit term clear . ` ` this would be undemocratic and proof positive they fear the verdict of the Scottish people . ' ' in the Commons , the SNP ' S Pete Wishart tell MP any attempt to block a referendum would backfire . he say : ` ` surely there be no case for stand in the way of democracy and defy the will of Scotland ' s elected parliament . ` ` if this government be think of stand in the way of Scottish democracy , it will be the big recruiting sergeant possible for independence . ' '
joy of Brex ; BUILDERS BOUNCE Back AS FEWER Firms STRUGGLE Sun City the number of UK firm in ` ` financial distress ' ' have fall since the Brexit vote . expert say @card@ few be under the cosh in the last quarter than in the three month to June . building firm be among those to have bounce back well . accord to UK ' s big insolvency firm , @card@ firm be struggle the three month to September . BEGBIES Traynor say the figure be @card@ in the three month to late June . six per cent few firm be ` ` significant ' ' distress and , of these , @card@ be small or medium-sized . the building sector , which shrink at its fast rate since @card@ in the month after the June @card@ vote , see an @card@ per cent drop in firm in the same boat . Begbies boss Ric Traynor say there be ` ` a bounce back after the initial Brexit shock ' ' . consultancy be also pick up post-Brexit , with ` ` significant ' ' distress case ten per cent down . Julie Palmer , a partner at Begbies , say law firm and management consultancy be in demand from client seek help ` ` navigate Brexit uncertainty ' ' . separate figure research agency OPINIUM show small and medium-sized UK firm be more optimistic than before June @card@ . only @card@ per cent believe there will be a recession , compare to per cent when quiz in May . meanwhile , the confederation of Industry say yesterday that export order , boost by the weak pound , rise @card@ per cent in the three month to October . this be the fast growth rate since @card@ , it add . @card@ the from few firm in financial distress in the last quarter @card@ % drop in UK company fear a recession
gloom of Brexit ' get sex up by bank ' A Top US economist say lead City expert ` ` sex up ' ' their gloomy post-Brexit vote forecast and be be force to admit they be wrong . Paul Krugman , @card@ , say major bank such as Credit Suisse and Morgan Stanley get their shortterm prediction wrong . he say they have now have to ` ` back off their forecast of a Brexit-induced recession ' ' . the Nobel Prize-winning economist add : ` ` it seem as if my scepticism about dire short-run forecast have be vindicate . ' ' but he still expect Brexit to ` ` do substantial long-run economic harm ' ' . Krugman be the distinguished professor of economics at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York . the New York Times columnist win the Nobel in @card@ for his work explain the pattern of international trade . Sun City - Page @card@
boom and BUST ; UK Growth FORECAST up AS Euro Economy FALTERS Britain ' S economy be grow faster than expect post-Brexit as Europe ' S stutter , it emerge yesterday . GDP be expect to rise by @card@ per cent this year , accord to auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers . in July and August , in the aftermath of the Referendum , it have be forecast to rise @card@ per cent . the increase add an estimated £5billion to the value of good and service produce in Britain . and the bounce follow week of gloomy growth downgrade in the week after the June vote . John Hawksworth , PwC ' s chief economist , say : ` ` Our improve outlook reflect the late official datum , which confirm the UK economy remain in reasonable shape go into the Brexit vote . ` ` it ' S encourage that indicator such as retail sale hold up well in July and purchasing manager indices bounce back in August . ' ' there be more positive news yesterday with the number of job available in the financial sector increase four per cent month-on-month in August . Hakan Enver , of recruitment firm Morgan McKinley , hail the rise as remarkable in the midst of Brexit , summer break and the bank holiday . meanwhile , European Central Bank president Mario Draghi say he expect the economic recovery of the eurozone to be ` ` dampen ' ' . his outlook suggest Brexit will have more of a long-term impact on the EU rather than Britain itself . Mr Draghi say : ` ` the economic recovery in the euro area be expect to be dampen by still-subdued foreign demand , partly relate to the uncertainty follow the UK referendum outcome . ' ' former Belgian PM Guy Verhofstadt , who call leave voter rat , have be appoint European Parliament ' S chief Brexit negotiator .
heel , BOYS New PM Theresa can reunite Tory & deliver Brexit ; Maggie May in AT No.10 by Steve Hawkes Theresa May yesterday vow to heal the Tory rift as she deliver the public ' s demand for Brexit - after she be crown Prime Minister in wait . she be expect to whip feud male Cabinet colleague into line in the no-nonsense style of Maggie Thatcher . Mrs May , wear her famous kitten-heeled leopard print shoe , say : ` ` Brexit mean Brexit - and we ' re go to make a success of it . ' ' Full Story - Pages @card@ , @card@ , @card@ and @card@
how Osborne get his Europe figure so totally tangle ; Economist RUBBISHES £4,300 Claim WRONG and mislead . that be the good way to describe the most quote figure of the referendum campaign . in April the Chancellor say family would be £4,300 a year worse off with Brexit . he also describe this as a fact . it be nothing of the sort . unfortunately the Prime Minister keep repeat this number . the figure be produce by the Treasury - the Whitehall department that serve Chancellor George Osborne and oversee the economy . let me explain six reason why this £4,300 figure be not worth the paper it be write on . flaky FORECASTS First , as part of its long-term forecast of Brexit , the treasury predict what the economy would look like in @card@ . there be no harm in longterm forecast but it be not possible to be precise about what will happen in @card@ year ' time . to put this in perspective , back in March the Chancellor have to announce revision in his Budget forecast for this year that have be make only four month earlier . growth IGNORED Second , Osborne say that people would lose money with Brexit . but that be not what even his own figure show . the Treasury expect the economy to be much big in @card@ than now , whether we stay in the EU or leave . but they do n't report it this way . instead they say the economy would be @card@ per cent small with Brexit than if we remain in . even so , that would still leave the UK economy almost @card@ per cent large with Brexit by @card@ than it be now . hardly a loss . cherry Picking Third , the Treasury ' s growth forecast for Brexit be base upon pessimistic assumption about future policy . in particular , they assume that if we be to leave the EU we would not change either our migration or regulation policy . as both of these be key issue in the Brexit campaign , you would think both be likely to change . likewise , the Treasury make cautious assumption about our likely trade policy after Brexit . more realistic assumption would result in much strong growth with Brexit . fiddle Figures fourth , the next thing the Chancellor do be to report the number in an unusual way . this have already be question by many , include the cross-party house of Commons Treasury Select Committee . gross domestic product ( GDP ) measure the size of an economy . this include lot of firm as well as many people . so if you divide the size of an economy only by the number of people , you get a misleadingly large figure . this be what they do , calculate GDP per head . you do n't need to be an economist to smell a rat by now . economist look at income per household , a much small number . indeed , the Treasury Select Committee say this change alone would mean that the £4,300 figure of GDP per household be equivalent to £1,600 in median household disposable income . far small . hike the Numbers Fifth , instead of look at this in term of what it mean for individual , they look at household . the aim be probably to make the cost seem as big as possible in the way it be report . a household be not the same as a family . it be the number of people who live in the same dwelling . the average household be @card@ people in the UK . so immediately by look at household it make the number @card@ time big than look at individual . GDP of £4,300 per household be the same as £1,800 GDP per person . it would be far small in term of average disposable income . dodgy Division Sixth , to get the cost per household in @card@ you should divide by the much large number of the million more household who will be live here then . instead , the Treasury use the number of household today . this make the final figure of cost per household higher . it be n't only the number . the Chancellor ' S report do n't provide a fair assessment of the risk or opportunity . remain in the EU contain huge uncertainty but this go largely unmentioned . the EU be expect to be the slow-growth region of the world economy . at its core be the unstable euro . and even though we be not in the eurozone we would find it hard not to be drag into the problem face the EU . these include the crisis in Greece , the unfunded liability of Germany ' s pension system and the problem of Italian bank , plus the obscenely high rate of youth unemployment . leave , naturally , present its own www.problems.No one should kid themselves it will be completely plain sailing . I have look at this in detail and conclude that despite near-term challenge , Brexit be the good option on offer . so what be forecast as a £4,300 loss per household by the Chancellor really should have be report as a longterm gain for each of us . Dr Gerard Lyons be a member of the economist for Brexit . his ebook the UK Referendum : an Easy Guide to Leaving the EU cost £1.99 on Amazon .
' LEAVE EU and Save the NHS ' ; 48HR ' BREXIT BLITZ'Gove : boost health with Euro billion BREXIT campaigner Michael Gove and Boris Johnson will today tell voter that leave the EU would free up ` ` waste ' ' billion to save the ailing NHS . Justice Secretary Mr Gove be expect to say taxpayer ' money would be well spend on hospital at home rather than prop up Brussels coffer . while he give a speech in Nottingham this evening , MP and London Mayor Mr Johnson will give a similar message in Manchester . the rally call will launch a 48-hour ` ` Brexit blitz ' ' with employment minister Priti Patel , Leader of the Commons Chris Grayling , and Northern Ireland Secretary Theresa Villiers speak across the country . link the NHS to the EU vote be likely to infuriate David Cameron as he will see it as a direct challenge to his record as PM . speak to the Manchester Evening News ahead of his speech , Boris urge EU ' ' voter to ` ` throw off the shackle of the EU ' ' . he add : ` ` EU membership cost the North West £1.5billion every single year . that ' s enough money to buy four new hospital be waste on an unaccountable and fail institution . ' ' but Remain supporter and ex-NHS chief Sir David Nicholson say leaving would hit the economy and mean less money for health .
a SINN-ISTER DEMAND Sinn Fein be to blame for a major new Brexit stand-off over the Northern Ireland border , minister claim . they say the IRA ' s political wing have push Irish premier Leo Varadkar into a new hardline demand which could sink the whole Brexit deal . he now insist that to keep an open border Ulster must stay in the EU single market and custom union if the rest of Britain leave . minister say this come after heavy political pressure from Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein , whose party be set for big election gain if Mr Varadkar ' s weak fine Gael government collapse soon . the plan be at once shoot down as ` ` impossible ' ' by Brexit Secretary David Davis yesterday , who insist protect the two EU institution ` ` can not come at cost to the constitutional and economic integrity of the United Kingdom ' ' . he say : ` ` this can not amount to create a new border inside our United Kingdom . ' ' Ex-Cabinet minister John Whittingdale say : ` ` Sinn Fein should not be try to profit from make a Brexit deal very hard to reach . ' ' but pro-EU Labour MP Conor McGinn say the only answer be for all of the UK to stay in the custom union and single market .
PM Ruth Can UNITE All of US Just when we need a strong Prime Minister , Theresa May be reveal as have kitten heel of clay . full credit to May for remain at her station - rather like Captain Edward Smith of the Titanic , and completely unlike David Cameron , who immediately run away when it all go wrong for him . but thought inevitably turn to who will replace May . and the obvious choice be not necessarily the right answer . I love old Boris . but perhaps the country - all those youngster who just vote for the first time , the Ukip voter who be change allegiance , the working-class Labour voter who despise Corbyn - have have enough Old Etonians as PM to last them a lifetime . how about Ruth Davidson , above , who humble the SNP in Scotland and secure our United Kingdom for a generation ? it be true that Ruth be not dream of a hard Brexit . but then if this country crave a hard Brexit , it should have give Theresa May her landslide . this be not a bad time to recall that while the 17.4million of us who vote to leave be the big vote in British history , the 16million who vote to stay be the second big vote in British history . nothing can stop Brexit happen . but we now need a Brexit that do its good to unite us all . and a PM capable of the job . Ruth Davidson - who once describe herself as a ` ` shovelfaced lesbian ' ' - be tough , funny and ferociously smart . and what a great country this would be if the Prime Minister stand wave on the doorstep of No10 with her wife standing by her side . now that ' s what I call progressive .
dear Starmer ; MP ' s £125K from Brexit-blocking law firm Shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer be pay £125,000 by a law firm that help derail Brexit . Ex-DPP Mr Starmer - also involve with a failed witch hunt of Sun journalist - have reveal he be pay up to £750 an hour by Mishcon de Reya . Mishcon be one of three firm that bring the legal challenge to Theresa May ' s Brexit plan in the High Court last week . last year Mr Starmer , @card@ , be elect as a Labour MP , for which he be pay £75,000 a year . between June and September this year he be pay £18,000 by Mishcon for @card@ hour of ` ` legal advice ' ' . late last year he make £7,000 offer legal advice to the firm for @card@ hour . he also reveal a payment of £100,000 on May @card@ @card@ , for work do before he become an MP . Mr Starmer be the third key figure from the £14.7million Operation Elveden witch hunt of Sun journalist to be employ by Mishcon . his former principal legal adviser at the CPS , Alison Levitt , and ex-Met assistant commissioner Sue Akers - who head the bungle probe - have also work there . last week Mr Starmer refuse to apologise after reporter Anthony France have his conviction overturn - mean not one of @card@ Sun journalist arrest be convict . a spokesman for his office say : ` ` the register make it clear the vast majority of his declare earnings be for work before he become an MP . ' '
get out ... and ACT like man ; BREXIT Chief URGES NIC. . ; call for Isle-style border control BREXIT campaigner Tom Harris urge Nicola Sturgeon to adopt Isle of Manstyle border control if we vote to leave the EU on June @card@ . he challenge her to use post-referendum negotiation to bring in a distinct immigration policy build around a strict work permit system like the Manx government ' S . but last night his Remain rival mock him for compare his country to a Crown Dependency ` ` about the size of Paisley ' ' . Mr Harris say in a letter to the First Minister that an Out vote would give Holyrood the chance to control its border and address skill shortage . the Vote leave director go on : ` ` the Isle of Man , outside the EU , have develop a special relationship with the European Economic Area - they put their own worker first but recruit from Europe to fill job local ca n't do . ` ` this be do through sponsor work permit that require proof of English speaking and a criminal record check . ' ' he say the prize for Brexit would be that ` ` politician will for the first time in 40-odd year have control over our border ' ' . he add : ` ` we do n't need a return to Whitehall central planning . we need to manage this in Scotland . ` ` if social democracy be to prosper post-Brexit , it will mean demonstrate to the rest of the UK that a progressive way of handle migration be possible . ` ` I hope that after June @card@ you have an opportunity to prove it . ' ' he say there have be a ` ` postwar consensus ' ' that government would allow immigration on condition they could ` ` turn off the tap if it get too bad ' ' . but he admit quit the EU might not mean an end to mass immigration to the UK , as the likes of Norway must allow free movement in return for access to the single market . but Scotland Stronger in Europe hit out at his letter , say : ` ` depend on the day of the week , the leave campaign think we should be like Albania , Australia or now the Isle of Man - about the size of Paisley . ` ` the option that be right for Scotland be stay in the EU and the single market of @card@ million people . ' ' a spokesman for the First Minister add : ` ` with his argument against Whitehall central planning and for Scotland have control over its own immigration policy , Tom Harris make a good case for independence . ' '
the Remoaners be begin to [ ... ] the Remoaners be begin to whisper that Brexit be die . they think , the way thing be , we ' re never go to leave . I think it ' S time we put them right on this issue . and it ' s time the government show a bit of solidarity and spine . I ' ve even hear Remoaners suggest the last election be a verdict on Brexit and the British people clearly do n't want it . listen , you bitter and delude bore . if that ' s true , why do almost everybody vote for one of two party totally commit to Brexit - Labour and the conservative ? if the public have turn anti-Brexit they could have vote for the one major English party determine to have a second referendum - the Lib Dems . but almost nobody do - and they end up with @card@ seat .
golf war ; Juncker SMEAR Row EU ' not a club ' jibe be brush off as gossip FURIOUS MP have accuse an EU chief of ` ` insulting ' ' Theresa May and Britain - and try to sabotage the Brexit deal . Jean Claude Juncker be say to have tell the PM the EU ` ` be not a golf club ' ' after minister suggest the UK should quit for free . the Commission president launch the attack after claim talk at a No10 dinner last Wednesday have be ` ` constructive ' ' . he call Mrs May ' s Brexit expectation obstinate and naive . when the PM tell Mr Juncker they should share the aim of make Brexit work , he tell her : ` ` Brexit can not be a success . ' ' he be say to have call German leader Angela Merkel on the morning after the dinner to relay his concern which lead her to attack No10 for have illusion . Germany ' S Socialist Europe minister Michael Roth liken Mrs May ' s approach to a fairytale . the account of the meeting appear in a German newspaper . Mrs May call it Brussels gossip . No10 say : ` ` we do not recognise this account ' ' . privately , Whitehall be seethe at the breach of diplomatic protocol . top Tory Brexiteers hit out . Ex-Tory chief Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` this be Juncker try to stay centre stage when most of the nation want him off this stage . ` ` all this be try to do be undermine Theresa May and make himself look more important . it ' s an insult to Britain , as well as the EU . ` ` Juncker ' S behaviour be bizarre and irrational and it do n't help anyone . it ' s time for those of clear head to move him to one side . ' ' Lib Dem leader Tim Farron claim the disputed account show the PM have ` ` no clue ' ' . Labour Brexit Secretary Sir Keir Starmer say : ` ` this be evidence that May ' s rigid and complacent approach to Brexit negotiation risk lead Britain over a cliff edge ' ' .
golf war ; Juncker SMEAR Row ; EU ' not a club ' jibe be brush off as gossip FURIOUS MP have accuse an EU chief of ` ` insulting ' ' Theresa May and Britain - and try to sabotage the Brexit deal . Jean Claude Juncker be say to have tell the PM the EU ` ` be not a golf club ' ' after minister suggest the UK should quit for free . the Commission president launch the attack after claim talk at a No10 dinner last Wednesday have be ` ` constructive ' ' . he call Mrs May ' s Brexit expectation obstinate and naive . when the PM tell Mr Juncker they should share the aim of make Brexit work , he tell her : ` ` Brexit can not be a success . ' ' he be say to have call German leader Angela Merkel on the morning after the dinner to relay his concern which lead her to attack No10 for have illusion . Germany ' S Socialist Europe minister Michael Roth liken Mrs May ' s approach to a fairytale . the account of the meeting appear in a German newspaper . Mrs May call it Brussels gossip . No10 say : ` ` we do not recognise this account ' ' . privately , Whitehall be seethe at the breach of diplomatic protocol . top Tory Brexiteers hit out . Ex-Tory chief Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` this be Juncker try to stay centre stage when most of the nation want him off this stage . ` ` all this be try to do be undermine Theresa May and make himself look more important . it ' s an insult to Britain , as well as the EU . ` ` Juncker ' S behaviour be bizarre and irrational and it do n't help anyone . it ' s time for those of clear head to move him to one side . ' ' Lib Dem leader Tim Farron claim the disputed account show the PM have ` ` no clue ' ' . Labour Brexit Secretary Sir Keir Starmer say : ` ` this be evidence that May ' s rigid and complacent approach to Brexit negotiation risk lead Britain over a cliff edge ' ' .
lend May YOUR X ; Election @card@ JIBE AT JEZZA be INSULT To ALIEN REPTILES PM ' s call to Labour voter ' back me for Brexit deal ' Theresa May call on Labour voter to ` ` lend ' ' her their vote yesterday to boost hope of a good Brexit deal . speak at a rally in the Labour heartland of Leeds East , the Prime Minister say the snap election be about the ` ` national interest ' ' . she declare : ` ` this election be not about who you may have vote for in the past . everyone in our country have a positive reason to lend me their vote . ' ' Mrs May tell Labour voter to ditch old loyalty because this election ` ` be about vote in the national interest ' ' . she say Mr Corbyn would be a ` ` weak leader negotiate Brexit and high tax , debt and waste ' ' . the PM say : ` ` Vote for me to strengthen my hand at the negotiate table in Brussels . ' ' in return for vote Tory , the PM pledge she would govern for ` ` every person in this great country ' ' . hit out at Labour and the Lib Dems for threaten a ` ` coalition of chaos ' ' against Brexit , she say : ` ` Our opponent be already seek to disrupt those negotiation - at the same time as @card@ other European country line up to oppose us . ` ` that approach can only mean one thing - uncertainty and instability , bring grave risk to our grow economy with high tax , few job , more waste and more debt . ` ` so we need the strong possible hand , the strong possible mandate and the strong possible leadership as we go into those talk . ' ' in a fresh sign of the Tories ' confidence the PM launch the extraordinary power grab in Leeds East - one of Labour ' s safe seat hold by staunch leftwinger and Shadow Justice Secretary Richard Burgon . the Tory blitz signal the party be target a massive majority on June @card@ by target Labour ' s weakness in northern England . analysis reveal by the Sun last week show the Tory could grab a massive @card@ seat from Labour with a ten per cent swing . pollster Matthew Goodwin say this be ` ` entirely plausible ' ' and include Labour stronghold of Leeds North East and Wakefield in its top @card@ seat under threat . the PM ' s trip to Leeds be her second pitch of the campaign to northern voter after she launch her bid for re-election in another Labour heartland , Bolton , last week . the Tories also hope to win back Ukip vote . and last night there be sign the Eurosceptic party would help Mrs May when it announce it be not contest Ilford South in East London in an attempt to oust Europhile Labour MP Mike Gapes . hour earlier Tony Blair urge voter to ignore Theresa May ' s ` ` clever ' ' national interest strategy . he say : ` ` what the Tories have do very cleverly be give people the national interest reason for vote Tory . ` ` what they ' ve say be , the patriotic thing irrespective of your politics be to vote Conservative because she need a strong hand in the negotiation . ` ` it ' S a persuasive argument until you realise that she ' S tie her hand in the negotiation by say , ' I ' m not go to put the single market on the table ' . ' ' Staff of one-term MP who lose their seat in June will not get a pay-off , it emerge last night . vast taxpayer-funded payout in @card@ prompt a rule change .
Davis BLASTS Lords BREXIT Block FURIOUS Brexit chief David Davis last night vow MP would overturn a second Brexit Bill defeat in the Lords . the Tory accuse peer of try to thwart Britain ' s EU divorce altogether after they vote @card@ to @card@ to amend the legislation . they rule Parliament should be able to block a ` ` bad ' ' agreement with Brussels and send Theresa May back to the negotiate table . the amendment , back by @card@ Tory , be the big vote in Westminster ' S Upper Chamber . it set up a knife-edge commons vote next week when Mrs May will ask MP to bin the amendment and push ahead with trigger Brexit talk by the month ' s end in a statement , Mr Davis say : ` ` it ' s clear that some in the Lords would seek to frustrate that process . it be the government ' s intention to ensure that do not happen . ` ` we will now aim to overturn these amendment in the House of Commons . ' ' up to @card@ Tory MP , include former minister Anna Soubry , be threaten to rebel against the PM and back the Lords ' call . government source say last night they be confident their majority would still hold . but Ms Soubry urge Tory colleague to abstain at the least . she tell the Sun : ` ` this be not a revolution . ask Parliament to approve a deal or no deal be at the heart of what this great country of ours be all about . ' ' ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury Justin Welby brand Lib Dem peer ` ` undemocratic ' ' yesterday as they launch a doomed bid for a second EU poll . he say another vote would ` ` add to our division ' ' .
' Trump in on Brexit ' Nigel Farage have insist his Brexit fight play a key role in get Donald Trump elect as US President . Mr Trump would not have win if not for the EU referendum victory , he tell documentary-maker Michael Cockerell in a film for BBC2 ' s Newsnight last night . he say even Mr Trump himself do not think he would have win without Brexit happen . Mr Cockerell ask : ` ` so you help make Donald Trump president ? ' ' Mr Farage reply : ` ` it be n't the object at the time of fight for a referendum , but it be a by-product . ' ' day of the Donald - P16 & @card@
snap election threat for MP Spy Network be PART of Deal THE Prime Minister could hold a snap general election if Remain-leaning MP veto her Brexit deal . Theresa May yesterday also talk tough to EU leader by throw Britain ' s worldbeating security and intelligence ability on to the Article @card@ negotiating table . during her landmark Lancaster House speech , Mrs May finally bow to MP ' demand by pledge to give them a say on the final Brexit term in a vote in both Houses of Parliament . but when quiz on whether she would allow the result to bind her and keep Britain in the EU , she would say only : ` ` I be sure the British parliament will want to deliver on the view of the British people in respect to the democratic decision take . ' ' Ministers last night confirm the Prime Minister want to be able to call a fresh nationwide poll in @card@ to win a popular mandate for her Brexit deal , if it prove necessary . one Cabinet minister tell the Sun : ` ` the PM know she always have the voter up her sleeve , and she want to keep them there . ` ` if Parliament try to block the deal she have brokered and recommended , she will then go to the country . ' ' last night a source close to the PM also confirm that a potential Brexit-deal general election would be ` ` a political choice that would be make at the time ' ' . millionaire Ukip backer Arron Banks even brand the offer of a Parliament vote a mistake by Mrs May . Mr Banks say : ` ` with the promise of a parliamentary vote on her deal with the EU , May have open the door to a Remainer coup . ' ' but reinforce Mrs May ' s determination to complete Brexit whether there be a deal or not , the PM ' s official spokeswoman add last night : ` ` we be now seek a new partnership with the EU . ` ` either way , we will very clearly be leave the EU . ' ' as part of her vision for a new strategic partnership , Mrs May also make a substantial offer to EU country to enshrine in write the significant help they already get from Britain ' S security and intelligence agency for the first time . the PM tell them : ` ` Our intelligence capability - unique in Europe - have already save countless life in very many terrorist plot that have be thwart in country across our continent . ` ` after Brexit , Britain want to be a good friend and neighbour in every way , and that include defend the safety and security of all of our citizen . ` ` a Global Britain will continue to cooperate with its European partner in important area such as crime , terrorism and foreign affair . ' ' that include British troop currently station in Estonia , Poland and Romania to guard against resurgent Russia continue to ` ` do their duty ' ' , she add . No10 insist the PM do not ever intend to withdraw lifesaving intelligence sharing as part of hardball talk . it be a threat that MI6 chief Sir Alex Younger explicitly warn her against make last month . but the UK ' s major contribution to cross-European crime fighting , via institution such as Europol , be up for grab .
plan ' vital ' for future of job & business HOLYROOD plan to keep Scotland in the European single market be vital for our prosperity , the Nat ' Brexit Minister insist yesterday Michael Russell say the SNP have come up with ` ` compromise proposal ' ' short of independence to ` ` mitigate the Brexit damage ' ' . to make that work after the UK leave , immigration control and large part of trade law would have to transfer to the Scottish Parliament . Mr Russell say : ` ` that be vital for job , investment and long-term prosperity , all of which be threaten by the hard Brexit now champion by the right-wing of the Tory party . ' ' ` ` there be an overriding obligation on UK Ministers to engage seriously with our proposal . ` ` Failing to engage meaningfully constitute a gross breach of faith . ' '
Mais NON ! ; NEW PM PULLS Off Her FIRST Diplomatic Coup ; Theresa ' s win on French border control Theresa May last night pull off her first diplomatic coup as PM by extract a pledge from France to keep border control in Calais after Brexit . the new PM strike the agreement with President Francois Hollande during their first talk in Paris . but the two leader also clash bitterly over the shape of a future Brexit deal , and how swiftly the UK should leave the EU . maintain British border post on the other side of the Channel - set up @card@ year ago by the Le Touquet Treaty - be crucial to stop the soar migrant camp in the French coast town from move to Dover . Ex-PM David Cameron paint the disaster scenario during the EU referendum campaign as a potential Brexit consequence . but at the Elysee Palace last night , Mrs May declare : ` ` there be those in France that want it to go . Le Touquet be of benefit to both Britain and France , and we be both very clear it should stay . ' ' Mr Hollande say : ` ` we want to keep it , and we want to improve it . Le Touquet ensure we can say to migrant there be no point come to Calais as they will not be able to cross . ' ' there will he speak after emerge the Calais Jungle camp have more than @card@ occupant for the first time . aid agency warn it will hit @card@ by the end of summer , with @card@ day arrive . Article y ` ` it unre ts dll da eal opulande xt April er Alain before of year but Mrs May ' S deal may not last if unpopular Socialist Mr Hollande lose the election next to rival frontrunner Juppe , who want to the border post . we scrap ner ter al gs need Ahead of their dinner last night of lobster and prawn salad , veal and vanilla pudding with strawberry , Mrs May and Mr Hollande fail to paper over a e er Brexit. . Brexit difference . sooner well ore she she deparsible ' ' . Mr Hollande tear into her before arrive - demand trigger formal EU departure ` ` as soon as possible ' ' . Mrs May have already insist she will delay invoke Article @card@ of the Lisbon Treaty until next year . the French leader have attack her for try to pick and choose the good bit from the EU . and he repeat the barrage during a joint press conference yesterday , dub it ` ` the crucial point ' ' of the Brexit negotiation . Mr Hollande tell Mrs May : ` ` if Britain wish to remain in the single market , it must abide by the four freedom . there can be no free movement of good , service and capital without free movement of people . ' ' he also repeat his call for a speedy Brexit , ` ` the sooner the better ' ' , add : ` ` uncertainty be the great danger . ' ' ` ` Mrs May then shoot back : ` ` I understand the need for confidence and certainty inmarkets , which be I ' ve already be clear Britain will not invoke article before the end of this year . ' ' fidence the why cle be @card@ th be no @card@ EU leader be end this sp ha Fr a fa Germ Merkel visit on I split on how to handle Brexit , with France ' s boss take far hard line than Germany ' S Angela Merkel , who Mrs May Wednesday . bid to charm her yesterday , Mrs May speak her opening remark in French . quick she also say the two country ` ` share firm belief in the value of ` ` liberté , égalité , fraternité ' ' . in a host y spok rem tw a vé fu our Brits ple liv countrie but Mrs the the the pair go the furthest yet to honour the right of and French people live in each other ' S country after Brexit . May insist she must first know British citizen live in Europe would be protect . she explain : ` ` I want to be able to guarantee the right of people live in the UK . ` ` it will only not be possible if British people ' S right live in Europe be not respect . ' ' they vow to deepen cooperation on defence and security and Mrs May pledge solidarity to defeat terrorism after Nice last week .
BOJO Challenge To PANICKING PM Boris Johnson challenge David Cameron to a live TV debate after the panick PM brand Brexit campaigner liar . Mr Cameron accuse his own Tory Ministers of peddle ` ` one big con ' ' as he try to boost his Remain camp in a hastily-called press conference . but BoJo and Justice Secretary Michael Gove hit back , say : ` ` the public deserve the chance to hear these issue debate face-to-face between the PM and a spokesman for Vote leave . ' ' a visibly-riled Mr Cameron list Vote leave claim and dismiss them as ` ` complete untruth ' ' . he say : ` ` it ' s time that the leave campaign be call out on the nonsense that they be peddle . ` ` they say people have have enough of hearing from expert . why would you say it about one of the most important and complex decision that this country will have to take in our lifetime ? ' ' his old friend Mr Gove say last week he be glad economist be not back Brexit as they have get it so wrong before over the euro . the PM also slam Mr Johnson for his ` ` casual wave of the hand ' ' over the pound after Brexit . ask if he fear lose the referendum , he say not at all . he say : ` ` what I ' m worry about be people be be tell thing that be n't correct . ' ' Mr Johnson and Mr Gove ' S challenge come in a joint statement . Tory MP David Davis , another Vote leave supporter , say Mr Cameron have ` ` run fast and loose with the truth himself ' ' . the PM say Japanese conglomerate Hitachi , the US Central Bank and the World Trade Organisation have come out to warn against Brexit . the Sun say - Page ten
£3BN EU WAR CHEST ; BREXIT A £3BILLION war chest have be earmark to cover ` ` every possible outcome ' ' for Brexit . the Chancellor have come under intense pressure from Brexit support MP to prepare in case Britain exit the EU in @card@ without a trade deal . on Tuesday , David Davis say : call the Department Exiting the EU , Department for deal come what the cash , which never need to be will be divide between department include those for the environment , tax , transport and the Home Office . Philip Hammond say : ` ` we have already invest almost £700million in Brexit preparation today I be set over the next two another £3billion . ' ' but his Budget speech new positive tone on exit after critic accuse him of be a gloomy Remainer . he tell MP : ` ` we face a choice - embrace the future or reject the change . we choose the future , to run towards change , not away from it . ' ' he say the deal would be ` ` base on free and frictionless trade , close collaboration on security and strong mutual respect and friendship ' ' . last night Brexit back Tory MP voice concern the Budget have earmark £3.5billion in payment to the EU for @card@ . but a Government source say the figure be an estimate of possible custom payment not yet negotiate with Brussels .
fox BLAST AT BEEB Liam Fox launch another attack on the BBC yesterday , claim it be try to make Brexit a disaster by broadcast negative story . the International Trade Secretary say he be sick of the ` ` self-defeat pessimism ' ' of medium outlet like the BBC and the Financial Times . Senior Tory backbencher Jacob Rees-Mogg also vent anger at the BBC ' s ` ` absolutely appalling ' ' coverage since last year ' s Brexit vote . and he warn the BBC it will lose viewer if it continue with its anti-Brexit stance . Mr Fox say his travel since take the International Trade brief have show him there be ` ` real belief in the quality of the United Kingdom ' ' . and he will use his speech to Tory conference today to tell voter that many good will become cheap after we leave the EU . he will say : ` ` we may think the benefit of free trade be self-evident but we need to sell our vision and mission . ' '
BREXIT MONEY FIASCO ; Andrew Nicoll
Brexit to speed up the UK ' s acceptance that it have financial obligation to the EU could speed up the Brexit talk , say Fianna Fail . TD Stephen Donnelly be respond to comment by Tory MP Joyce Anelay , where she accept the UK would have to meet its financial obligation to the EU . speak ahead of the next round of talk tomorrow , Fianna Fail ' s Brexit spokesman say : ` ` this acknowledgement can speed up the initial negotiation relate to exit the Union , and precipitate a speedy start to the negotiation on the UK ' s post-Brexit relationship with the European Union . ' '
Labour ' sell-out ' Labour ' S Brexit chief yesterday suggest EU citizen should have superior right to brit after Brexit . Sir Keir Starmer say they should be able to bring in family after @card@ without pass the £18,600 income test . brit have to pass it if they want to bring in a non-EU spouse . he add foreign judge should have a say - rather than it be up to UK court . Sir Keir say : ` ` people should not suffer as a result of Brexit . ' ' the Sun say - Page ten
hammy PULLS BREXIT STRINGS ; Jobs Come FIRST , INSISTS Chancellor Top Cabinet minister last night clash on Brexit as both side pile pressure on Theresa May over her negotiate strategy . Chancellor Philip Hammond join force with Home Secretary Amber Rudd to demand the weakened PM prioritise job over tough immigration control . with just five day until talk be due to begin , the Remainers also insist Mrs may take a ` ` more pragmatic approach ' ' after her disastrous election result . they be pitch against the two Brexiteers - Boris Johnson and David Davis . Mr Hammond be also expect to repeat his job demand in public at tonight ' S annual Mansion House speech . the Treasury boss will insist ` ` British business , British job and British prosperity ' ' must now be the government ' S priority during the Article @card@ talk . his intervention come as Brexit tension among Tory again threaten to reignite a party civil war over Europe . last night ' s 90-minute showdown come at the first meeting of the Cabinet ' S new Brexit negotiation committee . Mr Hammond , face the axe until the election , and Ms Rudd take on leave champion Boris Johnson and Brexit Secretary David Davis . Foreign Secretary Mr Johnson have already warn there must be ` ` no backslide ' ' on plan to take back control of UK law , border , and money . the committee , chair by Mrs May , will steer direction for @card@ month of tough talk aim at win the good deal from the @card@ other EU member . a senior government source say : ` ` Philip express some strong view , and Amber back him all the way . ` ` nobody be try to reverse the EU Referendum - we be leave and everyone be fully commit to that . but the election have change an awful lot , so Philip think we need to fundamentally reassess where we be . ` ` there be some difficult time ahead for the economy . unemployment over the next two year must now be our great concern ' ' . the negotiation committee be set up two month ago when the PM trigger Article @card@ . it have a membership of five - two leave and two Remain campaigner with the PM sit in the middle . but newly appoint First Minister Damian Green , a passionate pro-EU campaigner , be also last night ask to join the committee - give it a clear Remain majority . Mr Hammond ' s attempt to urge a rethink will enrage hardline Brexiteers , lead by ex Tory leader Iain Dun-can Smith . minister have already warn the PM she face ` ` bitter trench warfare ' ' if she try to push Brexit law through the commons have throw away her majority . and ex-PMs David Cameron and Sir John Major have also urge Mrs May to rethink her strategy . but lead leave campaigner and Tory Brexit Minister Steve Baker say there be no need , claim we only have to ` ` do it smoothly and successfully and gain economic benefit ' ' . the talk should start on Monday in Brussels , where Mr Davis will meet with the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier . last night German Chancellor Angela Merkel say : ` ` we ' re ready on the European side . we ' ll see about the rest . ' '
well , we do get @card@ point ... from Aussie ; Eurovision SNUB AS Portugal Win Lucie Jones face a Brexit backlash at Eurovision last night as the only country to award the UK with the maximum @card@ point be ... Australia . the former X Factor star , @card@ , finish in 15th place . she fail to win over the rest of Europe with her ballad never give up on you , which critic dub ` ` a Brexit break-up anthem ' ' . it come after PM Theresa May say Lucie would n't get ` ` many vote ' ' after Brexit and ex-Cabinet minister Ed Balls claim ` ` win Eurovision may be a stretch for post-Brexit Britain ' ' . the UK do not get a single vote from bitter EU powerhouse Germany and France - yet it be the first time the UK have be place in the top @card@ in six year . Portugal storm to victory with a song about break heart - sing by Salvador Sobral , who have a lifethreatening heart condition . Bulgaria ' S Kristian Kostov be second , Moldova third and Sweden ' S Robin Bengtsson , who dance on a treadmill , come fifth . the UK ' s BBC host Graham Norton have to apologise when a stage invader flash his bum .
well , we do get @card@ point ... from Aussie ; Eurovision SNUB AS Portugal Win Lucie Jones face a Brexit backlash at Eurovision last night as the only country to award the UK with the maximum @card@ point be ... Australia . the former X Factor star , @card@ , finish in 15th place . she fail to win over the rest of Europe with her ballad never give up on you , which critic dub ` ` a Brexit break-up anthem ' ' . it come after PM Theresa May say Lucie would n't get ` ` many vote ' ' after Brexit and ex-Cabinet minister Ed Balls claim ` ` win Eurovision may be a stretch for post-Brexit Britain ' ' . the UK do not get a single vote from bitter EU powerhouse Germany and France - yet it be the first time the UK have be place in the top @card@ in six year . Portugal storm to victory with a song about break heart - sing by Salvador Sobral , who have a lifethreatening heart condition . Bulgaria ' S Kristian Kostov be second , Moldova third and Sweden ' S Robin Bengtsson , who dance on a treadmill , come fifth . the UK ' s BBC host Graham Norton have to apologise when a stage invader flash his bum .
UK back incontrol of human right law ; UK be back in Control Britain take back control yesterday as David Davis dump a hate European Union human right charter . the Brexit Secretary unveil plan to switch every piece of EU law into UK legislation before we leave the bloc in early @card@ . but he say the UK would not be adopt the EU ' s Charter of continue on Page Two continue from Page one Fundamental Rights - oversee by judge in Luxembourg . he say lawmaker in Parliament and Supreme Court judge would rule once we cut our tie with the EU . the move - @card@ hour after PM Theresa May trigger Article @card@ to formally launch divorce talk - be welcome by Brexit-backing Tories . it come as : lFRENCH president Francois Hollande tell Mrs May Britain would have to settle Brexit term before the EU discuss a new trade deal . pleased lSCOTTISH First Minister Nicola Sturgeon accuse the PM of use the great repeal bill to grab a stranglehold over Scotland . lMRS May write about Britain ' s wish to remain a strong partner and ally in newspaper column in EU country . LEX-PM David Cameron be accuse of try to rebrand himself a Brexiteer by say he never like the European Parliament . lMILLIONAIRE Gina Miller say that she be consider a legal challenge to the great repeal bill . lLABOUR ' S ex-EU Trade Commissioner Lord Mandelson call for a nationwide Brexit ` ` resistance ' ' . under the great repeal bill more than @card@ EU regulation will be transfer into UK law to help pave the way for a ` ` smooth ' ' Brexit for business . the EU Charter bring together fundamental right protect in the EU . it have be blame for force the government to allow entry to a know terrorist and for give the European Court of Justice the mean to grab control over immigration , defence matter and home affair in member state . ... Raab Mr Davis tell MP the government be deliver its promise to end the ` ` supremacy of EU law in the UK ' ' . ex justice minister Dominic Raab tell the Sun : ` ` remove the charter stop skewed human right obligation be impose on the UK . ' ' Mr Davis insist Britain have no plan to pull out of the European convention on Human Rights . Kill Bill - Pages Four and Five
much good use for Brexit billion ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter the president of the European Commission , Jean-Claude Juncker , propose to charge the UK £50billion in return for a favourable Brexit deal . that £50billion would be well invest in her Majesty ' s force for the good of Europe ' s collective security . and in return the European Union should grant the UK a favourable Brexit deal . john Barstow by Email I Know we be still at the barter stage , but Juncker ' s bid to charge Britain £50billion to leave the EU be plain daft . I presume he have forget what we have do for Europe . any trip to a British military cemetery should remind him . Paul Jenkinson Edinburgh in Trevor Kavanagh ' s article in the Scottish Sun , he say ` ` Britain be lucky to have a Prime Minister who spend five year as Home Secretary and have unrivalled experience and authority on issue of security ' ' . really ? be this the same Home Secretary who take no action after the C4 documentary ISIS : the British Women supporter Unveiled in November @card@ ? name and ADDRESS SUPPLIED WITHOUT the UK rebate it would cost an independent Scotland around £1billion a year for EU membership , plus the £15billion deficit already hang around our neck . that would be after leave the UK and dump our big trading partner . Nicola Sturgeon be on an independence juggernaut and be blind to everything else . William Strang Falkirk how two-faced be Nicola Sturgeon ? after the horrific event at Westminster she state that the independence referendum debate would continue as it be ` ` business as usual . ' ' then she announce she would stand in solidarity with London despite constant bleat about her determination to separate Scotland from London and Westminster . shocking . Caroline Mccord Glasgow Firms such as Google and Facebook which permit - and promote - terrorist activity appear not to be morally bind by their action . but they must be make legally bind to co-operate with our security service . Sarah Osborne by Email I CONGRATULATE Benedict Cumberbatch , picture , on the birth of his second child - at a private hospital . instead of a public one - you know , the one overcrowd partly due to uncontrolled immigration . the immigration Mr Cumberbatch lecture his audience about . john COYLE by email
power play ; TWO Days Till BREXIT BEGINS ; May hint at more devolution in bid to sink IndyRef2 Theresa May will today hint at more power for Scotland after Brexit in a desperate bid to put the brake on IndyRef2 . the PM be fly to Glasgow for showdown talk with First Minister Nicola Sturgeon . it come just @card@ hour before she fire the start gun for Article @card@ EU exit negotiation on Wednesday with a letter to Brussels boss . the visit be also ahead of tomorrow ' S Scottish Parliament vote on whether to push for a second poll in three year over break away from the rest of the UK . raise the prospect of another power transfer from Westminster to Holyrood , Mrs May will say in a speech to Department for International Development worker in East Kilbride : ` ` I believe when we work together , there be no limit to what we can do . in Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , that mean fully respect , and indeed strengthening , devolution settlement . ' ' but she ' ll also insist it mean ` ` never allow our union to become loose and weak , or our people to drift apart ' ' . a heated debate be under way Indy vote countdown . . over which former EU power should be take on by the UK Government or devolve parliament . SNP leader Ms Sturgeon want control of agriculture and fishing . it have also emerge the Brexit ministry want to allow EU national already live here to keep all state benefit after Britain leave . but the Scottish Government react frostily to the possibility of any offer from Mrs May . a spokesman for Brexit Minister Mike Russell say : ` ` give we be just day from the formal process of Brexit be trigger ... Holyrood there have , as yet , be no discussion with the Scottish government over what will be in the letter trigger departure from the EU . ` ` there have be no discussion over how Scotland ' S interest will be represent , what role the Scottish government will play in negotiation , nor which power the Tories intend to take for Westminster and which power will rightly be determine by Holyrood . ` ` give the failure of the UK Government to seek an agree approach or to support stay in the single market - which be at the heart of our compromise proposal - it be appear this be another area where a Tory Prime Minister intend to simply dictate the rule and expect Scotland to go along with it . ' ' the Sun say - Page ten
£500,000,000,000 cost of BEING in EU ; BETTER Off AFTER BREXIT ; Brussels bill shock British taxpayer have hand more than £500BILLION to Brussels since we join the EU , new figure reveal . the membership cost be lay bare three day before Theresa May fire the Brexit starting gun . since we sign up in @card@ , our annual bill have rocket from £1.8billion in today ' s money to nearly £20billion at the last count . Brexit Secretary David Davis will use the figure to fight EU demand we cough up a further £50billion as the price for leave . write in the Sun on Sunday , he say : ` ` we ' re go to get out there , negotiate hard and deliver on what the people in the UK vote for . ' ' he could also put in a counter claim for a share of the EU ' s £133billion of asset , most of which be not part of the calculation . but the total gross sum of UK contribution since @card@ - half a trillion pound or £501,853 million - be the big-gest weapon in our armoury . even after rebate , refund and public sector grant , our total net contribution stand at £184,535 million in today ' S money , accord to independent expert in the Commons library . Tory MP Peter Bone , of leave Means leave , say : ` ` the true scale of how much hard-working British taxpayer have hand over to Brussels be horrify . ' ' Jean-Claude Juncker , the European Commission president , have warn if more country copy the UK ' s lead it could break up the EU .
BREXIT Deal ? it ' S A NO-NO ; Sturgeon ' S Double Blow Nicola Sturgeon ' s push to land Scotland a separate Brexit deal be deal a double blow yesterday as two top politician rubbish her bid . the SNP chief ' S plan be brand ` ` impossible ' ' by a senior Spanish official , whose government could veto any attempt . offim mp ent t. -And Welsh First Minister Carwyn Jones also pour cold water on the idea , say : ` ` I ca n't see how it would work . ' ' mp iso nt ' ' M um ers . l her Ms ` ` the setback come asSturgeon attend a summit with devolve UK leader . mmit s she be set to unveil Brexit proposal in the come week amid fear No10 ' S plan may see Britain leave the single market . the First Minister have threaten a second indy vote if that happen . but her Welsh counterpart Mr Jones say : ` ` for me , what be absolutely crucial be we get the good deal for the UK - all four nation of the UK . ' ' while MEP Esteban Gonzalez Pons , of Spain ' s ruling people ' S Party , say a different Scots set-up could boost Catalan and Basque separatist . he insist : ` ` it ' s impossible . ' ' Earlier this week , Alex Salmond tell how he ' d flow to Iceland , Switzerland and Liechtenstein to pave the way for Scotland to join a ` ` Champions League ' ' of EU bolt-on nation . ask about a future bid to enter the European Free Trade Association , Mr Gonzalez Pons say : ` ` we ' re not go to accept Scotland in the single market without the rest of the UK . ' ' last night Tory constitution spokesman Adam Tomkins say : ` ` they ' re simply state the obvious - that a separate deal be n't on the table and be unrealistic . ' ' but External Affairs Secretary Fiona Hyslop hit back : ` ` nothing be impossible . we ' re in uncharted territory . ' ' yesterday Ms Sturgeon slam PM Theresa May for snub the British-Irish Council summit in Cardiff , which Irish Prime Minister Enda Kenny attend . the First Minister say she ` ` respect the different view ' ' across the UK . but she add : ` ` Single market status be the only way to protect the economy of Scotland and Wales and the UK as a whole . ' '
BREXIT Will Cut OUR Life SUPPORT ; ' CRIPPLED ' Public SERVICES Fear ; Nat warn on EU worker flow a Ban on Europeans work here would cripple our public service , Scotland ' S Brexit Secretary warn yesterday . Mike Russell say the NHS , care sector and other area could face ` ` severe problem ' ' if free movement of worker end after Britain quit the EU . and he point out that nine per cent of our doctor and @card@ per cent of social care worker come from Europe . the Argyll MSP say : ` ` Scotland be not full up . I represent an area that ' S suffer a severe problem of depopulation . ` ` to address this issue only in the context of the South East of England will do an immense disservice to Scotland . ` ` we can resolve to ensure the good outcome for Scotland and all the people who live here - include those who have come from elsewhere . ' ' Earlier this week Mr Russell join Nicola Sturgeon in London at a Brexit summit with Prime Minister Theresa May . and he echo Ms Sturgeon ' s insistence that the UK Government appear clueless on how it will leave the EU . he say : ` ` Monday make it clear than ever there be no coherent UK plan . ` ` but there have to be a Scottish plan , and ideally that should be one that ' s good for the UK too . ' ' he say the SNP Government be try to persuade the UK to adopt a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' with continued membership of the single market . and he reveal they will present their own detailed proposal by the end of this year . he add : ` ` a key part will be how we can maintain membership of the single market for Scotland , even if the rest of the UK leave . ` ` get this wrong will lead to serious financial difficulty for every one of us . ' ' his attack come as the First Minister urge politician , firm and university to join together to oppose a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' . she claim leave the single market could cost @card@ Scots job within a decade . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` I believe a coalition can be build to keep the UK in the single market . ' ' she add : ` ` regardless of the position people take on our constitutional future , there be widespread agreement in Scotland on this central issue . ' '
Hammond ' quit threat ' over exile ' Chancellor Philip Hammond have twice threaten to resign over Brexit clash with Theresa May , it be claim . Senior Tory tell the Sun he have come close to quit over how it be be handle - and at be exclude from key strategy meeting . the claim lift the lid on the split at the heart of the government over the UK ' s future relationship with the EU . one Cabinet Minister slam Mr Hammond for spread ` ` doom and gloom ' ' over Brexit and talk down the economy , say : ` ` it ' S as if George Osborne never leave . ' ' a source say the Treasury appear desperate to keep Britain in the single market - a ` ` Soft Brexit ' ' which could cripple demand to take back control of UK border . the source tell the Sun : ` ` Philip be become isolate . the Treasury seem to want to wrestle control of the EU negotiation from No10 but it wo n't happen . ' ' friend of Mr Hammond say he have long covet the job of Chancellor and be not about to quit now he have it . another Treasury source last night insist the claim be ` ` completely untrue ' ' . the Sun say - Page ten
softly DOES it ; Business chief ' Brexit plea with May over trade PRO-Remain business chief be plead with Theresa May to opt for a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' . they say quit the EU without keep tie to Europe ' s single market must be rule out . boss at Rolls-Royce , Bae Systems and EASYJET be among those to sign a draft letter demand the PM respond to rise fear in the City of a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' and a plunge pound . the letter , send round by the CBI employer ' group , call on Mrs May to set out a clear plan . Brexit minister David Davis and international trade minister Liam Fox have suggest trading with the EU under World Trade Organisation rule like the US , Japan and China . but the letter warn that would mean ` ` significant ' ' cost for British business and say it should be rule out ` ` under any circumstance ' ' . the letter , which have be see by the FT , add : ` ` the government must set out a clear road map for consulting with firm of all sector and size to increase confidence that these complex decision be take on the basis of fact and a genuine understanding of economic implication . ' ' it follow Mrs May ' s party conference speech where she rage at excessive boardroom pay and firm who avoid pay their fair share of tax . the CBI ' S letter be be circulate among former member of No10 ' S business advisory group , dissolve by Mrs May last month . one boss tell the FT : ` ` she do not really have a relationship with business . very few people have ever meet her . ' '
Abbott be wrong on Brexit claim ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think
mystic mug ; BACKTRACKING ON BREXIT ; OECD expert ditch recession prediction a World watchdog yesterday backtrack on its prediction of a post-Brexit recession , say the UK economy will grow instead . the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development admit there will no longer be two negative quarter over winter . it increase its forecast for Britain ' s GDP in @card@ from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent . but the Paris-based think tank say a Brexit vote wobble will slash growth in @card@ from two per cent to one per cent . the new figure lead Chancellor Philip Hammond to warn that ` ` there may be some difficult time ahead ' ' . he signal he be ready to open the spending tap to tackle them , insist : ` ` I be confident that we have the tool necessary . ' ' the OECD ' S @card@ projection see Britain ' s growth forecast suffer the big cut of any of the world ' S ten big country . Germany and France be expect to grow quick than us next year . the Office for National Statistics also say yesterday Brexit be yet to have a major effect on the economy . lUK car production be at its high for @card@ year with @card@ build in August - @card@ per cent more than the same month last year , figure show .
BREXIT & TAKE US WITH you ... Enda Kenny have have a big effect on Brexit - poll swing dramatically in favour of leave the EU when he land in the UK to support Remain . Ireland be emphatically against Brexitbut we have n't be tell exactly why . BREXIT , why . there be wild scaremongering about economic catastrophe . but none of the people who be predict the end of day see the last crash come . the Taoiseach say Brexit would pose a ` ` major strategic risk ' ' to our economy . this be the same guy who think Fianna Fail ' s Bank guarantee be a good idea , and he vote for it in @card@ . it cost taxpayer ( Euro ) 64billion . you ca n't believe the establishment . their big fear be the restoration of the border with Northern Ireland . last time we have an active border , the frontier county of Donegal , Cavan and Monaghan thrive with industry . smuggling be a boom business . it may be our most victimless crime . it reduce the tax take of those in power who squander it without improve service . we ' re tell the EU have be good to us . tell our fisherman that . our Atlantic sea water have be almost fish dry by giant trawler from our apparent EU ally . farmer have undoubtedly do well in grant and payment , yet the price of milk and veg remain on the floor despite have access to a giant European market . if the EU build our road , then I ' m not sure who get the huge toll we have to pay to get around . a one-hour drive from Dublin to Dundalk can cost ( Euro ) @card@ . the British be on course to vote for Brexit . nobody know what the effect on our economy will be . all we know for sure be that the establishment be lie when they claim to know exactly what will happen next . maybe Ireland will get its say on exit Europe if our wise neighbour opt out .
Thatcher ' S guru warn of con trick Maggie Thatcher ' S economics guru have accuse the establishment of a ` ` big fix ' ' over their Brexit forecast . Professor Patrick Minford , picture , claim the Treasury , the Bank of England and other organisation have use ` ` false assumption ' ' . these include say if the UK vote to leave it would charge importer the same tariff as the EU do now . he say the ` ` book have be cook ' ' . in April the Treasury say after Brexit the economy would shrink by six per cent by @card@ , cost household £4,300 . and George Osborne say there could be @card@ lose job and a year-long recession . but Brexit campaigner Mr Minford say Britain would remove import tariff . he say it would mean ` ` a significant price cut for household , as food and good would be cheap ' ' . he add : ` ` that be how economics work , and Osborne , and the rest of them know it . ' ' yesterday , David Cameron say Michael Gove and Boris Johnson be ` ` write cheque they know will bounce ' ' after they claim the NHS could get £100million a week more after Brexit .
the PREMPIRE STRIKES Back ; May THE Force be WITH you in Big BREXIT Poll PM ' S rating up against Corbyn @card@ % want her to stay at No10 Theresa May have receive a boost in her battle against the Brexit rebel alliance , a Sun on Sunday poll reveal today . the Premier have bounce back from a rollercoaster week to close the gap on Labour rival Jeremy Corbyn and strengthen her position . Sixty-one per cent want the force to be with her at least until she have steer Britain out of the EU - compare to only @card@ per cent who want her to stay on in August . and surprisingly , six out of ten Tory voter now believe she should go all the way and stay on to lead their party into the next General Election . the embattled PM - who critic predict would be go by Christmas - be rock last week when @card@ of her MP join with Labour to defeat the government in a House of Commons vote . in an ICM poll conduct before that vote , more than half of voter - @card@ per cent - say they believe she be the right person to win the good deal for Britain . nearly two third want her to remain as PM at least until the UK have leave in March @card@ , with @card@ per cent of all voter egg her on to fight the next election . the public also send an emphatic message to EU-loving MP slow down the process with tedious Commons vote - tell them : ` ` just get on with it . ' ' Our poll reveal a huge majority of brit want MP to see it through and believe Mrs May be the good person to achieve that . most people , include Remainers , think she make good progress in the first round of talk . meanwhile , after the breakthrough on the first stage of Brexit , @card@ per cent feel equally or more positive about leave than they do before the referendum , which take place @card@ month ago . in a further boost for Mrs May , she have narrow the gap on Mr Corbyn from @card@ point two week ago to @card@ . the poll also reveal widespread confusion over the Labour leader ' s Brexit policy . more than half of voter think he plan either to block our departure from the EU or stage a re-run of the in-out referendum . a third of people , @card@ per cent , believe he want to keep Britain in the single market , while one in five be convinced he want to stop Brexit and stay in the EU . a further @card@ per cent think Labour have promise a second referendum and @card@ per cent have n't a clue what the party ' S position be . Senior MP believe Mrs May ' s clear stand have give her the edge as she go to war with EU chief - and rebel within her own party . it be not all good news for Mrs May in our extensive poll . the public favour Parliament be give a ` ` meaningful vote ' ' on the final divorce deal . and Labour enjoy a one-point lead over the Conservatives , who lead by two in an ICM poll only a week ago . but the PM will be relieve there be no obvious front-runner to replace her as leader . Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson be still favourite , but just @card@ per cent say they ' d be more likely to vote Conservative with him as leader . Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson be his near rival on six per cent . but the public give some indication as to how Mrs May can improve the party ' S fortune . there be moderate support for her to refresh her top team and bring new blood into her Cabinet . some @card@ per cent want a reshuffle , with @card@ per cent say she should keep the existing line-up . leaver have also make clear their main reason for vote to quit the EU . most say they want Britain to have power to make its own law . cut immigration come second , follow closely by escape the drive towards a European federal superstate . more than a third - @card@ per cent - say the transition period after we leave should be limit to no more than two year . twice as many people think the £38billion ` ` divorce bill ' ' be too high as those who think it be about right or too low . but there be a strong feeling that the UK should pay its debt when we leave - irrespective of whether or not we get a deal . the country be split down the middle over whether the March @card@ departure date , to be write into Brexit law , should be extend if the PM fail to clinch a deal . some @card@ per cent say Yes , but @card@ per cent be oppose and believe we should leave not a second later than then . but even those who be relax about meet that deadline be fiercely oppose to an open-ended transition period . only @card@ per cent believe we should maintain full link with the EU for more than a year . seven per cent say that period be acceptable and @card@ per cent insist it must be no more than six month . EU chief have insist that Britain stick by their rule - include freedom of movement and ruling of the European Court - during any transition phase . we would also have to comply with European trade policy as a price for an extended stay inside the single market . Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg warn the move would reduce the UK to a ` ` vassal state ' ' of the EU and want the Prime Minister to reject them . he say : ` ` we can not be a colony of the European union for two year from @card@ to @card@ , accept new law that be make without any say-so of the British people , Parliament or Government . ` ` that be not leave the European Union , that be be a vassal state of the European Union and I would be very surprised if that be government policy . ' ' the Sun on Sunday ' S poll make clear that most people believe that break free from those rule be the most important benefit the nation will get out of Brexit . some @card@ per cent of people say take back control of our own law be the most important thing , while @card@ per cent believe a cut in immigration by end free movement be the number one advantage . a fifth of voter - @card@ per cent - will be glad to get away from what they see as a drive towards a European federal superstate run from Brussels . a further @card@ per cent be look forward to Britain be able to decide for itself how to spend its own money . nine per cent believe we will be able to take advantage of good trade opportunity with the wide world once we have leave . but all the reason for leaving have one common link . they each mean take back control of our own destiny . ICM research director Gregor Jackson say : ` ` the EU deal negotiate by Theresa May appear to have strengthen her position , at least for the time be . ` ` however , danger lurk around the corner for the Prime Minister since the public feel the divorce bill be too high . ` ` they support a meaningful vote for Parliament on the final deal and be split on whether the exit date should be extend in the event of a no deal . ` ` one thing be clear - @card@ be shape up to be equally as momentous as @card@ . ' ' ICM Unlimited interview a representative sample of @card@ adult age 18+ online on December @card@ to @card@ , @card@ . interview be conduct across the country and the result have be weight to the profile of all adult . ICM be a member of the British Polling Council and abide by its rule .
Brexit bridge Yesterday ' S remark on Brexit by Leo Varadkar do not please some in Britain , but the Taoiseach be merely stick to longstanding Irish policy on the issue . like it or not , the UK be go to leave the EU . how that happen will ensure citizen here on both side of the Border can get on with their life with as little disruption as possible . despite some DUP suggestion , if we have a hard Brexit all the ' technology ' in the world will not prevent border control . and such control will hurt business on both side of the Border . it be in everyone ' S interest , include ours , that a deal be work out to prevent a return to the old day of custom post . unfortunately , ongoing negotiation between the UK and the EU be not promising . both side , particularly the European , seem intent on play hardball and - @card@ month from the deadline - very little progress have be make . the Taoiseach warn that ` ` time be run out ' ' and ` ` unique solution ' ' be require to deal with the unprecedented diplomatic and economic challenge pose by Brexit . both be statement of the bleed obvious , but both be worth repeat . if @card@ year of the Troubles can be solve with negotiation , then certainly Brexit can be successfully achieve too .
BREXIT To Cost ( Euro ) 200M A Year ; lESRI call for spending caution ; lLeo : still time for UK to stay in BREXIT be expect to slash the government ' S coffer by ( Euro ) 200million each year , an economic watchdog have warn . the Economic and Social Research Institute have also urge a more cautious approach to increase spending and cut tax in October ' S budget . a slow-down in tax revenue be expect to have implication in four month , accord to the ESRI ' s late report . it say the UK leave the EU could lead to a reduction in the ' fiscal space ' - the amount of money the government have to spend - by about ( Euro ) 200million a year after our near neighbour achieve full Brexit in @card@ . in its late quarterly economic review , the ESRI say that , apart from VAT , all tax head be show either weak growth or actual decline , compare with what be expect at the start of the year . the institute ' S Prof Kieran Mcquinn say : ` ` one of the most perplex issue be that some of the labour relate tax , income tax and PRSI be register only weak growth despite the fact employment be grow quite fast and unemployment falling . ' ' it be speculate that job gain have largely be in low paid work , yield less in USC than anticipate . other tax weakness , such as excise , may be relate to Brexit and the fall in sterling ' S value . Prof Mcquinn say the weak revenue growth argue for a more cautious approach to the budget , with no economic reason for increase government spend or cut tax . meanwhile , Taoiseach Leo Varadkar have insist that the door remain open for the UK to stay in the EU . the Fine Gael leader be in Brussels yesterday for his first EU summit and say Ireland be oppose to the UK leave the EU , the single market or the custom union . he add : ` ` that be ultimately a decision for them , however , and that may change . ` ` Countries can take position , often very strong position , they be often negotiate position , and yet the final outcome might be more favourable . ` ` while Britain say they intend to leave the custom union and the single market , they also say they want a free trade agreement , and many of the element of a free trade agreement - while not be the same as the custom union - may not be that far from that . ' ' the Taoiseach be speak follow a bilateral meeting with the president of the European Council Donald Tusk . Mr Varadkar say the outcome of any Brexit talk be more important than the timetable . he add : ` ` I ' d rather have a good deal for Ireland in time than one that do n't work for us in a short time period . ' ' and he say no economic border between the North and south remain Ireland ' S main Brexit objective . the Taoiseach continue : ` ` we want to retain the normal trading relationship there have be between the two island for many decade . ' ' along with Mr Varadkar , it be also the first European Council summit for French president Emmanuel Macron . although Brexit be not on the official agenda for the Brussels summit , the issue be expect to dominate many of the talk at the two-day event . @ IrishSun Online
Brexit must work ; ' PROSPERITY Trumps IMMIGRATION ' CALL Hammond : deal Will PUT Jobs FIRST E.U . exit ' Can NOT Make BRITS POORER ' Philip Hammond have demand a Brexit deal that put job first to show brit do not vote to become poor . the Chancellor insist that the country ' S prosperity be his priority over bring down immigration . give his delayed Mansion House speech , he also propose a long transition to keep custom rule the same for year after EU exit . and in another shift towards a soft Brexit he call for a rethink of PM Theresa May ' s tough stand on immigration control . his speech win praise from hardened Remainers such as former minister Anna Soubry , who say : ` ` put the economy at its heart , value immigration , with a transition period : I ' m like Hammond ' S Brexit . ' ' Mr Hammond ' S speech , postpone because of the Grenfell Tower fire , may open Tory division with its nod towards a soft EU exit . but he tell City bigwig : ` ` I have say before , and I remain clear today , that when the British people vote last June , they do not vote to become poor , or less secure . ` ` they do vote to leave the EU . ` ` and we will leave the EU . ` ` but it must be do in a way that work for Britain . in a way that prioritises British job , and underpin Britain ' S prosperity . ' ' Mr Hammond say he be not turn a blind eye to a ` ` grow tide of hostility ' ' against globalisation and mass immigration but stress he would push for a new trade policy that ` ` deliver clear benefit for ordinary working people ' ' . he say immigration would be manage but not shut down , add : ` ` we be not about to turn inward . ' ' Tory grandee and devout Europhile Ken Clarke welcome his remark , say : ` ` the key thing be the economy and job . we must not put up any new barrier . ' ' and the Federation of Small business say : ` ` the Chancellor have listen to small business call for a transition period after Brexit . ' ' the speech come as David Davis jet from the opening Brexit talk in Brussels to Madrid to discuss the tricky issue of Gibraltar with Spain ' S Foreign Minister Alfonso Dastis . the Brexit Secretary will sidestep the official divorce process this summer to focus on a series of oneon-one talk with EU country . meanwhile , Jeremy Corbyn be face a rebellion by @card@ backbench Labour MP who form anew parliamentary group to oppose Britain leave the single market . the Europhile group will join the Lib Dems , the SNP and Greens in campaign on the issue . former frontbenchers Liz Kendall , Chuka Umunna and Maria Eagle be among those signing a joint article argue that Britain could remain in the market while merely seek reform on immigration . it come after Mr Corbyn confirm only last week that Labour would support quit . elsewhere in his speech , Mr Hammond declare the Tory must fight a fresh battle to keep Britain as an open , capitalist country after the rise of Mr Corbyn . he insist the surge in support for the left-wing Labour leader be proof the ideological war of the 1970s must be refought . the Chancellor say : ` ` I think we have win that argument . but I learn in the General Election campaign that we have not . we must make anew the case for a market economy and for sound money . ' ' he also say the government must get on with the crucial job of balance the book but concede : ` ` Britain be weary after seven year of hard slog repair the damage of the great recession . ' '
heel , BOYS ; Maggie May in AT No.10 New PM Theresa can reunite Tory & deliver Brexit Theresa May yesterday vow to heal the Tory rift as she deliver the public ' s demand for Brexit - after she be crown Prime Minister in wait . she be expect to whip feud male Cabinet colleague into line in the no-nonsense style of Maggie Thatcher . Mrs May , wear her famous kitten-heeled leopard print shoe , say : ` ` Brexit mean Brexit - and we ' re go to make a success of it . ' ' Full Story - Pages @card@ , @card@ , @card@ and @card@
EU need a Brit of tough love ; Ireland ' S BREXIT Fear it ' S see be many observer as the great potential threat to Ireland ' s economic stability . with debate around Brexit continue to rage ahead of Britain ' s referendum on June @card@ , the impact on the Emerald Isle be unclear at good . but it may not be all doom and gloom - as some have predict - and could actually have a positive impact on EU policy , explain Vincent Mccarthy , Head of Investment Consulting at Invesco Ltd. WITH the risk of Brexit loom large , the big question be : can Britain break European heart and still stay friend ? and more importantly , can Europe stay strong after the hole leave by the loss of their long-term partner ? how the relationship end will determine the impact of Brexit . a lot have be write on the potential fallout from Brexit . the UK Treasury devote @card@ page to it last week , in support of stay in , estimate leave the EU could cost each British household £4,300 ( ( Euro ) @card@ ) per year . this be a figure derive from their forecast of a six per cent drop in Britain ' s gross domestic product by @card@ - a measure of economic output divide by the current 27million British household . the report be great news for those in favour of remain in the EU and a blow to the likes of Tory Mayor of London Boris Johnson , above , who be campaign for Brexit . as with all economics , there be huge uncertainty in term of estimate the fallout from a British vote to exit the EU . while both the Yes and the No side will argue their case for In and Out , respectively , the reality be the long-term fallout will depend heavily on just how the relationship end . IMF Director Christine Lagarde recently say : ` ` it ' s my personal hope it do n't break . like all marriage , good talk can actually help and I hope the dialogue can continue . ' ' still , just because it could be a messy divorce be not reason enough for Britain to stay in an EU clearly at a crossroad . rather than lambast Britain for consider their future in Europe , other member , on a path to close integration with their eye close , should take this time to consider what they want from this relationship . too many relationship , in all walk of life , be define by ' it ' S easier to stay ' . leaving require a leap of faith . a fear of the unknown be why people stay in a job they dislike , or stay in a bad relationship , or rarely move outside their comfort zone . it be why I believe Briton will vote to remain in the EU , the same reason that have me convince Scottish independence would not happen . nevertheless , it be a risk that Irel tion Ireland can not ignore . there be many facet to our relationship with Britain , but from an economic perspective , there would be significant implication for the Irish economy . indigenous industry , more reliant on the British market than multinational , would be hurt most by the uncertainty emanate from a breakup . wou tion in relia than hur ema however , rather than bemoan the risk of Brexit , company should address it head on by seek out new market . shou seek Fo rem regi for example , Latin America remain a relatively untapped region for Irish company , a develop region with a population of over @card@ million . the Brexit risk be a reminder for Irish firm to keep widen trade link worldwide . ultimately , I believe a fear of the unknown will sway voter ' mind and Britain will remain . EU country now need to come up with a good prenuptial agreement - as it ' s the uncertainty around the term of a future breakup which could cause the big risk . event since the financial crisis show how Europe ' S institution like to play the fear card if you refuse to comply . Greece be bully into stay - but be they any good off now ? no relationship can survive long-term where control be the power that unite . l FOLLOW Vincent McCarthy on Twitter at @ askthevmanorsubscribetohispersonalblogmacromarkets.ie .
codswallop ; comment on Arsenal . NATS SLAM BREXIT Claims ; Gove blast over foreign fishing ' lie ' Michael Gove be last night brand a liar by the Nat after say foreign boat would continue to fish in UK water after Brexit . the Tory bigwig assure Danish food industry rep that their fisherman would ` ` still be able to catch large amount ' ' in our sea . but just week earlier , the UK Environment Secretary have insist Britain be ` ` take back control ' ' of its water . SNP Brexit Minister Mike Russell describe Mr Gove ' s remark as a ` ` stunning admission ' ' . he add : ` ` Fishing community be therefore lie to by Gove . ' ' in his speech to the Danish representative , Mr Gove claim Britain do n't have the facility to deal with all its reserve . he say : ` ` Danish fisherman will still be able to catch large amount of fish in British water . Britain have no fish cutter and production facility enough to catch all the fish in British water . ' ' many fisherman who be unhappy with Brussels rule on quota and sharing water rally behind the EU leave campaign last year . but the post-Brexit set-up remain unclear with talk with talk on the issue yet to start . Mr Gove have say leave the EU will mean quit the Common Fisheries Policy , which set quota and give other nation access between @card@ and @card@ nautical mile from our shore . Niels Wichmann , head of trade body Danish Fishermen , say : ` ` certain access will have to be grant to vessel from other country . in term of the claim ' we want our water back ' - you never have the water . we ' ve fish there for hundred of year . ' ' but the Scottish Fisherman ' S Federation say : ` ` it ' s clear from our meeting with the government that control over UK water will be in our hand . ' ' a spokesman for Mr Gove last night say : ` ` he be reiterate that once we leave , we be not say we wo n't grant access to other country but it will be for us to decide who get access to our water . ' '
EU to tell UK : pay our £60k pension CHEEKY EU chief want Britain to still help fund a £57billion pension pot for Brussels fatcats . thousand of ex-Eurocrats enjoy retirement deal of £60,000 a year on average . and the UK face demand to fund a huge part of the package under a Brexit pact . the EU ' s @card@ current member state pay £56.7billion towards the gold-plate pension and private health cover . source say the UK will be ask to pay £6billion after Brexit talk begin this month . but only @card@ brit be among the @card@ retire EU staff who benefit . most , @card@ , live in Belgium . Brexit Secretary David Davis will resist the demand if the Tory be return to power . Lee Rotherham , of the Eurosceptic Red Cell think tank , say : ` ` Theresa May can turn it on its head by pay only for debt owe to British recipient . ' '
Labour mean bare-xit ; May Warning ON EU TALKS CLUELESS Jeremy Corbyn would be alone and naked negotiate Brexit if he win the key to No10 , Theresa May warn yesterday . in her most personal attack on the Labour leader yet , the Prime Minister say her rival be ` ` simply not ready to govern and not prepare to lead ' ' . she say Mr Corbyn would accept an EU divorce deal on ` ` any term ' ' , which mean he ` ` will find himself alone and naked in the negotiate chamber of the European Union ' ' . she add : ` ` now I know that ' s an image that do n't bear think about but actually this be very serious . ' ' the scathing jibe be a nod to Labour hero Nye Bevan , who plead with party member in @card@ that give up our nuclear weapon would leave the country naked on the world stage . Mrs May be attempt to wrestle the election campaign back on to her Brexit message at a Tory rally in Wolverhampton . her comment come after Labour accuse her of negotiate our EU divorce like ` ` an ogre ' ' . day poll start of she accuse the Labour leader of have no plan for the EU exit . she say : ` ` with Brexit negotiation due to begin only @card@ day after polling day , he be not prepare . ' ' she say : ` ` but I be prepare , prepare to take the difficult decision that leadership demand . ` ` prepared to do what be necessary to protect and defend our country . ' ' she warn Labour would ` ` accept any deal , however bad , sign up to any bill , however vast ' ' . last night former Chancellor George Osborne launch a stinging attack on the ` ` shrill ' ' PM in the London Evening Standard he now edit . @card@ between day and Brexit negotiation he accuse her of run a personality cult .
how Tusk response pan out European Council president Donald Tusk have outline the EU ' s draft guideline for how it will deal with Brexit . we take a look at the key point of the response . boost on Trade TALKS Mr Tusk say it be ` ` only fair ' ' to settle Britain ' s withdrawal before talk on a trade deal can begin . but he suggest a ` ` phase approach ' ' with talk start once ` ` sufficient progress ' ' be achieve rather than an agreement seal . ongoing cost POST-BREXIT Britain will be expect to pay EU contribution and abide by the European Court of Justice during any ` ` transitional ' ' deal . that mean still send cash to Brussel and be govern by its law from the date of our official withdrawal in @card@ until the date any new agreement begin . Mr Tusk say that could be for a maximum of three year , with Britain effectively remain a member state during that time . language SETS THE Tone the response be business-like in tone , compare with Mrs May ' s more emotive Article @card@ letter . and it suggest an ` ` us and them ' ' mentality , refer to the ` ` united ' ' remain member and call the UK ` ` a third country ' ' . Gibraltar uncertainty the British territory ' S future be throw into doubt when the EU say the Brexit deal will not apply there unless Spain give the nod . it effectively mean the Spanish could use Brexit to seek joint sovereignty , boot out the Navy or block any transport there . but he also say establish the future of the UK ' s military base in Cyprus should not be difficult . and he say the EU want to avoid a ` ` hard border ' ' in www.Ireland.NO ' Individual ' Economic DEALS DEALS for specific sector of the British economy under Brexit be rule out , suggest no special protection for the City of London . but the EU also know strong and constructive tie be in the interest of both party . it also back call for an early deal to guarantee the right of citizen live and work abroad . EU SETS THE rule Britain be tell it must abide by the EU ' s rule at least until Brexit Day in March @card@ . that mean no trade talk with non-EU nation until then , unless do through the union . and all communication must be through all @card@ remain state - with no try to pick off country for separate negotiation . the Sun say - Page ten
Queen back Brexit THE Queen yesterday give her Royal Assent to the legislation necessary to trigger Article @card@ . the bill give Theresa May the power to start Brexit negotiation . Tory MP cheer as Speaker John Bercow announce the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) bill have be give the royal nod . Brexit Secretary David Davis say : ` ` we will invoke Article @card@ , allow us to take a step out into the world as a truly global Britain . ' ' Labour ' S Gisela Stuart say : ` ` Brexit will allow us to begin the process of national renewal . ' '
the Sun SAYS Blows to Brexit Bitter Remainers must not be allow to tie Theresa May ' s hand before her negotiation with Brussels begin . they will be damage our interest and slapping voter in the face . yet those such as Tony Blair , Peter Mandelson , the self-appointed Brexit blocker Gina Miller and some in the Commons and Lords be still fight the war they lose last June @card@ . unelected peer inflict the first blow on Wednesday , insist Mrs May must secure the right of EU citizen here regardless of whether Brussel as generous to our expats . next week they be expect to back Parliament have a veto over the final Brexit deal in a new act of Parliament . MP Must reject both amendment . the Article @card@ Bill solely enact the simple answer to a simple question : should we remain in the EU , or leave ? Britain ' s answer be leave . not ` ` leave , but only if all EU migrant be look after , even if our expats be n't ' ' . nor ` ` leave , so long as MP on the lose side can scupper the final deal ' ' . Britain can not afford for Mrs May ' s negotiate power to be compromise . Tory rebel may sympathise with this last stand by Remain ' s defeat diehard . but it would be unforgivable to try to rewrite or fudge the referendum result . MP must pass the bill as it be write .
lWITH the current political mood [ ... ] lWITH the current political mood across the UK at a low follow Brexit and the ongoing fallout from Donald Trump ' s victory in the American presidential race , I be amaze to see the SNP get their knickers in a twist over a more bizarre subject . SNP MSP Colin Beattie , right , who represent Midlothian North and Musselburgh , call on the UK Government to challenge the new design of Toblerone chocolate bar , cite in a Holyrood motion that its change of shape be ` ` emblematic ' ' of the devastating consequence of Brexit . while a plunge in the value of the pound follow the Brexit vote have worry many and real concern have be air on what our future trade relationship with the EU and other economy may be , Mr Beattie seem to have focus instead on the large gap between chocolate triangle . you have to ask yourself whether the people Mr Beattie serve feel that investigate Toblerone be an efficient use of his resource . I ' m certain there be much more pertinent issue in Midlothian North and Musselburgh include barrier to access health service and transport . it leave an unsavoury taste , unlike the pyramid-shaped chocolate . his motion call on the Scottish Parliament to offer its official condolence to those ` ` mourn ' ' the change to the classic confectionery . perhaps instead we should be mourn those in a position of power have finally lose the plot .
BREX OFFENDERS ; Fury at House of Lords plot to keep us in EU UNELECTED peer be slap down by Theresa May yesterday for threaten to block Brexit . a House of Lords plot to try to force a second referendum have be reveal . but the PM ' s official spokesman say peer should instead ` ` focus on get behind ' ' Brexit . baroness Patience Wheatcroft say there be dozen of peer who want to stop or delay the official trigger to leave the EU . in an interview she say it be ` ` imperative that we do n't press the button on Article @card@ ' ' . the Tory peer say she hope delay in the Lords of any potential Brexit law would lead to a second vote . a legal challenge on whether the government can trigger Article @card@ without the prior authorisation of Parliament be set to be hear in the High Court in the autumn . baroness Wheatcroft say : ` ` if it come to a bill , I think the Lords might actually delay thing . I think there ' s a majority in the Lords for remain . ' ' ask if she would support peer delay Brexit legislation she reply : ` ` Yes I would . ' ' but eurosceptic Tory MP Bill Cash insist there be ` ` no justification ' ' to ` ` face down the people ' ' . he say : ` ` it would be absolutely outrageous . ' ' Mrs May ' s official spokesman say yesterday : ` ` the British people have make their decision . ' '
should Brits be brick it over Brexit ? ; How EU Vote COULD AFFECT Property MARKET your place WE may be face a sizzling summer but the hot topic of to day have to be Brexit . with the referendum loom , and scaremongering rife , would-be property purchaser might be forgive for sit on the garden fence . but what will happen to the property market after June @card@ ? how will our vote , in or out , impact on the affordability of home and their value ? even before we get to the vote , there be sign that the uncertainty surround the result could be have an effect on the investor market , which ultimate ly filter down to the rest of us . in London especially , jittery overseas investor be stay away , with some even abandon property they have already reserve with a deposit . UK-based private investor have also slow down their activity . so demand be soften , which mean price could too . but what be the overall implication for the rest of us ? here be my Brexit FAQs : what will happen to mortgage rate after the vote ? if we choose Brexit , as Boris Johnson and Co propose , the political uncertainty that will follow will put the UK economy under pressure , and as such , it will be hard to see how the Bank of England would be able to increase interest rate s. on the other hand , stay in Europe - as PM David Cameron want us to - when the rest of the Eurozone be still struggle with lukewarm economic performance be not an environment in which interest rate be likely to be raise any time soon . so my money be on low interest rate for the foreseeable future . what will happen to property pr ice in the UK ? a vote for Brexit be likely to lead to a short-term negative impact on the City of London . as a result , London property price could get hit hard , which would have a ripple effect on the rest of the UK housing market . however that would increase affordability , so one result might be that firsttime buyer be able to climb on to the property ladder in location that be financially out of their reach previously . David Catt , of property market analyst Hometrack , say : ` ` if the UK leave the EU , it would create a prolonge d period of uncertainty , lead to reduce demand , which , consider the tight supply of housing in the UK , could feed quickly into house price and result in a major slowdown in the rate of growth . ' ' not necessarily a bad thing . what about the availability of housing ? potentially , a Brexit vote threaten the City ' s shortterm stability , and therefore also the availability of fund for further home-building . another risk be that if property price fall , developer will not want to build home in a market of downward price . the only way to mitigate this would be government-sponsored affordable mortgage . interestingly , in the run-up to the referendum the construction sector have slow to its low level for almost three year . many firm clearly seem unwilling to commit to new project in the short term , and builder be ta king on subcontractor rather than hire staff while they wait to see what happen . the drop in home-building will mean more people chase limited stock , which could push price back up . what will happen to property purchasing cost ? this have very little to do with the vote . cost be very much a government decision , and give the state of the economy , I predict that if the government can , it will try to find a way to increase tax and raise revenue . in a nutshell , while the referendum be be play out , and there be a lull in property activity underpinne d by uncertainty , the opportunist among you might be in luck . with the low mortgage rate on record , now might be a unique chance to nip in there , negotiate a good price and grab the deal of a lifetime .
George ' twisted ' word of exper ts to make the case against Brexit . office for Budget Responsibility ( OBR ) chief Robert Chote tell the Sun the Chancellor have quote them ` ` selectively ' ' and insist they have make ` ` no explicit judgment ' ' about the pro or con of leave the EU . Mr Osborne spark fury among Eurosceptics when he quote the OBR during Wednesday ' s Budget speech as warn of the danger of Brexit . but last night Mr Chote insist the Chancellor have misrepresent the OBR by miss out a crucial part of a sentence , and have ` ` select the view that make the case he want to make ' ' . he add : ` ` people quote thing selectively . when they go too far , you want to make the position clear . ' ' it come as the Bank of England warn uncertainty over the EU referendum could hit growth .
Blair bid to derail EU talk on Brexit Tony Blair will attempt to derail Britain ' s Brexit negotiation next week by meet EU chief Jean-Claude Juncker . the pair will have talk in Brussels at the same time as Brexit Secretary David Davis and EU negotiator Michel Barnier be expect to hold a press conference . Brussels official insist they be meet because they be ` ` good friend ' ' - despite clash when Mr Juncker be Luxembourg ' s PM and Mr Blair be in No10 . but the timing of their meeting raise eyebrow in Westminster as a third round of Brexit talk take place next week . aide say Mr Blair and Mr Juncker would discuss European politics and the Middle East but refuse to provide any further detail .
Mayor ' s EU vote stay plan ; BREXIT @card@ BREXIT could be stop if Labour ' s next election manifesto commit to hold a second referendum , the Mayor of London have claim . Sadiq Khan say he be optimistic about overturn last year ' S poll . he say : ` ` You ' d have to spell out in black and white what we ' d do if we win the General Election . ` ` what could trump the referendum result be us have a manifesto offer say we would n't leave the EU , or we ' d have a second referendum . ' ' Labour stand accuse of have several different position on Brexit . Leader Jeremy Corbyn indicate the party want to leave the single market before shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer say no option should be off the table .
world waiting for BREXIT EU leader be warm to a good trade deal with Britain as the rest of the world wait for Brexit , the Prime Minister have reveal . Theresa May speak to the Sun ahead of today unveil the great repeal bill - the first Brexit law to start its passage through Parliament . she hail it as ` ` Brexit ' s big day yet ' ' and ` ` the point at which people will see we mean business ' ' . Mrs May also reveal positive response in private from many of the EU ' s other @card@ nation stand in stark contrast to ` ` strident comment ' ' from official in Brussels . France , Belgium and the Netherlands have be particularly encouraging , she say . the shift in attitude boost hope for a generous post-EU settlement for Britain . the PM also say she be strike by the excitement in the US and China to forge partnership . she tell the Sun : ` ` the world be wait . outside the EU we can be nimble , we can be innovative . without the constraint of the EU we can be take those opportunity . ' ' the Tory chief make it clear she choose the anniversary of her become PM to publish the great repeal bill as a signal of intent . as well as move @card@ year of EU law onto Britain ' s statute book , it also formally repeal the @card@ act that legally link the UK to Europe . Mrs May add : ` ` it be not just about deliver on that referendum vote , it be about embrace the future and embrace the world . ' ' she say Brexit be ` ` an opportunity , not a process ' ' and stick to her stance that there will be no European Court of Justice rule over any UK area after Brexit .
fatal L FLAWS ; NEW BREXIT FURORE AFTER Queen ' S SPEECH ; lHolyrood ' veto ' over repeal bill ; lConsent snub could spark chaos MSPs could have a veto over whether crucial Brexit law unveil in Theresa May ' s Queen ' s Speech impact on Scotland , it emerge yesterday . the Prime Minister admit her flagship great repeal bill - design to copy EU law onto the UK statute book - may need Holyrood ' s consent to alter swathe of Scots law . the revelation raise the prospect of a constitutional stand-off when the crisis-hit Tory try to pass their Brexit law at Westminster . Mrs May be force to admit a ` ` legislative consent motion ' ' might need to be pass by Holyrood after the Queen ' S Speech formally unveil the humble PM ' s scaledback plan for government . expert last night say MSPs refuse to pass the motion would n't allow them to derail the entire Brexit legislation . but a snub could trigger chaos by stop the repeal bill apply to law here . the revelation come as Mrs May row back on a series of controversial manifesto pledge in the wake of her election humiliation . the PM climb down on end the pension triple lock , and backtrack on English policy such as expand grammar school , social care change dub the ` ` dementia tax ' ' , and means-test the winter fuel allowance . instead , she focus on Brexit with eight of the @card@ bill connect to the UK ' s complex departure from the EU . the PM - yet to strike a deal with the Democratic Unionist party to prop up her minority government - try to put on a brave face . Mrs May say her plan for government would include measure to protect access to UK water that be ` ` so important to Scottish fisherman ' ' . she add : ` ` this be a government with purpose . determine to deliver the good Brexit deal , commit to keep our country safe , enhance our standing in the wide world and bring our United Kingdom closer together . ' ' but as she be quiz on her plan in the commons , she run into trouble when grill on the impact of Brexit on Scots law . Nat MP Stewart McDonald ask her if a legislative consent motion would have to be pass by MSPs - effectively grant permission for Westminster to strip out EU rule from a raft of devolve legislation . she reply : ` ` that ' s a matter be consider here and in Scotland . there ' s a possibility a legislative consent motion may be require in the Scottish Parliament . ' ' but last night public law expert Professor Aileen McHarg say the effect of MSPs refuse a motion would be that ` ` the relevant aspect of the Bill would not extend to Scotland ' ' - unless Westminster try to override Holyrood . the Strathclyde Uni academic say : ` ` I doubt the Scottish Parliament would want to do that , as they ' ll want to ensure continuity of effect for EU law as regard Scotland , which be the main purpose of the repeal bill . they could enact their own version of the legislation for devolve matter , but I have n't see any suggestion the Scottish Government be consider that . ` ` we ' re really talk about ' how ' the repeal bill affect Scotland , rather than ' whether ' it do so . ' ' Mrs May ' s admission that she may need Holyrood ' s go-ahead to press ahead with her Brexit law prompt the Scottish government to claim Westminster be already not play ball over the matter . SNP MSP Joe Fitzpatrick tell Holyrood the repeal bill would be ` ` consider ' ' and warn : ` ` it will then be for the Scottish Parliament to determine whether to give or withhold consent . ' ' the Nat ' Brexit minister Michael Russell add : ` ` the Scottish Government expect to be closely involve with the UK government on propose legislation that affect Scotland and it be time for far more transparency and openness from them and a joint co-operative approach . despite the imminent introduction of the repeal bill , we have not see any of its draft provision nor do we know the proposal . ' ' Earlier , the Queen be accompany by the Prince of Wales instead of the Duke of Edinburgh for the State Opening of Parliament after it emerge Prince Philip be admit to hospital . her speech - read out Mrs May ' s proposal - see Brexitrelated bill on custom , trade , immigration , fishery , agriculture , nuclear safeguard and the international sanction regime . in the wake of the Grenfell Tower inferno and terror attack , the PM reveal plan for a civil disaster taskforce and a new commission for counter extremism . Mrs May vow to ` ` see Brexit through ' ' , but pledge to ` ` seek to build a wide consensus ' ' . Jeremy Corbyn dismiss the programme as ` ` thin gruel ' ' . the Labour leader say : ` ` this be a government without a majority , mandate and serious legislative programme , lead by a Prime Minister who have lose her personal authority and be struggle even today to stitch up a deal to stay in office . ' ' but his claim to lead a ` ` government in waiting ' ' be mock by the PM , who say he ` ` fight a spirited campaign and come a good second ' ' . last night , the SNP say the agriculture and fishing bill suggest the Tories ` ` intend to centralise power repatriate from the EU , rather than ensure all new power in devolve area automatically become Holyrood ' S responsibility ' ' . but Scottish Secretary David Mundell hit back : ` ` there will undoubtedly be more decision-making power come to Holyrood . ' '
the Sun SAYS Forget Ukip ... vote Tory to get Brexit the Sun today have a simple message for our reader think of voting for Ukip or Labour tomorrow : do n't . let us explain why . Ukip have succeed wildly in its only real aim : to get Britain out of the EU . but it no longer serve any purpose and its leader know it . it be only stand in half the seat nationwide . the Tories alone be commit to see Brexit through in full . they will withdraw us from the single market and custom union , regain control of our border and law and free us to trade independently with the rest of the world . Labour claim it will see Brexit through too . but , as the last few week have prove , it will promise absolutely anything for your vote . its Brexit ` ` strategy ' ' change daily . currently it ' S to insist on free access to the single market . it have no idea what it will do if the EU say no . indeed the Sun do not believe for a second that Brexit would happen under Labour . do not think voting Ukip will somehow ensure the Tories do n't let Brexit slip . Ukip be n't even expect to win any seat . meanwhile Theresa May and her Brexit Secretary David Davis have work on their negotiate tactic for almost a year in government . there be no weakness in their resolve . in fact they be criticise for be too tough with Brussels . the Tories need every former Ukipper ' s vote to win a decent majority to make Brexit happen without opposition party or rebellious MP hold it back . many Sun reader will already be vote Tory . other will fancy Labour because that ' S how they have always vote . if that ' s you , know this : this be not the moderate Labour of Tony Blair . it be not the Labour of Kinnock or even Miliband . your vote would be to install Britain ' s first Marxist government . a generation after the end of the Soviet Union , the dismantle of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of almost every ruinous and oppressive hard-left regime worldwide , you would be help to establish a new one , right here in Britain . it would be the grave mistake this country have ever make . plenty of people have spend a year rage over the damage they think Brexit will do . many of them also back an extremist Labour Party whose effect on the economy would be genuinely cataclysmic . even the monstrous spending and borrowing plan they admit to in their manifesto will destroy hundred of thousand of job and hugely increase tax for all - no , not just the rich . do n't let them convince you this be a gentle adjustment to help public service . it would be just the start . Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell have pose as calm and respectable to get elect . it be a gigantic fraud . they be bad man who have spend their life in the company of truly evil people . look at Corbyn on our front page today , rabble-rousing at a rally attend by fanatic from a terrorist group , some dress as suicide bomber and scream for Israel to be gas . it would defy belief , have he and his Shadow Chancellor not also spend decade as Westminster cheerleader for the wicked murderer of the IRA . they and their sinister Marxist aide know this be their only chance of power in a lifetime . if the tight of the opinion poll be right , they could seize it ... and damage Britain beyond repair . their naive young follower and the mega-rich US-based celebrity who back Corbyn be too clueless or careless to see where this lead . but those alive in the bleak 1970s remember an economy cripple by massive union domination and wholesale nationalisation . the light go out . body go unburied . public transport stop . industry be wreck . Corbyn ' S regime would be far bad . the extreme socialism he admire and crave have destroy oil-rich , once-prosperous Venezuela . its starve people be riot . do not let that be our fate . until he take over Labour , Corbyn have never run anything outside of a stop the War meeting . now his young fan want this witless novice in charge of Brexit , our big challenge in peacetime . they want him in charge of a massively expensive and pointless nationalisation programme , a new tax system - and the long recession guarantee to follow . they want him in charge of fight Islamist terrorism . look at our front page again and see where his instinct lie . this man pride himself on voting against every anti-terror law for @card@ year . most of his MP know the truth and try to oust Corbyn . now they dishonestly , disgracefully urge voter to make him Prime Minister . Theresa May say that would make us a global laughing stock . well , be would be laugh . the civilised world would be horrify . Britain would face ruin . those who cast their ballot for it would be to blame - and regret it to the end of their day . the Tories have not run a great campaign . but they be pro-business , pro-jobs and pro-low tax . most poll predict they will win . do not assume it . your vote could make the difference between wake up on Friday to a benign government ready to carry Brexit through ... or the nightmare of hard-left extremist prop up by the SNP from Scotland . make certain you vote tomorrow . even if you have n't do so before , vote conservative . PM Corbyn would be Britain ' s bad error do not assume Tory will win
EU LIARS ; Nat ' S BREXIT BLAST ; Russell rap May over Scotland snub FIBS @card@ Tory minister be lie to Scotland over the EU , Holyrood Brexit Secretary Mike Russell claim yesterday . he accuse Theresa May ' s government of snub Scottish opinion in the departure process while claim the opposite . he say : ` ` it ' S very difficult to negotiate with people who be not tell you the truth . ` ` it be become clearer that Scotland ' S voice be simply not be listen to . ` ` the claim about Scotland be an equal partner be p i ` ` ng empt h be expose as empty , diversionary , rhetoric . ' ' Mr Russell , right , also indicate Westminster ' s hard line on Brexit make a second Scottish independence referendum more likely . he add : ` ` do we want our future determine by a government determine to turn its back on Europe despite the threat to job , prosperity , right and freedom ? ` ` or be it better we take our future into our own hand ? ` ` the UK Government be make that the key question of this whole process . ` ` they be close down option for Scotland instead of work with us to find the right way forward for everyone . ' ' his attack follow this week ' S Supreme Court ruling that the Article @card@ process to trigger Brexit can not happen until MP vote on it . a Westminister spokesman say : ` ` we ' re consulting extensively with the Scottish government and engage with people and business . ` ` the @card@ MP who represent Scotland in the in the UK Parliament will scrutinise , debate and vote on the Article @card@ bill , alongside representative from across the UK . ' ' 6They
Gove and OSBO GLUMMER HOLS George Osborne rip up plan for a summer family holiday with Michael Gove , fuel fear of a post-Brexit rift . the ex-Chancellor tell his longterm Tory ally he would have to shelve plan for a break . a source claim last night Samantha Cameron put pressure on Mr Osborne to snub the Brexit campaigner , tell him : ` ` it ' S us or them . ' ' she have vow never to speak to Mr Gove or his wife Sarah Vine over his ` ` treacherous ' ' backing of Brexit . close friend of Mr Gove fear how he will react at be freeze out by former colleague . one say it be inevitable he would not be invite to David Cameron ' s 50th birthday next month . Mrs Cameron be hear have a huge ` ` eff and blind ' ' row with Sarah Vine . a friend of Mr Gove say last night : ` ` Michael remain on good term with old friend who take a different side in the referendum . ' '
BREXIT BLAST AS PM MISSES Meet THE SNP slam PM Theresa May after she snub a Brexit summit . First Minister Nicola Sturgeon be join in Cardiff by leader from Wales , Northern Ireland and the Republic . but Tory leader Mrs May do not attend yesterday ' S British-Irish Council meeting . a senior SNP source say : ` ` it ' S hugely disappointing that Theresa May do n't see fit to come . it speak volume that the Tory government - which be responsible for the Brexit vote - have n't treat the summit with more importance . ' ' Downing Street insist : ` ` the UK government be appropriately represent at the event . ' ' its delegation be head by Northern Ireland Secretary James Brokenshire .
unite on Brexit BREXIT be a journey into the unknown . so it be welcome news that Ireland will be front and centre in the opening phase of negotiation . we be clearly not a priority for Theresa May ' S UK Cabinet . but after intensive lobbying , Ireland be a priority for Europe . Britain have be tell it must settle the key divorce issue of ` ` people , money and Ireland ' ' before any talk on a post-Brexit trade deal . in a letter to the head of @card@ EU country ahead of a summit today , the European Council President Donald Tusk say that ` ` before discuss our future , we must first sort out our past ' ' . a draft declaration by the EU will state the potential for a ` ` unite Ireland ' ' within the EU . the declaration will confirm that Northern Ireland would seamlessly rejoin the bloc after Brexit in the event of a vote for Irish reunification . this be uphold the principle of the Good Friday Agreement , endorse by the people north and south . plan need to be make for a unite Ireland . and we need to have plan in place to capitalise on business opportunity present by Brexit . change be come and Taoiseach Enda Kenny must get the good deal for Ireland . above all we need peace and prosperity for everyone on the island .
it ' S time To BREXPLAIN ; NATS ' EU DEMAND To PM ; give us detail , not slogan SNP chief demand ` ` detail not slogan ' ' from Theresa May before her landmark speech on quit the EU . Brexit Secretary Mike Russell urge Mrs May to spell out her vision for the UK seven month on from June ' S referendum . he call for an end to meaningless slogan like ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' - and advise Mrs May to accept a ` ` compromise ' ' suggest by the Nat of a Norway-style link-up with the EU . but last night it emerge Mrs May ' S speech be pepper May PUT an End This ... TO with more soundbites . she will say the referendum see Britain choose ` ` change ' ' and to ` ` embrace the world ' ' . and she will claim she want the UK to be ` ` more united ' ' - despite the SNP ' s push for another independence poll after the result . but Mr Russell say : ` ` with the trigger of Article @card@ drawing closer , Theresa May must spell out some detail beyond meaningless slogan . ` ` however , all the signal be that the hardline Tory Brexiteers be dictate the direction of her travel . ` ` the SNP put forward a compromise . we expect Mrs May to live up to her promise and give it proper consideration . ' ' the Nat ' blueprint for Brexit will be debate at Holyrood this afternoon .
we be a good , fair and more tolerant country ; Sunday Issue the FIRST Minister ' S NEW Year Message To READERS This year mark the tenth anniversary of the SNP come to power in Scotland . it have be a decade of dominance and landslide election victory for the Nat on one hand , but a shatter independence referendum defeat in @card@ on the other . and with last June ' s Brexit vote throw the immediate political future into turmoil , @card@ may turn out to be the Scottish Government ' s most challenging year to date . write exclusively for the Scottish Sun on Sunday , First Minister Nicola Sturgeon today explain why the next @card@ month will be spend fight to prevent Scotland fall into an economic abyss . last year will surely go down as one of the most difficult and troubling year in modern time . and @card@ be shape up to be just as challenging - not least in how we counter the effect of Brexit and the loom economic catastrophe which be take out of Europe threaten us with . I have say previously that leave the EU and the single market could see a lose decade in term of economic growth and job . we could be talk about a generation of lose opportunity if we do n't keep our place in the world ' s big free trade area . Brexit threaten Scotland with a cost to our economy of around £11billion a year by @card@ . Independent research suggest @card@ Scots job would be lose over a decade , with average earnings fall £2,000 over the same period . in those circumstance , it would be a dereliction of duty for any First Minister and any Scottish government not to do whatever we can to prevent us be drag over that economic cliff edge . the paper we publish before Christmas show how we could retain our place in the single market even if the rest of the UK leave it . our proposal would protect our place in the single market and support continue free trade across the UK . such a solution would not be without its difficulty , but Prime Minister Theresa May have pledge to give our proposal serious consideration . I intend to hold her to that . but the lack of any clear direction or strategy from the Tory on what ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' actually mean be become a national scandal . fully six month on from the vote , they be unable - or unwilling - to tell people what their position be . that be an unforgivable failure of leadership . and while the Tory Government at Westminster be grip by the language and agenda of its hard-right anti-European faction , the Scottish Tories be now in full-scale sell-out mode . go be the rhetoric of protect our place in the single market , to be replace by meaningless Brexiteer slogan . I have make clear independence must be an option to protect our place in Europe and our national interest , and that remain the case . this year will also mark a decade since the SNP take office , a landmark I be both proud of and inspire by . I ' m proud of our record and believe Scotland have become a good , fair more tolerant country in that time . but I ' m also inspire to go further and do more to tackle the big challenge that still face us as a nation . there remain a huge amount of work to do to make Scotland the country we all want it to be . I will be work harder than ever to help achieve that . the year ahead will be one of the most challenge any of us could imagine . but I welcome those challenge and look forward to build on all we have achieve so far .
wait game it ' S come to something when the First Minister ' s demand for a tiny bit of clarity over the UK Government ' s position on Brexit be regard as outlandish . only on Thursday , Boris Johnson , who really be the Foreign Secretary , announce that the Article @card@ process to begin Brexit would begin in the early part of next year . he do n't pick a date , he do n't even pick a month . at bad he indicate a six-month window but , within hour , No10 have issue a statement slap him down . No10 seem to spend an awful lot of its time slap Cabinet minister down , whether it ' S Brexit Secretary David Davis say there ' s next to no chance of remain in the single market or Trade Secretary Liam Fox brand the whole country as fat and lazy . and , while the UK Government be able to tell its minister what Brexit do n't mean , they ca n't tell the rest of us what it do mean . it ' s be obvious for a long time that nobody do even a tiny bit of homework about the consequence of a Brexit vote - but that be more than three long month ago . that ' S long enough to prepare at least a skeleton of a plan and every day that pass without one only strengthen the hand of the SNP .
no Deal ' S So Bad for EU ; BREXIT BROADSIDE Euro firm need our trade , warn Davis David Davis last night warn the EU that failure to secure a Brexit deal would be a disaster for its business . the Brexit Secretary say European company sell more to Britain than China , India , Brazil and Russia combine . his late negotiation paper point out that export to the UK be worth £257billion last year , leave it in ` ` no one ' s interest to see disruption and uncertainty ' ' . it also come with a call for British and European good already on sale to stay on shop shelf after Brexit . the proposal be in his department ' s late tranche of position paper which will form the basis for divorce negotiation with Brussels . the trade proposal be publish alongside paper on cross-border court decision and confidential document . Mr Davis say : ` ` these paper will help give business and consumer certainty and confidence in the UK ' s status as an economic powerhouse after we have leave the EU . ` ` they also show that , as we enter the third round of negotiation , it be clear our separation from the EU and future relationship be inextricably link . ' ' Business leader welcome the plan , call them a ` ` significant improvement ' ' on Brussels ' proposal which they fear would result in more red tape on both side of the Channel . the legal arrangement paper call for British and European judge to carry on recognise each other ' S decision . three more position paper will be publish this week . the paperwork be a bid to ` ` turn the table ' ' on EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier , who have blame slow progress on Britain not come up with enough detailed proposal . but Labour ' S Shadow Brexit Secretary Sir Keir Starmer say : ` ` the government be publish bland , non-committal paper as a smokescreen to mask their failure to make any meaningful progress . ' ' the Sun say - Page ten
Jagger ' S change his tune on Brexit Mick Jagger have take aim at Brexit Britain in two new song title England Lost and Got ta get a grip . the 74-year-old Rolling Stones star have speak out in favour of Brexit before last year ' S referendum , say : ` ` I do n't think it be go to make a huge difference . ' ' but the new solo track , which be release on Thursday , give a sneering take on topic include corruption , immigration , ' fake news ' , anti-intellectualism and the refugee crisis . Jagger also hint at fear that Brexit will make the UK a tax haven for the rich , sing : ` ` Lock the shutter , bolt the door , London ' s gon na be like Singapore . ' ' Hollywood actor Luke Evans star in a bleak video to England Lost . Mick say of the song : ` ` it ' S about a feeling that we be in a difficult moment in our history . ' '
go ON JUNCK Make My Day ; SHOWDOWN WITH Europe ; PM ' s no deal Brexit plan Theresa May be consider the dramatic step of publish Hard Brexit plan - to show Britain be serious about go it alone . she would go public with the contingency measure be put together by Cabinet Secretary Jeremy Heywood in the event EU divorce talk break down . Downing Street want to prove to Brussels chief that it really be prepare to walk away rather than sign up to a bad deal , we can reveal today . her Dirty Harry-style challenge not to test her follow a volley of hostile briefing from Brussel as eurocrats ratchet up the pressure on No10 . it have be blame on Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker ' s chief of staff Martin Selmayr . she have accuse Brussels bureaucrat of ` ` deliberately ' ' try to swing the election . but there be claim senior EU figure be embarrass by the behaviour of Mr Juncker . they be say to include the Commission ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier . the Prime Minister now want to send a message to the EU to rein in the Commission . source fear the EU still think she will not walk away in the event of a bad deal and so it feel confident enough to ramp up the pressure . Mr Heywood have ask government department to prepare for a no-deal scenario after Mrs May insist that no Brexit deal be good than a bad deal . she have say that remain her position . and the government could immediately stop Britain ' S £18billion annual budget payment to the EU if talk collapse . source say the PM could take the ` ` nuclear option ' ' if the EU insist on demand she can not meet . Britain be still due to make annual contribution to the EU budget in the next two year until we leave in @card@ . Mr Barnier yesterday say Britain must offer assurance EU citizen will be treat ` ` properly and humanely ' ' after Brexit before any trade talk can begin . and he say that without the assurance there can be ` ` no trust ' ' when build a new relationship .
' Brexit be a threat to peace process ' BREXIT have provide a boost for dissident republican oppose to the peace process , MP have be tell . the vote to leave the EU be be use as a rally call by group try to get a grip on community unhappy with the referendum result . Prof Peter Shirlow , of the Institute of Irish study at the University of Liverpool , tell a Westminster committee yesterday : ` ` if you look at the dissident , Brexit have be a boost to them in term of their organisational capacity . ` ` there be a section of our society which be rub its hand at Brexit for its own end . ' '
Trump be a win for the fed-up mass ; letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think S2
threat ? EU ' Re ONLY BLUFFING ; Row Over BREXIT debate ; Davis hit back as he block MP ' vote Europe ' S leader threaten to punish Britain with a tough Brexit deal be bluff and will climb down to avoid disaster , David Davis say . the Brexit Secretary tell MP that the hard line take by Francois Hollande and Angela Merkel even ` ` put at risk the European Union ' ' . he predict France and Germany ' S leader will soon reverse their stance and say : ` ` what they say today , they wo n't necessarily be say tomorrow . ' ' Mr Davis be hit back at Mr Hollande , who say last week ` ` there must be a price ' ' to pay for quit the EU . but Mr Davis say a ` ` supposed punishment strategy ' ' would actually harm the continent ' s farmer who export to the UK and put the EU at risk . he be try to quell a Tory backbench revolt over PM Theresa May ' S plan for a hard Brexit , unveil at the party ' s annual conference last week . and he hint that Mrs May will quit the single market and ` ` seek the most open , barrier-free market we can ' ' . he say : ` ` that will be as good as a single market . ' ' it come as Mrs May claim her first Brexit deal ally on a visit to Copenhagen . Denmark ' S PM Lars Lokke Rasmussen pledge to ` ` stand up for free trade ' ' with her .
MP ' will not vote on Brexit ' PM Theresa May will not hold a parliamentary vote on Brexit before trigger Article @card@ , her source insist last night . opponent of Britain leave the EU claim it must be approve by the commons as the referendum result be advisory . but a No10 source say : ` ` Mrs May have be clear the British public have vote and she will get on with deliver Brexit . ' ' the former head of the civil service Lord O'Donnell yesterday say Brexit be not inevitable . but lead Brexiteer Iain Duncan Smith claim Mrs May will launch the EU leave process next spring .
BRECESSION ; BANK Boss Dire Warning ; Carney : quit EU could bring carnage BANK of England boss Mark Carney yesterday issue the grim warning yet about a Brexit , say it could trigger a recession . inflation and unemployment be likely to rise if we opt out , he say . and the pound could fall ` ` perhaps sharply ' ' , push up price and hit growth . PM David Cameron say the governor ' S prediction send ` ` a very clear message ' ' . but Brexiteers accuse Mr Carney of talk Britain into a crisis . former Tory Chancellor Lord Lamont say : ` ` if his unwise word become self-fulfill , the responsibility will be the governor ' S alone ' ' . visit ... Anti-EU Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg even call on Mr Carney to resign , dub his comment ` ` unprecedented ' ' . jitter over the June @card@ vote have see trade and investment slow , the Bank ' s monetary policy committee find . quiz on the impact of Brexit , Mr Carney say it could even extend to ` ` a technical recession ' ' - six month of the economy shrinking . he also say the Bank should not be rely on to cushion the blow . but with the global economy in trouble , the governor also admit growth will be less this year than earlier think even if Brits vote to stay . George Osborne dub Mr Carney ' S intervention ` ` a very big moment in the debate ' ' as it be proof that Britain would be ` ` poor ' ' under Brexit . carney leave campaigner demand to know if the governor have come under pressure from the government to talk down Brexit . it come after photo emerge of Mr Carney enter the Chancellor ' s home on Monday . aide refuse to rule out Brexit be discuss at that meeting . but they insist the monetary policy committee ' S guidance be draw up last week . the Bank keep interest rate at @card@ per cent yesterday . lFORMER Tory PM Sir John Major will today tell the Oxford Union that voter will feel cheated if we ` ` end up leave Europe because absurd falsehood be widely believe to be true ' ' .
Theresa ' so silent ' on Brexit Theresa Villiers have be accuse of ` ` avoid ' ' answering question on the impact a Brexit would have on Northern Ireland ' S economy . the NI Secretary have declare she will campaign for the UK to leave the EU at the forthcoming referendum . and Ms Villiers neatly sidestep the issue when it be raise in the House of Commons with Minister Ben Wallace face many of the EU-related question . Shadow NI secretary Vernon Coaker raise concern about the impact of a Brexit on Northern Ireland ' S trade . he ask Mr Wallace how he ` ` keep a straight face ' ' as he promote the government ' s position on the EU with Ms Villiers sit behind him . Coaker say : ` ` can I ask the minister , have he discuss with the minister of the executive the survey by the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce which show that @card@ per cent of business in Northern Ireland support continue EU membership ? ` ` be n't it the case that there be little surprise in that finding give that @card@ per cent of Northern Ireland ' S export go to the EU , high than any other part of the UK ? ' '
the Sun SAYS Beastly bunch the Tories should be ruthlessly focus on two target - deliver a successful Brexit and keep Marxist Jeremy Corbyn out of Number @card@ . instead , the party ' s big beast be busy draw target on each other ' back . Chancellor Philip Hammond be out to weaken the EU negotiating hand of Brexit Secretary David Davis . Davis loyalist brief furiously against Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson . Hammond blame Michael Gove . their common enemy : Theresa May , whose job they all covet . Liam Fox say Tory backbencher be furious . as he rightly point out : ` ` the only people smile at this will be in Berlin and Paris . ' ' French confidence have be buoy by desperate Remain plot to destabilise Brexit - typify by Tony Blair ' s ludicrous intervention this weekend . leak memo reveal Paris now have its sight set on steal away the business of the City of London , the jewel in Britain ' s economic crown . clearly , this be no time for a circular firing squad of Tory leadership hopeful leave the door open for Corbyn . and to make a success of Brexit we need grown-up politician prepare to put aside personal ambition and unite in that vital common purpose . enough be enough .
there be an uneasy peace [ ... ] ; Forsyth James 1G
May : it ' s full steam ahead to leave EU Theresa May last night pledge minister be work ` ` full steam ahead ' ' to complete Brexit . her vow come amid claim that delay could see Britain stay in the EU for three more year . Yesterday City insider say ` ` chaotic ' ' Whitehall department be not ready to trigger Article @card@ - the first step to Brexit - for a year . lead Tory Eurosceptic Jacob Rees-Mogg say start the process in January be ` ` reasonable ' ' . he add : ` ` any suggestion Whitehall be not ready just wo n't do . ' ' a Cabinet source say problem hire staff for David Davis and Liam Fox ' s Brexit and International Trade department be stall progress . but a No10 source say last night : ` ` it be full steam ahead . ' '
May must not let the SNP dictate term on Brexit SORRY , Theresa , but you get it wrong by go to see Nicola Sturgeon . you be the Prime Minister of the UK . if there be issue with any of the region regard Brexit , they ask if their representative can come and see you . you do n't go run to them . when you do meet , you simply tell them that the UK vote for Brexit , and it will be implement . if you need any more advice just give me a ring . George Pickles Ripon , N YorksNO wonder Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon be all smile after meeting PM May if she believe she can still be part of the UK and a member of Europe , at the same time . so the English will be pay for the Scottish NHS and benefit , and the EU will be pay for their shortfall in agriculture and the fall-off in North Sea oil price , with the added benefit that Scotland can have a safety net if either system should fail . talk about have your cake and eat it . Neil BLATCHFORD Steeple Claydon , Bucks the regionalisation of Britain have evolve to such a degree that the British Parliament be no longer sovereign in Britain . it seem Westminster can not start to carry out the will of the British people until the Scottish administration at Holyrood have approve all the detail . eric Davidson Macduff , Aberdeenshire Nicola Sturgeon and the SNP should be concentrate on use the power they be give to get Scotland back on track with the NHS , education and unemployment , which they have make a mess of since they have be in power . what special deal with the UK be she want ? for us to still be able to buy from the EU , as we have nothing much to offer the EU . our oil be dry up and not everyone drink whisky . never mind the EU free movement that would still allow anyone to come into Scotland . we have too many unemployed with no prospect already . Susan MCSTAY Wishaw , N Lanark THE UK ' s overall vote be for Brexit . what part of this do Nicola Sturgeon not understand ? do she not understand the meaning of democracy ? for her , this be not about be in or out of the EU , this be about her clutch at straw to obtain independence for Scotland at any cost . tom Ritchie by Email why be Theresa May say she want all the party to agree about Brexit before she agree with it ? leave win the referendum . it ' s nothing to do with all the party . Theresa May be do her good to drag Brexit out . peter Cook Bury Theresa May have make her first mistake . let Nicola Sturgeon dictate to her as to when she apply Article @card@ be the tail wag the dog . the SNP first minister do not accept the Scottish referendum result and seem hell-bent on a second chance to overturn it . now , she be meddle in Brexit . if she want to be independent and a member of the EU , then she have to understand that the rest of Britain will not pay her a penny . Michael SHORT Eastbourne , E Sussex So Nicola Sturgeon think Scotland be well off in the EU and keep freedom of movement ? really ? after the late French atrocity by someone with EU residency ? the EU be a failed social experiment and threaten our security . wake up , Nicola . Linda PEROZ Glasgow TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply it ' S great that the steelworks buy from Tata will supply the Scunthorpe football stadium . now we should help the worker in Port Talbot by put a large tariff on import Chinese steel . Trevor , Prestatyn I Must express outrage at the extra severance pay Cameron award his adviser , after all , many ordinary worker do not receive extra pay-off . one law for rich and another for poor . Marie , Cumbria Theresa May do not have to ` ` please Scotland ' ' . she have to please the people who vote out ! remember , madam , we can vote you out at election ! Maureen Shaw the picture in the Sun on Saturday show the massacre survivor sit by the body of his love one break my heart ! May France find peace . T Roberts , Bromley , Kent Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
what a difference a Tez make when David Cameron come to see Alex Salmond to thrash out the ground rule for the independence referendum , nobody could pretend the First Minister go for subtlety . t sSy he make sure Mr Cameron be seat directly in front of a map of Scotland ' S constituency , paint yellow by the SNP landslide vote . but how thing have change . there be no tease this time . Ndt nobody know what go on in the draw room of Bute House when the new Prime Minister come to call but , in public at least , all be sweetness and light . ` ` Remain mean Remain , ' ' say Ms Sturgeon . ` ` Brexit mean Brexit , ' ' say Mrs May and , aside from that , it be a brief but polite discussion . the PM make clear there will be no Brexit until we arrive at a UK-wide position . she say : ` ` I want the Scottish government to be fully engage in discussion and will listen to any option they bring forward . ' ' Ms Sturgeon say that be ` ` a very important commitment ' ' . it seem clear that behind all the politeness a subtle constitutional knife-fight be go on . Ms Sturgeon have ask for something already guarantee - a place at the table . she can now claim a victory . in exchange Mrs May have the Scottish government wire into the Brexit process . she can kick the leg from under SNP grievance by tie Scotland into the final say . Ms Sturgeon ' S adviser have declare access to the single market and right of free movement as ` ` red line ' ' for a future EU deal . Mrs May , who support Remain , probably want a single market too . suppose she meet Scots demand . will Ms Sturgeon have to go off in a huff to keep dream of Indy Ref2 alive ? and now the big question . have she finally meet a worthy opponent ?
get Whitehall turf war [ ... ] l ' ' Got Whitehall turf war write all over it and between three of the big ego in politics ' ' , declare one former Downing Street aide when they see Theresa May ' s appointment of the three Brexiteers . Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary , David Davis as Secretary of State for Leaving the EU and Liam Fox as International Trade Secretary be all involve in implement Brexit . Johnson be the one occupy the great office of state . but Whitehall insider expect it to be Davis who deal with the nitty gritty of the renegotiation . I understand the Brexit department have already make clear that it want two minister of state to help prepare for the exit talk . but how the Foreign Office will take to be cut out of the big negotiation in decade remain to be see . add spice to all this be that the third man in the Brexit triumvirate , Liam Fox , have famously strain relation with Davis . the pair run against each other for the Tory leadership in @card@ and there ' s no love lose between them . Fox be also no fan of Boris , regard him as a rather frivolous figure . these three , though , will need to work seamlessly together if Brexit be to work .
top Tory : Brexit will take 6yrs to broker FOREIGN Secretary Philip Hammond yesterday warn that a Brexit could take six year - as long as World War Two . he tell the commons that negotiate a divorce with the EU will take up to two year and it could take a further four year for all @card@ member state to agree to the deal . the Tory make a similar warning in March when he be campaign to Remain . but yesterday he say there should be no doubt Britain would be leave the EU and there would be no halfway house . he say : ` ` the next PM have make it clear that Brexit mean Brexit , we will be negotiate our exit from the EU . ' ' Mr Hammond add Britain would have to ` ` tread carefully ' ' in try to thrash out new trade deal with the rest of the world , give that the country will remain a full EU member up until the time it leave . Foreign Office Minister Hugo Swire say the government be ` ` fully aware ' ' of the need to train and recruit more trade negotiator . Theresa ' S Girl Power - Pages @card@ & @card@
lord Eric To GET PM Out of Pickles ; May ' S Plan ON BREXIT fight @card@ new peer to take on Remoaners Theresa May will next week bolster Tory number in the House of Lords with ten more loyalist ahead of month of ` ` bloody ' ' Brexit battle . long-serving former Cabinet minister Eric Pickles and Peter Lilley lead a put forward by the to get new life peerage . other Conservative grandee be consider for ennoblement include MP Edward Garnier , Brazier and Andrew All either stand down ex-Julian Tyrie . or lose their seat at the general election in June last year . Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn be also appoint three new peer . but the PM be push through three time his number in a bid to lessen Labour , Lib Dems and crossbenchers ' huge advantage in upper house . opposition peer have threaten to water down the landmark EU ( Withdrawal ) Bill , which pass the commons this week - or force another Brexit referendum . Tory minister tell the Sun : ` ` Pretty much the whole of @card@ be go to be a bloody street fight in the Lords , who be overwhelmingly either soft Brexit or pro-Remain . ` ` there will be a lot of late night , so we ' ll need as many reinforcement as we can in there . ' ' the Tories currently have @card@ peer , fall more than @card@ short of a majority of the Upper House ' s total @card@ member . there be @card@ Labour lord , @card@ Lib Dems and @card@ cross bencher , as well as @card@ bishop and a handful of other non-affiliated member . five more major bill on Brexit be due to follow it this year . the independent House of Lords Appointment Commission will meet next week to approve the list .
Theresa ' s tough talking could be hard for border Ireland be destine for a ' hard border ' after the UK quit the EU , it be claim last night . politician say dramatic change be inevitable after Theresa May outline her vision of a post-Brexit Britain . the Prime Minister say the UK can not remain a full member of the single market and custom union - mean a border rethink be inevitable . she add that , while the UK would work on tighten immigration , it will seek to keep the common travel area allow free movement north and south . Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams say : ` ` it be difficult to see how this can be accomplish without significant change to the current border arrangement . ' ' SF MLA John O'Dowd say : ` ` Exiting the single European market , exit the custom union , create a hard border on the island of Ireland . ` ` Warm word , soft word from Theresa may mean nothing . ' ' Alliance deputy leader Stephen Farry describe Mrs May ' s speech as ` ` catastrophic for Northern Ireland ' ' . he add : ` ` any departure from the custom union and the single market will necessitate a formal border either across the island of Ireland or down the Irish Sea . ` ` a one-size-fits-all Brexit be just not practical . there be too many factor and circumstance particular to Northern Ireland . ` ` yet , these have not yet be recognise and respect by the UK government . ' ' the DUP say it support Mrs May add it be commit to help May build a ` ` prosperous and strong UK outside of the EU , ' ' after @card@ per cent of Northern Ireland voter reject Brexit at the June referendum last year , but have to go along with the full UK decision . Taoiseach Enda Kenny , who have call Brexit the big challenge Ireland have face in @card@ year , welcome the Prime Minister ' s ` ` clarity ' ' on the issue . opposition Fianna Fail leader Micheal Martin say Mrs May be speak softly but be act in her own national interest . last night the Northern Ireland Independent Retail Trade Association say all side must ` ` ensure that Brexit do not result in the hardening of the border and that no barrier whatsoever be place on trade or worker across the EU ' ' . a group that represent Irish business , IBEC , hit out at the speech on social medium say ` ` ( The ) UK ' S aggressive Brexit approach risk damage UK-Irish relation . ' ' during her speech earlier on Tuesday , the Prime Minister say maintain the common travel area between the UK and Republic of Ireland would be a priority during Brexit negotiation . she say : ` ` No-one want a return to the border of the past . our guiding principle must be to ensure that as we leave the European Union no new barrier to live or do business within our own union be create . ` ` the United Kingdom will share a land border with the EU and maintain that common travel area with the Republic of Ireland will be an important priority . ' '
secret society @card@ PRIME Minister Theresa May seem to think she ' S play a great poker hand by refuse to tell anybody what she ' s up to . but all this secrecy and silence may actually be a mask for absolutely nothing at all and just when it look like Brexit ca n't get any more chaotic , it do . the UK Government be determine to try to set aside last week ' s court judgment which confirm that MP have a right to decide on Brexit . and now , as if to stir the pot , we could be just day away from the Scottish government get involve in Westminster ' S Supreme Court Appeal . if that legal move go ahead and if it be successful , then it ' s go to complicate thing more than a little . as well as two house of Parliament , lord and MP , all have their say on Brexit , it could mean that MSPs be give a vote too . if Holyrood be allow a voice , then why not the Welsh Assembly and the Northern Ireland Assembly just for good measure ? the view from Holyrood be clear . Europe be knot through every strand of the Scottish Parliament . be all of that go to be tear out , tear up and throw away without any chance for MSPs to have a chance ? will Mrs may drive her way through the devolve parliament regardless of what they think ? and if she do , what be that go to do for Nicola Sturgeon ' s independence referendum plan ? it ' s further proof that Brexit be a lot more complicated than anybody think of . incredible as it be to believe , it seem nobody who claim to be in charge have give any of this stuff a moment ' S think . it ' S almost as if they be make it up as they go along . as the Holyrood Brexit Secretary Mike Russell say : ` ` that ' s no way to run a democracy . ' '
BREXTRA QASH ; Exclusive : NISSANBACKSUK NEWCARFORBRITISHPLANT Car giant Nissan be poise to announce it will build new SUVs at its Sunderland plant in a post-Brexit boost for Britain . the Japanese firm say last night it will decide whether to produce the next Qashqai in the UK in the next month . but Sun columnist James Forsyth reveal the deal have be do after Business Secretary Greg Clark fly to Japan to sweeten company chief . claim Nissan would halt production in the North East be a central plank of Project fear before the EU referendum . last night Brexit boss Michael Gove welcome the ` ` fantastic vote of confidence ' ' . he add : ` ` and as a Nissan driver myself , I be delight that British manufacturing be on a roll . ' ' Arriving in Japan , Mr Clark say : ` ` it be the quality as well as the quantity of that investment that stand out and have contribute to make the UK automotive sector the success story it be . ' ' he add : ` ` the government be clear the UK remain open for business , which be why I be here , ensure we continue our long-standing relationship with company like Nissan . ' ' one in three British car be make at Nissan in Sunderland . last year it build @card@ motor , with @card@ per cent of production export . Nissan chief Carlos Ghosn warn that investment in Sunderland would hit the skid if Brexit lead to the EU slapping tariff on car export from the UK . he say Nissan would need ` ` compensation ' ' to splash the cash in the North East , where it have @card@ staff and support @card@ more job in the supply chain . last night government source be reluctant to confirm whether it promise to compensate Nissan . last month Honda back post-Brexit Britain with a £200million investment at its plant in Swindon .
BBC Must QUIT Bias ON BREXIT THE BBC bend over backwards to be impartial during the referendum campaign . I take part in the Wembley Arena debate where the London audience be overwhelmingly and predictably in favour of Remain . to its eternal credit , the way the Beeb broadcast the event make it seem as though the audience be evenly split . but the BBC ' S impartiality have be leave out for the bin man since June @card@ . good Brexit news - old friend like Canada and Australia who be keen to strike trade deal - be downplay . bad news - even total fib , like the £66billion annual price tag for Brexit base on discredited figure by George Osborne - be shout from the roof of Broadcasting House . it stink , Auntie . the BBC be now as fanatically partisan about the horror of Brexit as eyeswivelling Little Europeans like the Financial Times , the Guardian or George ` ` the Redundancies Will Start immediately ' ' Osborne . ` ` stand by for another tumble on the pound follow Theresa May ' s remark on the single market , ' ' gloat Norman Smith , the BBC ' s assistant political editor , on Twitter . Smith be wrong - the pound go up in value against the euro and the dollar . some 17.4million people vote to leave the European Union . how many of them work for the BBC ? my guess would be - none . and it show in what be be call ` ` a constant stream of negativity ' ' . this be nowhere near good enough . the BBC take a £145.50-a-year licence fee from many of that 17.4million who vote to leave the EU . it be time the BBC start show that 17.4million some respect .
Brussels Boss BACKS BREXIT ; E.U . get Message AT Last Junck blow for Remainers Brussels boss Jean-Claude Juncker last night insist Brexit will go ahead next year regardless of the opposition from Remainers . the European Commission chief say those claim otherwise be delude . his remark come as a major rebuke to Remainers such as Labour peer Lord Adonis and former Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg who want to reverse Brexit . the pair be among those push for a second referendum on the deal Theresa May secure with EU leader . Mr Juncker tell a conference in Brussels : ` ` do n't believe those who say that it ' S not go to happen and that people have realise their error in the UK . ` ` I do n't think that that ' s go to be the case . our British friend will be leave us on the 30th of March @card@ . ' ' Labour MP Ben Bradshaw accuse him of be out of touch . he say : ` ` he need to get out more and not assume statement of UK Government minister speak for Britain . ' ' Remain campaign group Best for Britain add : ` ` President Juncker be completely wrong to say Brexit be a dead certainty . ' ' Mr Juncker have previously suggest Britain could rejoin the EU in the future , but would have to leave the bloc first . do n't believe those who say it ' s not go to happen
ditch the despair on Brexit say PM Theresa May will today urge business leader to replace their doom-laden prediction for Brexit with a ` ` rational optimism ' ' . the PM want them to seize the ` ` huge opportunity ' ' create by our EU divorce . she will tell the Confederation of Business Industry conference she be ` ` excited ' ' by the possibility of a new relationship with the EU . and she will pledge to agree a ` ` detailed ' ' deal with Brussels as early as possible . but Bank of England governor Mark Carney yesterday warn that the Brexit effect mean the economy be ` ` just growing ' ' when it ` ` should really be booming ' ' . he say Brexit uncertainty be hold back investment in Britain and send firm elsewhere .
EU Citizens ' Peace Deal Theresa May have order Whitehall official to prepare a post-election Brexit peace deal on EU citizen ' right , it be claim yesterday . source say they have be tell to draw up a ` ` big generous offer ' ' , include a later-thanexpected cut-off date for residency . Brexit negotiation be due to begin on June @card@ - with right for EU citizen live here and brit abroad at the top of the agenda . the new offer be design to show the EU27 that Britain be seek an amicable divorce . the EU want any citizen arrive in the UK up until Brexit in March @card@ to be able to gain lifetime residency right . a Government official tell the Politico website : ` ` there will be quibble about the date - cut-offs for new EU citizen arrive in the UK - but fundamentally it ' S pretty generous . ' '
golf war ; Juncker SMEAR Row ; EU ' not a club ' jibe be brush off as gossip FURIOUS MP have accuse an EU chief of try to sabotage Britain ' s Brexit deal . Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker be say to have tell PM Theresa May that the EU ` ` be not a golf club ' ' . he be also say to have leak detail of the bust-up with her during last Wednesday ' s No10 dinner . during the evening Mrs May be accuse of be naïve in her expectation for the exit deal . the insult come after she say Britain do not have to hand over any compensation for future commitment under exist rule . and when the PM tell Mr Juncker they should share the aim of make Brexit work , he tell her : ` ` Brexit can not be a success . ' ' Quizzed on the account , publish in a German newspaper , Mrs May dismiss it as ` ` Brussels gossip ' ' . No10 say : ` ` we do n't recognise this account . ' ' Downing Street and Mrs May instead point to Mr Juncker say straight after the dinner that it be ` ` a constructive meeting ' ' . Senior Tory Brexiteers blast Mr Juncker for ` ` a complete fabrication ' ' . Mr Juncker be also allege to have call German leader Angela Merkel at 7.30am on the morning after the dinner to relay his concern about Mrs May ' S position . that lead Mrs Merkel to later attack No10 for have ` ` illusion ' ' . Lib Dem leader Tim Farron say the claim show the PM have ` ` no clue ' ' . it also emerge last night that senior Brussels bureaucrat be unite in oppose Mrs May ' s bid to do a deal on EU citizen ' right as early as June . the PM want to wrap up an agreement quickly to secure residency right for 3.2million European live in the UK now and a million brit in the EU . the Daily Telegraph say EU Council president Donald Tusk also oppose her timetable . his chief of staff Piotr Serafin tell colleague last month that the PM ' S good will aim be ` ` not feasible ' ' .
knickers to Brexit ; City Sun THE FTSE @card@ Fell @card@ TO @card@ EDITED By Rhodri Phillips Tel : @card@ @card@ @card@ e-mail :
BREXTREMISTS ; NATS Gather in Glasgow ; Nic : ' Racist ' Tories hijack agenda on EU ; Intolerance be not what leave voter want Nicola Sturgeon will today suggest that Theresa May ' s government be closet racist who be try to ` ` hijack ' ' the Brexit result . the First Minister will launch a furious attack on top Tory at Westminster as she open the SNP conference in Glasgow . and she will point to the Conservative gathering last week , where the party ' s potential policy include list foreign worker . Ms Sturgeon will say : ` ` we hear an intolerance towards those from other country that have no place in a modern , multicultural society . ` ` it be a disgrace . it shame the Tory party and all who speak for it . ` ` but make no mistake - the right wing of the Tory party be now in the ascendancy and be seek to hijack the referendum result . ` ` Brexit have become Tory Brexit . they ' re use it as licence for the xenophobia that ' s lie under the surface but which be now in full view . ' ' Ms Sturgeon will add : ` ` I suspect many of those who vote leave now look at the Tories and think , ' that ' s not what I vote for ' . ` ` they certainly do n't vote to throw economic rationality out of the window , or to lower live standard or sacrifice job and investment . ` ` and they do n't vote for business to face tariff , for holidaymakers to need visa and for the scapegoate of foreigner . ' ' the First Minister - who will speak after unveil her new deputy - have threaten to hold an indy vote during the two-year Article @card@ period before the UK exit the EU . she ' ll now confirm SNP MP will vote against Brexit legislation in the Commons . and she ' ll urge Labour , liberal and moderate Tory to join a coalition against a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' t Sh ill outside the single market . she will add : ` ` the Conservative manifesto , on which Theresa May and other Tory MP be elect , say , ' we be clear about what we want from Europe . we say yes to the Single Market ' . ` ` the PM have a mandate to take England and Wales out of the EU but have no mandate to remove any part of the UK from the single market . ' ' but Scottish Tory chief whip John Lamont say : ` ` it ' S disappointing that Ms Sturgeon be intent on rabble-rousing . ' ' Scottish Labour chief Kezia Dugdale add d ` ` O t i l d add : ` ` Our country be already divide enough . we can not afford to divide it again . ' ' meanwhile , Theresa May last night spark Tory civil war after refuse MP a vote on her Brexit plan . angry Tory turn on their own minister in a heated six-hour debate , with four ex-ministers back Labour to demand that MP can water down a hard Brexit clean break . the government will go to court today to try to stop a bid to force a Commons vote on when Mrs May can trigger Article @card@ .
let the Lion ROAR ; Independence Day Boris LEADS great BREXIT Rally CRY he tell reader : future in your hand cry freedom for the Best of British Boris Johnson last night urge million of Sun reader with destiny in their hand to back Brexit today - and ` ` let the Lion roar again ' ' . speak on the eve of the big vote for two generation , the Tory heavyweight say the leave campaign be ` ` on the verge of history ' ' . and he tell waverer it be time to ` ` cry freedom ' ' by BeLeaving in Britannia - and throw off the shackle of the European Union . he speak to the Sun during a whistle-stop 500-mile tour of Britain where he be urge to kiss a fish , land in a World War Two airfield and end the day pull pint . he be meet by horde of leave voter everywhere , stop for selfies every ten metre before joke : ` ` where be these Remain supporter the poll keep tell us about ? ' ' ` ` but with expert claim today ' S referendum be still too close to call , the Brexit standard-bearer implore Sun reader to make June @card@ ` ` Independence Day ' ' . in a passionate Churchillian-style plea , he brand the Referendum a ` ` Battle for British democracy ' ' . he say : ` ` Sun reader have the future of our country in their hand . ` ` they represent the good of Britain , the good of British instinct . I know they believe in our great country and I hope very much they want to take our country forward tomorrow on a path toward great democracy , great openness to trade with the rest of the world and a more dynamic future for Britain . ` ` they know the brave cross they put on the ballot paper can make the difference between restore democracy in Europe or remain shackle to Europe . it will be a historic moment . ` ` it ' s time to take the chain off the giant , unshackle Britannia and let the Lion roar again ! ' ' as BoJo fly the flag , fellow Brexitbacking Tory Michael Gove hit the south coast with Armed Forces Minister Penny Mordaunt . he warn a Remain vote will spell ` ` game over ' ' for Britain as Brussels would ` ` never reform ' ' . ` ` separately , Leave-campaigning Jobs Minister Priti Patel also deliver a rousing battle cry - urge voter to ` ` take back our destiny ' ' . she warn it be Brits ' ` ` last chance to keep our democracy ' ' - and say a Remain win would leave us ` ` settle for whatever crumb Angela Merkel be willing to drop ' ' . but in a frantic last day ' S campaigning , an exhaust BoJo be the champion for the Brexit cause . despite a two-hour live TV debate on Tuesday night , the ex-London Mayor be up before dawn yesterday to start his 500-mile tour . he begin at Billingsgate fish market in East London where he pose for selfies with trader who back a Brexit - in part because of the EU ' S Common Fisheries Policy . he also pose with a salmon , which photographer urge him to smooch after he reveal he ` ` once kiss a crocodile in Australia ' ' . he then drive to Maldon , Essex , where he buy the Sun on a walk through the town . he tell activist : ` ` I think we be on the verge of an extraordinary event in the history of our country and indeed in the whole of Europe . ' ' after a flight from Southend , he meet local in Ashby-de-la-Zouch , Leics , where lorry driver hoot their horn in support . then come a visit to Wolverhampton before he fly by helicopter to Selby , North Yorkshire . landing at Burn airfield , a World War Two site for Bomber Command , BoJo quip , in a nod to the movie apocalypse now : ` ` let ' s put on ride of the Valkyry . ' ' amid a throng of well-wisher , he insist his passion for the cause have only grow since he come out for a Brexit in February . he confirm separately yesterday to the BBC that at one stage he have write two letter to the PM - one backing Remain and the other Brexit , which he send . but he tell the Sun he become ` ` more certain ' ' a Brexit be right the longer the campaign have go on . and he urge brit to consider the future if Remain win . he say : ` ` we will be lock to a system that can only get bad . we will forever be subservient to a supra-national , federalist state . ' ' Dismissing No10 ' s argument that a Brexit be a leap into the dark , he say it be a ` ` stride into the light ' ' , add : ` ` there ' s a great sunlit meadow out there . we ' ve just get to open the door . ' ' Batting off criticism that the leave campaign be anti-immigrant , he say he love Britain ' s multi-cultural society . but net migration of @card@ EU national a year be far too high , he say , promise a Brexit would see immigration fall by the end of the current Parliament . pull a pint at the end of the day in the George pub at Piercebridge , Co Durham , he urge supporter bridge , sup to ` ` drive for the line ' ' . and ask about his own stamina , he smile : ` ` hard as nail . ' ' Down in Bournemouth , Mr Gove urge million who have still to make up their mind to take this ` ` once-in-a-lifetime opportunity ' ' . Ms Mordaunt insist Brexit supporter should not be make to ` ` feel guilty ' ' or be tell by Remain voter that they be ` ` narrowminded little Islanders ' ' . she say : ` ` that be a sign that they have lose the argument . ' ' Michael Gove apologise yesterday after compare pro-EU expert to Nazi propagandist - admit his word be ` ` clumsy and inappropriate ' ' . the-
stop cave in on Brexit talk ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter on the first day of negotiation for the UK to leave the European Union , Brexit Secretary David Davis have already crumble to EU negotiator Michel Barnier . it mean discussion of trade term will have to wait until other issue have be address , such as the UK ' s divorce bill , the right of EU national in Britain and the border with Ireland . this be the bad start we could possibly have have . how many more concession will our weak negotiator make ? this government be fast become all talk and no action , display increase weakness in many area . the EU must be rub their hand with glee . I can see a lot of political trouble ahead if thing do n't change , and that be the last thing Britain need at this time . john Stacey by Email David Davis be suppose to be the tough negotiator . day one see him make concession . God help us if we have a weak negotiator . ken Young Inverness David Davis ' S performance so far have increase the need for the SNP to have a seat at the Brexit talk . we need someone in there who will stand up for Scotland , not roll over and get our tummy tickle . john Jamieson Edinburgh SURELY the government , not the medium , should be give the people realistic information regard Brexit . if , as predict by the medium , there will be a drop in the standard of live for the middle and low income worker , why do the government not admit it ? a second vote could be an option as people become more aware of the implication of leave . tom Scobie Girvan , Ayrshire Liam Gallagher refuse to give a 90-year-old lady a picture . who do he think he be ? he seem to forget his fan put him where he be today . the lady should ' ve slap his arrogant face with anything freeze in her shopping trolley - like a cold fish . Chrissie GIBBS Douglas , Lanarkshire ON Sunday evening I accidentally catch the end of BBC2 ' S White Gold , with Joe Thomas , picture , and James Buckley and be subject to the vile language I ' ve ever hear . who on Earth authorise such filth to be mouth ? standard be be continually downgrade and the so-called authority just turn a blind eye . Len LAINSBURY by email
pm : I ' LL DIG My HEELS in ; May RAISES BREXIT Heat ; Hint at single market pullout by Tom Newton Dunn Theresa May give her strong signal yet yesterday that she be ready to pull Britain out of the EU ' s single market after Brexit . the determine PM , give her start-of-year TV interview , be grill on whether her exit negotiation demand will include stay in the free trade area . and she reply to Sky News : ` ` we must n't think about this as somehow we ' re come out of the EU but we want to keep bit of membership . ` ` we ' re leave , we ' re come out . but we will get the well possible deal for trading with and operate within the single market . ' ' the declaration suggest the PM be instead hope to keep British firm ' access to the European market tarifffree by strike a jumbo trade deal . that would also allow the government to regain full control of immigration from the EU , which she be ` ` clear that be what we need to deliver ' ' . Mrs May ' S comment delight ` ` hard Brexit ' ' leave campaigner last night . but they alarm pro-EU supporter , who insist lose membership of Europe ' s 500million-strong free market would make the nation poorer . Mrs May also admit for the first time that plan for Brexit have be more challenging than minister originally think . she tell interviewer Sophy Ridge : ` ` there have n't be any plan make , so it be important for us to take some time to actually look at the issue . ` ` the work that have be do have set out very clearly for us how complex this be . ' ' the PM hit back at the former EU ambassador Sir Ivan Rogers , who walk out of the top Brussels job last week with a stinging attack on No10 . pledge to lay out more of her plan in a speech later this month , Mrs May insist : ` ` Our thinking on this be n't muddle at all . we ' ve be take time . ' ' Leading Brexiteer and Tory Steve Baker dub Mrs May ' s single market hint as ` ` great news for the UK ' ' . he add : ` ` we wo n't be cling on to bit of EU membership . ' ' leave campaign boss Michael Gove go even further last night to insist the UK also leave the EU ' S custom union . the former Justice Secretary say it be vital to ` ` deliver a full Brexit , not settle for fake Brexit ' ' . but Remain campaigner sound alarm . former Tory business minister Anna Soubry MP plead for the PM to rethink and try to keep the UK in the single market ` ` for the sake of job , growth and UK prosperity ' ' . she say there be ` ` no comparable alternative ' ' to the single market , dub it ` ` the world ' s large free trade area ' ' . former Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg accuse Mrs May of ` ` put party before country ' ' , add : ` ` that ' s no way to kick off a ' share society ' . ' '
Salmond ' s Euro charm offensive it ' S clear the SNP think the idea of an indy referendum on the back of Brexit be far from dead but they now appear to be play a long game . as thing stand , Nicola Sturgeon be busy draw up her own Brexit blueprint to fill the void create by Theresa May ' s lack of clarity on the way forward . the Scottish Government be join in the Supreme Court battle to allow MP to vote on trigger the EU exit . now we learn Alex Salmond have be deploy to schmooze foreign leader . his mission : to charm head of the four country in the European Free Trade Association and ` ` smooth the way ' ' for Scotland to emerge from the Brexit chaos as a member of this club of EU bolt-on nation . there be some obvious barrier , not least the fact it would require Mrs May ' S permission . but until she come up with concrete plan , we may be no further forward in this increasingly complex saga . weapon the Nat , meantime , look to be play it cute . their diplomacy with EFTA already seem to be have an effect . and if Mr May rule out the SNP plan , the snub will be use to build indy support in Remain-backing Scotland . however , the Nat be not infallible . the Scottish Government publish a bizarre pamphlet yesterday , grandly title Scotland : a European nation its aim be to pull the heartstrings of Scot but , in reality , it be a ham-fisted attempt to shoehorn historic event from @card@ year ago into the Brexit debate . the Nat will doubtless shrug this off - perhaps reflect that EU win some , EU lose some . but minister must be more selective in what weapon they deploy in their Brexit battle - especially when taxpayer ' money be at stake .
Avis ' Rakes in £2M ' WITH Brit BREXIT tax car rental giant Avis may have rake in £2.6million with its dodgy Brexit tax . brit hire motor in Europe have be hit with a mysterious charge since the UK vote to leave the EU . the Sun tell yesterday how staff inform cus-tomers it be levy as the vote see the pound ' s value drop . the fee vary from £2.19 to £11 . brit in France and Spain have be charge , but it may have affect thousand more across the EU . just week ago , boss Larry De Shon insist Brexit have virtually no effect on his firm . last night expert predict Avis be likely to have enjoy a multi-million pound windfall . driver call for a boycott of the firm , which also run Budget car hire . motorist ' right campaigner Quentin Willson estimate that @card@ brit hire a car in Europe with Avis and Budget a day . with an average charge of £6 , that would see customer fleece of £2.6million since the June vote . Quentin say : ` ` I ' m sick of hearing of company try to cash in on Brexit . ' ' Avis say the fee be a system error and blame ` ` miscommunication ' ' . it have vow to refund affected customer . mum Carmel Ardrey say Avis charge her £600 after her rental car number plate be nick in Sardinia , Italy .
vote LEAVE in the lead ; EU REFERENDUM Shock ; Poll put Brexiteers @card@ point ahead a Poll last night reveal a swing among voter towards leave the EU . the leave campaign come out four point ahead at @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent for Remain . it be the first time pollster ICM have put Brexit in front after a phone survey . these be see as more trustworthy than online poll . leave be trail by ten point in the middle of May . the turnaround come amid grow concern about immigration . last night pro-Brexit Tory include Boris Johnson and Priti Patel vow to take control by introduce an Aussie-style point system at the border if Brits vote to quit the EU on June @card@ . the pound sink to a oneweek low on currency market as trader react to the ICM survey . a ` ` poll of poll ' ' continue to put Remain in front , @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent , but bookie yesterday cut Brexit odd to @card@ . Ex-Tory election mastermind Sir Lynton Crosby say out campaigner ' focus on immigration be work wonder . he say : ` ` leave have the right position on the issue . ' ' the swing come despite apocalyptic warning from David Cameron and George Osborne that a Brexit will plunge Britain into recession .
the Sun SAYS Brexit blame Whether interest rate go up or down , you can be sure Brexit will cop the blame . after the referendum the Bank of England rashly cut them to @card@ per cent fear economic meltdown . project fear prove nonsense , but the Bank refuse to backtrack . now , to calm inflation ( again , Brexit uncertainty be blame ) , they have finally go back up to @card@ per cent . it ' S a small increase . some borrower will pay a few quid more . but inflation need rein in . and Bank boss Mark Carney want rate at a level he can cut meaningfully to tackle a real crisis . those panick over the first hike in ten year , and blame Brexit , be yet again make fool of themselves .
grow up , EU lot HARDLY a day pass when we be not remind that Scotland have two government . what a pity they ca n't act like grown-up and start work together for the good of the country . Holyrood Brexit Minister Michael Russell say his London colleague be ` ` impolite ' ' . they have cut colleague in Scotland and Wales out of the Euro negotiation and they be promise thing they can not deliver to the EU . Scotland Secretary David Mundell soak up that swing of the handbag , and dish out one of his own . Holyrood minister must ` ` stop playing game ' ' , he say . the Scottish Government need to ` ` get serious ' ' about make progress on the Brexit Bill . well , set aside the fact we be little more than @card@ month away from Brexit and it look like almost no progress have be make . set aside the fact Sir David Edward , a former European Court judge , say the government ' s late paper would have fail as an ` ` undergraduate essay ' ' . set all that aside , and Mr Mundell be right - it be time to get serious . but we have reach a stage where professional politician on both side be reduce to pointless name calling . this be not serve the people of Scotland . come on , people . grow up . or be this playground ' yah-boo ' really why you join up ?
French BREXIT PLOT To DESTROY THE City French minister and bank chief be plot to destroy London ' s financial sector after Brexit , a leak memo reveal . the warning of the arrogant plan come in a document compile by the City ' s Brexit envoy Jeremy Browne . it say the ` ` giddy ' ' confidence create by new Europhile French President Emmanuel Macron have create an ` ` assertive collective endeavour ' ' to ruin the worldleading Square Mile . in his report for the government , Mr Browne say France be scheme to ` ` actively disrupt and destroy ' ' the UK ' s crucial financial industry - even if Paris fail to benefit from the move . he have travel to @card@ member state over the last @card@ month to ` ` make sure the City ' S voice be hear ' ' before Brexit . his memo be send follow talk with the French finance ministry , the French central bank and senator this month - which he describe as ` ` the bad I have have anywhere in the EU ' ' . respond to the threat from France , Economic Secretary to the Treasury Stephen Barclay say it show how vital it be for political party and business to ` ` roll up our sleeve and work together ' ' to make sure Britain get a good Brexit deal .
Brex talk to start on schedule BREXIT talk will begin on Monday in a slap down for doubt Angela Merkel . Britain and the EU issue a joint statement last night to confirm the June @card@ start date , despite Westminster ' S hang Parliament turmoil . Brexit Secretary David Davis and chief EU negotiator Michel Barnier ` ` agree to launch Article @card@ negotiation ' ' , the government say . the divorce talk must conclude by midnight on March @card@ , @card@ , when Britain formally leave the EU . Germany ' S Mrs Merkel have cast doubt on whether Britain would be ready . she say : ` ` we ' re ready . we ' ll see about the rest . ' ' the announcement come as Theresa May battle a Cabinet war over Brexit . Chancellor Philip Hammond will next week call for a soft Brexit to save job , a demand that have infuriate lead Brexiteers .
toxic Tory dump May at their peril ` ` a dead woman walking . ' ' George Osborne , sack by Theresa May , spit out his carefully rehearse verdict with all the relish of a hang judge . the only question , he add , be ` ` how long can she remain on Death Row ? ' ' . it may also be the question that help Theresa may survive . for if she go , her government go with her . a hasty execution would trigger a leadership bloodbath and likely defeat in a consequent election . my crystal ball be in smithereens after Thursday . but you do n't need to be clairvoyant to see the inevitable . Twentysomething millennials enjoy their taste of power . it be their youthful idealism - plus the lure of free university education - which propel a lifelong loser within a whisker of victory . they will turn out in their million to help Jeremy Corbyn across the line next time . Britain would have its first Marxist PM and the most revolutionary left-wing government ever . Theresa May have make the Tory toxic . nobody want her , but they can not afford to lose her . Downing Street be at the mercy of DUP hardliner . a handful of Ulster vote can save or destroy her crippled government . the tail be wag the dog . if life be tough with a majority of @card@ , run a minority regime will be a live nightmare . it will endure the added drama of torrid Brexit negotiation and the tight commons vote to drive them through . Boris Johnson dismiss talk of plot as ` ` ball ' ' . but he believe he be the reincarnation of Winston Churchill , wait in the wing to save the nation . in a party of suit , no other Tory have his ability to seduce non-Tory voter . Boris do wear a suit , but only just . he be equally happy jog in pyjama . people like that sort of thing . whether it qualify him to run the country , steer it through a fraught Brexit jungle and put Britain ' S economy back in shape be another question . he wo n't be hand the job on a plate . Brexit Secretary David Davis be sniff the wind . Chancellor Philip Hammond might stand . Priti Patel could stake a claim by slash Britain ' s bloated aid budget . but a ` ` Boris vs Jezza ' ' contest remain the Tories ' good hope of survival in the short term . meanwhile , Theresa May be on life support . serious Brexit talk begin in day . how will the PM conduct herself with no clear majority and her party once again rive over soft or hard Brexit ? Boris lead the Out campaign but be no zealot until last year ' s shock referendum result . now he believe he must deliver the expectation of most British voter . by contrast , David Davis be a lifelong Europhobe . today he seem more interested in a soft deal with Brussels . we now know Mrs May be also ready to compromise . EU leader be actually hope she would win her promised landslide so she could negotiate a soft deal without risk a Tory backlash . Germany ' S Angela Merkel and newly elect French president Emmanuel Macron be even tip to offer concession on immigration deny to David Cameron in order to keep Britain within the fold . there be talk of Britain join Norway and Iceland and sign up as semidetached member of the European Economic Area . this would delight many Tory , include Brexit supporter , but would be anathema to other . never mind the DUP , a handful of vote by hardline Tory MP could scupper any deal in Europe and reopen the civil war which have curse the party for decade . it would breathe life back into the Ukip corpse and galvanise a campaign to deliver last year ' s ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' referendum vote . mass immigration , still run at @card@ a year , would bounce back to life as the issue which infuriate voter most . meanwhile , as Tory sharpen their knife and stab each other in the back , disturbingly chirpy Jeremy Corbyn be rub his hand like a stun jackpot winner and wait for the longawait revolution . fraught Brexit jungle Reopen the civil war
BREXIT PERIL for ( Euro ) 8BN Tourist BIZ Tourism chief have warn that Brexit and soar price could undo a ` ` remarkable year ' ' in which the sector ' s value to the economy top ( Euro ) 8billion . new figure from the Irish Tourist Industry Confederation reveal that overseas visitor number jump by ten per cent in @card@ . and their ( Euro ) 4.7billion spending spree - on top of the ( Euro ) 1.75billion generate from domestic tripper - have raise hope of another strong year ahead for the industry , which employ more than @card@ people . but ITIC boss Eoghan O'Mara Walsh yesterday insist that it be ` ` vital that we chart a path for sustainable growth ' ' . he say : ` ` a hard Brexit would be damaging to Irish tourism . ` ` it be vital that in negotiation between the UK and the EU the Common Travel Area and liberalise air access right be retain . ' ' O'Mara Walsh also warn that Dublin hotel run at near-full capacity threaten the creation of @card@ job in @card@ , add : ` ` if demand and supply of bed be out of sync , there will be upward pressure on price . ' '
bid to block Brexit be insult to democracy ; Scottish Sun
good time to grab a mortgage ; BUYERS Benefit From BREXIT Mr money uncertainty in financial market mean borrower can be sure of one thing - a mortgage price war be under way and they will be the winner . lender fear that Brexit jitter may put some potential home buyer off , so they be go all-out attract any business they can . and they be already factor the Bank of England ' s expect cut in the base rate next month to @card@ per cent , so rate be come down . Rachel Springall of Moneyfacts say : ` ` the Brexit vote have definitely fuel uncertainty . ` ` but despite all this , it ' S still good time for borrower to grab a decent mortgage deal . ` ` lender be lock in a heated price war to attract new business , make this the perfect time to take editor ss ke ds , e advantage of low rate . ' ' David Hollingworth from broker London & Country add : ` ` market expectation be that the base rate will stay low for long . ` ` as a result , lender have be able to cut fix rate even low , especially the long-term product . ' ' this be great news for those thinking about remortgaging , as there be now the chance to reduce outgoings by move to a cheap fix deal . here , expert give their top tip n make the most of the deal . think CAREFULLY ABOUT FIXING with so much uncertainty in the air , the security offer by a fixed-rate deal may seem very appealing . there be currently very competitive ten-year fix available , such as Coventry Building Society ' s deal at a record low of @card@ per cent . this give you the peace of mind of know that whatever happen in the come week and month , your mortgage payment will stay the same until @card@ . but Mark Harris from mortgage broker SPF private client warn : ` ` whether you should fix for this long depend on your circumstance . ` ` if you fix for long than you be absolutely sure about , you may find you have to pay a hefty early redemption charge to get out of the mortgage during the fix term . ' ' do THE MATHS it be also essential that you check the number before settle on a ten-year fix , or any new mortgage deal for that matter . this be because while some will come with low rate , they will also have high fee . David Hollingworth from London & Country add : ` ` these low-rate deal can carry big fee of £1,500 . ` ` Borrowers with small mortgage can often find good value in a deal with low switching cost , despite a slightly high rate . ' '
PM May be be humiliate by EU ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think when be this government go to say enough be enough ? first it be the EU negotiator dictate to us . now it be the Republic of Ireland try to push us around . this be become humiliate . it be time to say , ` ` take it or leave it ' ' to the EU . if our PM be frighten of stand up to the bully of Brussels , perhaps she should resign and make way for someone who will . David FOAKES by email if Northern Ireland be allow to stay in a trading and travel arangement with Ireland as it have at the moment , what ' S to stop Scotland have the same kind of deal after Brexit ? and how would that be a ` ` unite Kingdom ' ' ? this whole negotiation process have show that the UK be entirely unprepared for deal with the Brexit vote - and it seem Brexit wo n't mean Brexit at all . Brian Patterson Glasgow THE EU be make a big deal over nothing with the Northern Ireland . its border can be leave open just like Switzerland , who be not in the EU . a deal could easily be do on this subject . it be just them try to make a deal harder for us . Pete LAMBELL by Email My Christmas wish be that someone in parliament would put forward a motion of no confidence in this government name Boris Johnson , Davies , the Chancellor , and of course the PM as unfit for the job . how can anyone believe this government when we can not trust anything they say ? we will be sell down the river owe billion under EU law and tell ` ` we try our good ' ' . Hugh Campbell Coatbridge , Lanarkshire NOW that the RBS be close branch all over the place , can I suggest RBS customer withdraw all their money and account . Davy Matson Abington , Lanarkshire WE be tell in @card@ , that business would close with independence . thanks to the toxic Tory and their idiotic Brexit , bank be close branch , ship order be down , @card@ job could go , and food price up , it ' s time Scot wake up and remember all the break promise . William Weir by email so MP Damian Green be on the ' naughty list ' . once the number reach @card@ , I predict a film be make call ` ` @card@ shade of man in Grey Suits ' ' . Tracey di Bona by email SO much for Kezia Dugdale use I ' m a celebrity to talk about Labour policy . she do n't seem to say very much while in the jungle , and pocket at least a five-figure fee and have a wee holiday in Australia as well . yeah , Kez , the people ' S party right enough . James Elliot Hamilton
MP ' Fury Over BBC BREXIT Bias FURIOUS MP yesterday accuse the BBC of an anti-Brexit bias . a cross-party group - include Tory backbencher Philip Davies , Labour MP Kate Hoey and the DUP ' S Ian Paisley Jr - hold showdown talk with the broadcaster ' s head of news James Harding . it come amid grow fury at the BBC ' s coverage since the Brexit vote a year ago . analysis of a series of show on Radio @card@ last year find listener be two-and-a-half time more likely to hear a pro-EU speaker than an anti-EU one . one MP tell the Sun : ` ` this be about how we make sure there be a more positive light put on Brexit over the next two year . the main thing be look for a code of practice or new guideline to ensure that the BBC be impartial . ' ' Tory Eurosceptic MP Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` the BBC be good prior to the referendum - but it have be extraordinarily bad afterwards . ' ' the BBC say : ` ` BBC News remain commit to cover development in a fair and impartial manner . ' '
Lucie : EU lot cost me win at Eurovision ; Email : dan.wootton
Nic ' S Indy Threat ON Euro Deal Nicola Sturgeon yesterday warn she could call a second independence vote next year if Westminster trigger a formal Brexit move with no UK-wide agreement . the First Minister say : ` ` the Scottish Parliament be make preparation to have another referendum if we find ourselves in that position . ' ' but she suggest Scotland could stay in the UK and the EU . PM Theresa May have insist she will not trigger EU Article @card@ - the formal mechanism for Britain to leave - until she agree ` ` objective ' ' with Holyrood . but Brexit Secretary David Davis rule out a Scots veto on Brexit and suggest Article @card@ would be activate ` ` by the start of next year ' ' . Ms Sturgeon add : ` ` I will have an independence referendum if I think that ' S in the interest of Scotland . ' ' it come as Ex-SNP leader Gordon Wilson call for the Yes campaign to be revive ` ` to bring support for independence up to @card@ per cent and coerce London to concede a fresh referendum ' ' . the Sun say - Page Eight
REBELEVEN ; BACKLASH AFTER PM ' S DEFEAT ; Tories ' fury at Brexit mutineer ' celebration Cabinet Ministers be last night fight to hold back angry Tory call for the party to throw out @card@ Brexit rebel . Michael Gove step in as member in Heidi Allen ' s Cambridgeshire seat become the first to call publicly for the deselection of their local MP . seething conservative round on the EU rebel after some be see celebrate in Parliament moment after inflict the humiliate defeat on the PM on Wednesday . ask if they should be oust by the party membership , Tory MP Henry Smith say : ` ` I think they have let down the British people . ' ' but Environment Secretary Mr Gove back call for calm with an anti-deselection message that claim : ` ` nothing could be less British . ' ' in a day of high drama in Westminster , it also emerge Theresa May could scrap plan to insert the Brexit date in EU Withdrawal Bill legislation next week to avoid defeat . Nicky Morgan say she and her fellow rebel be prepare to go up against the government again . their ringleader Dominic Grieve say he ' d get death threat since the vote . and Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson insist the vote give MP a say on the final Brexit deal would n't prevent us leave . but Remain source say they now believe the chance of prevent it have shoot up from five per cent to @card@ . tension be escalate after picture emerge of the rebel celebrate in Parliament ' S gild Pugin Room bar . Anna Soubry , below leave , be force to deny claim she be drink bubbly . weW Tory MP also bicker in their private WhatsApp group over party loyalty . praG respond to report of threat against Mr Grieve , a Government official say : ` ` no politician should face threat . ' ' ss
EU GOTA Deal ; BREXIT Bill Decision Brussels claim £52bn talk victory Britain have offer to only pay £38bn Fresh hope of a December Brexit breakthrough be raise after Brussels official say a deal have be do on the controversial divorce payment . the claim emerge from the EU side just a week after PM Theresa May signal she be willing to up Britain ' s offer to £38billion to get talk move . but British negotiator deny sign up to a bill of between £42billion and £52billion . official in Brexit Secretary David Davis ' S department say they do not recognise the figure and insist talk be continue in Brussels . a further sign of movement come as Michel Barnier travel to Berlin to talk number . the tight-lipped EU chief negotiator meet with German leader Angela Merkel and her top team last night . meanwhile , attention turn towards the crunch EU meeting to potentially give Brexit trade talk the green light on @card@ December . EU source tell the Telegraph a deal be seal in a behind-thescenes flurry of meeting with British official last week - and Mrs May talk sum with EU chief . but last night Mr Davis ' S department insist these ` ` intensive talk continue to take place in Brussels this week as we seek to reach an agreement ' ' . the Foreign Office reveal it be bring diplomat back from around the world to help secure the Brexit deal . Foreign Minister Sir Alan Duncan tell MP that a number of civil servant post in place like Afghanistan and other Asian country be be reduce to pay for @card@ new position in EU country . Brussels have be blast over plan for a new Parisian guesthouse that critic fear could be a love nest for MEPs and Eurocrats . EU official be to splurge £270,000 of taxpayer ' cash on land just outside the French capital , with proposal to build a luxury lodge for guest attend conference .
Nat farm attack at ' EU cash grab bid ' Nicola Sturgeon warn of a Westminster cash grab after Ruth Davidson suggest farm subsidy would be pay by Holyrood tax after Brexit . the First Minister say the UK Government want to keep the money that would no longer go to Brussels and leave Scotland to replace EU payment to farmer . at o tyat a-e ' ' . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` that be completely unacceptable . they intend to use Brexit to seize power . ' ' Nou ` ` Holyrood and Westminster be battle over who will control current EU power over farming and fishery after Brexit . d se e : e on the subsidy , Ms Davidson say ahead of the Scottish Tory conference : ` ` do it come out of the Scottish Parliament ' S budget and they have to levy additional taxation for it ? or be we assume it come from the Treasury ? ' ' dvy ? it ' '
' small hit ' to Brexit economy Any Brexit blow to the economy will be small , say respected academic as manufacturing confidence hit a two-year high . project fear scaremongering have ` ` little basis in reality ' ' accord to a study by three Cambridge economics professor . their Brexit forecast model show shrink in economic output be ` ` never much more than one per cent and soon recover ' ' . professor Graham Gudgin , Ken Coutts and Neil Gibson say any change be ` ` project to be only a little low than it might have be in the absence of a leave vote ' ' . they conclude Britain ' s ` ` economic outlook be grey rather than black , but this would have be the case with or without Brexit ' ' . their finding be back by the late economic good news , after a week of record-breaking FTSE closing high . and manufacturing sector confidence show a leap to a 2½-year high in December thanks to an export boost .
le gong for FT French kiss the editor of the Financial Times have be slam after brag about get an award from the French for bash Brexit . newspaper boss Lionel Barber tweet a friend say he have be offer the Legion d'Honneur for his ` ` positive role in the European debate ' ' . but MP yesterday say he should refuse it for ` ` further the interest of a foreign government ' ' at the expense of Britain . his paper run a series of anti-Brexit story before the June @card@ poll , and continue to do so in its aftermath . one headline before the poll announce , ` ` Brexit dominate fear for the global economy ' ' while comment piece warn a leave vote ` ` put UK company in the bargain basement ' ' and that ` ` the repercussion in Europe will be incalculable ' ' . the Queen will have to give Mr Barber permission to receive the honour . but Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` I would be surprise if the Queen allow him to accept it . ` ` it appear this be be give for help a foreign power achieve its foreign policy objective . ' ' Tory MP Philip Davies joke : ` ` if they give him the Legion d'Honneur for lose the Referendum , presumably they ' d have make him president if Remain have win . ' '
year we go Nicola Sturgeon be due back today from a 10-day holiday in Portugal . aside from the weather back home , we imagine there be one topic dominate the poolside chat with husband Peter Murrell , the SNP chief exec . not if , but when should the Nat call a second indy referendum ? in the dramatic aftermath of the Brexit vote , Ms Sturgeon warn that she could hold a re-run of the @card@ poll if there be no other way of keep Scotland in the EU . as Professor John Curtice point out yesterday , the First Minister might have to get a move on if she be to pull it off . he be among a grow number of expert who warn there ' s a limited window for a vote on the back of Brexit . the argument go that Scotland have to give itself plenty of time to negotiate membership before the UK formally leave . and the two-year countdown start when Theresa May and her Brexit Secretary David Davis trigger so-called ` ` Article @card@ ' ' . Davis want the process kick off by the start of @card@ . SNP strategist be say to be tot up whether they can win a referendum next year - less than half way through the two-year divorce process . back in June , it look rosy for indy backer , with a huge swing to Yes report within day of the Brexit vote after a majority of Scot have vote to stay in the EU . now the dust have settle , the most recent poll point to the pendulum swing back towards the pro-union side . it would be plain daft to predict what will happen next . just look at the event that have tear up the political landscape in the last few month . there be no reason to believe it will not be another topsy-turvy @card@ month in Scottish politics . the way thing be shape up , it ' S just possible this could be a year when Ms Sturgeon realise the Nat ' dream . or come crash down to earth .
dismay ; Sturgeon COULD Veto LEAVING EU Theresa in hint at delay to Brexit plan she want all UK to have say on leave include the Scot who vote Remain Theresa May spook hardline Brexit campaigner yesterday by hint she could delay Britain ' s divorce from the EU to please Scotland . Love-bombing Scots First Minister Nicola Sturgeon on her first trip as PM , Mrs May say it be critical that every corner of the UK be on board before she trigger Article @card@ - thus begin the two-year countdown to separation . after a brief meeting in Edinburgh , the PM say she want Scotland to be ` ` fully engaged ' ' in draw up Brexit plan and will ` ` listen to any option they bring forward ' ' . she add : ` ` I ' m very clear I want the Scottish government involve and I want to get the well possible deal for the entire United Kingdom . ` ` I ' ve already say I wo n't be trigger Article @card@ until I think we have a United Kingdom approach and objective for the negotiation . ' ' last week new Brexit Minister David Davis have say Britain ' s split from the EU could begin ` ` before or by the start of next year ' ' , mean Brexit by January @card@ . insider yesterday rush to play down Mrs May ' S comment . one source say : ` ` the remark be be over-interpreted . the Prime Minister be willing to listen to option but it ' S not in any way about give Scotland a veto . ' ' but arch Tory Eurosceptic Steve Baker tell the Sun : ` ` we can not allow any one region of the UK to prevent the democratic will of the people from be carry out . ` ` Theresa May say , ' Brexit mean Brexit ' . I do believe she will carry through with her promise . she will have to , to hold the Conservative party together . ' ' Fellow Tory backbencher Bernard Jenkin say the new PM have his ` ` unqualified support ' ' , add : ` ` I do believe pressure will mount for us to move far more quickly on this . ' ' Ms Sturgeon have repeatedly demand Scotland be allow to stay in the EU , give @card@ per cent of Scot vote to remain . she promise to explore every option and threaten a second independence vote if Scotland be drag out ` ` against its will ' ' . but Mrs May dismiss a Scotland referendum out of hand . she say : ` ` as far as I ' m concerned , the Scottish people have their vote . ' ' insider say yesterday ' S visit show just how tough the Brexit negotiation will be for the PM and her new government . Mrs May , who campaign for Remain , be already under intense pressure from Eurocrats to trigger Article @card@ and get on with Brexit . European Parliament chief Martin Schulz last month say : ` ` hesitate simply to accommodate the party tactic of the British Conservatives hurt everyone . ` ` that be why we expect the British government to now deliver . ' ' expert suggest the Prime Minister ' s big challenge before start the process will be determine how to safeguard free trade at the same time as win back control over EU immigration . speak after their meeting , Ms Sturgeon say the government do not appear to know ` ` where to go ' ' on its option . but she say she be assure by the PM it would be ` ` open and flexible ' ' to option as it work out its bargaining position . she add : ` ` I be very please that Theresa May say that she be absolutely willing to consider any option that the Scottish government now bring forward to secure Scotland ' s relationship with the EU . ` ` I have be very clear that we have to make sure Scotland ' S interest be protect and I want to examine every option of do that . ` ` we ' re politician from very different part of the political spectrum . but look , she ' s a woman who I think have a very business-like way of do thing that I have too , which be why I think we can find a way of work together . ' ' No10 official last night insist that the government ' S position ` ` have not change ' ' follow Mrs May ' s trip to Scotland . a spokesman say : ` ` the Prime Minister have be very clear that it will take time for the UK Government to agree its position for the negotiation . that have not change . ` ` as part of this we will of course engage fully with the Scottish government and listen to their view . ' ' Scottish Secretary David Mundell yesterday warn that any deal that keep Scotland both in the UK and the EU would be ` ` fanciful ' ' . he add : ` ` I certainly do n't think that it be possible for Scotland to remain within the EU and the rest of the UK to be out of the EU . ' ' Britain will have to poach the trade negotiator it need back from Brussels , David Cameron ' S former Brexit chief have reveal . Oliver Letwin say the government do not have a single specialist of sufficient calibre , add : ` ` the trade negotiator who be brit be basically work for the EU . ' '
do n't bow to Irish bully ;
Brexit vote just ruin the Party ; CILLIAN ON LATEST Movie WOES CILLIAN Murphy have tell how Brexit change the mood on the set of his new film . the Irish actor play a guest in the Party , which focus on a disastrous dinner host by a newlypromoted politician . write and direct by Sally Potter , the blackand-white film be set in a London house and be complete in just @card@ day . however , the schedule coincide with the shock result of the UK ' s Brexit referendum in June @card@ . the vote to leave the EU have a huge impact on the cast , all of whom have differ opinion . speak at the film ' s premiere in London , Murphy reveal how it be a case of life imitate art as the actor struggle to come to term with the vote . he say : ` ` it be such a close result and democracy work and that be the way it have to be . ` ` but on our set people be profoundly affect and sad and shocked and then there be people who be delight . ' ' he add : ` ` it ' s our duty as artist to shine a light on what be go on , or hold a mirror up to society . it ' S not up to us to tell you how to feel . ' ' the 41-year-old Corkman be cast as a ` ` ridiculously l l h handsome banker ' ' with a cocaine habit in the tragi-comedy . he star opposite Kristin Scott Thomas , who play an ambitious politician who have just be make shadow minister for health . the Four Weddings and a Funeral actress admit that she too feel the impact of the Brexit result while film , say : ` ` what hss pEvs happen during the shoot change the atmosphere quite drastically . ` ` for a start so many people on that set be Europeans and we all feel very European and it be such a shock that other people in Britain do n't feel the same way . ' ' the release of the Party come at a prolific time for Murphy , who will shortly return to our screen in season four of the period crime drama Peaky Blinders . the Dunkirk star also tell how he be particular about the role he accept , explain : ` ` I quite like go to extreme , only if the role or the material justify it . good writing be the only thing that I look for . ` ` and if you have a good director , you ' re hopefully in a position to challenge yourself and improve . they ' re my type of criterion . ' '
the Sun SAYS Junck bond what the preposterous oaf Jean-Claude Juncker say about Brexit should be of zero significance to anyone , especially this side of the Channel . he be a habitual liar who typify the Brussels arrogance that fuel the Brexit vote . so when he say our government ' S position be unsatisfactory , who care ? sadly , some seem to . diehard Remainers desperate to reverse Brexit or see it fail seize on Juncker ' S every self-serving snippet as ` ` evidence ' ' of our government ' S failing . but what else would he say ? that he have never encounter a negotiate strategy so meticulously construct ? we do have a couple of reservation of our own - not least that our team do n't think Brexit talk urgent enough to disrupt their Bank Holiday . but what we ' ve see from them so far have look eminently reasonable . unlike the childish , posture amateur in Brussels briefing endlessly against them .
the Sun SAYS EU ' s own goal hostility from Brussels will not intimidate most brit . in fact it be harden heart against the EU . that be true not just of Brexit voter but of many Remainers . yes , some diehard will cheer Brussels on as it try to land blow on Britain . many more reluctantly accept they lose the referendum and want now to get on with Brexit for good or bad . they have no enthusiasm for a long , divisive and ultimately futile resistance . they just want it negotiate competently and out of the way . they also accept there be no ` ` hard Brexit ' ' , just Brexit . leave the single market and custom union be the only logical consequence of the vote last June . EU chief Jean-Claude Juncker clearly have no grasp of history . he underestimate British resolve , even among those who wish we could stay in . they see him browbeat our PM and begin to wonder what they ever really see in the EU . bully voter and impose its will through deceit have work time and again for Brussels . it wo n't this time , with this people .
Indy and Out ; Nic WINS REF Vote ..AS PM Signs BREXIT Letter ; Sturgeon VOW ON Poll Battle Nicola Sturgeon be poise to fight for her right to hold IndyRef2 before Brexit - as Theresa May today kickstarts Britain ' s EU departure . the First Minister be draw up battle plan to force Westminster to allow another independence poll between autumn @card@ and spring @card@ . speak after MSPs vote in favour of that timeline last night , she say it would be ` ` democratically indefensible ' ' for the Prime Minister to block it . but Mrs May - who yesterday sign the official Brexit document that she will send today to EU president Donald Tusk - want to delay any referendum until after her government ' S talk with Brussel be complete . Ms Sturgeon have now vow to announce her strategy when MSPs return to Holyrood in two week after the Easter break . she say : ` ` let me be clear , I want the UK to get a good deal from these negotiation - whatever path Scotland take in the future , that be in our interest . ` ` I simply want Scotland to have a choice when the time be right . ` ` so I hope the UK Government respect the will of this parliament . ` ` if it do so , I will enter discussion in good faith and willingness to compromise . ` ` however , if it choose not to do so , I will return to parliament after the Easter recess to set out the step the Scottish government will take to progress the will of parliament . ' ' MSPs vote @card@ in favour of hold IndyRef2 before the UK leave the EU . Mrs May have already insist ` ` now be not the time ' ' for it . she be back by Scottish Secretary David Mundell , who say : ` ` we wo n't enter into negotiation on another referendum until the Brexit process be complete . ` ` we do n't know how long that process will take . it will involve negotiation with the EU , it may involve significant implementation time . ' ' at Holyrood , Ms Sturgeon claim the PM have be ` ` crystal clear ' ' on Monday that detail of Brexit would be know ` ` some time between the autumn of next year and the spring of @card@ ' ' . but Tory leader Ruth Davidson refuse to believe her version of the meeting with Mrs May in Glasgow . in an angry outburst , she say : ` ` I ca n't believe the one person she ' d take into her confidence be the First Minister , who could n't wait to rush out to the bank of microphone . ' ' when Ms Sturgeon try to intervene , Ms Davidson snap : ` ` sit down . ' ' she continue : ` ` this be just the SNP cooking up the same old recipe for division . ` ` take one unworkable proposal . add in some green . stir in grievance . and bring to the boil . ` ` it might have work once but it stink - and most people in Scotland be n't buy it . ' ' the IndyRef2 motion be back by the Nat and Greens . it be oppose by the Tories , Lib Dems and Labour , whose leader Kezia Dugdale say : ` ` let ' s not pretend this push for another divisive referendum reflect the will of the people - @card@ per cent of the population vote in the last referendum . ` ` we vote decisively to remain in the UK . that ' s the will of the people and it should be respect . ` ` my message to the First Minister remain unchanged - we be divide enough , do not divide us again . ' ' Lib Dem chief Willie Rennie say : ` ` we stand on a manifesto to oppose a divisive referendum and we will continue to do that . ' ' but the Greens ' Ross Greer say : ` ` it should be our responsibility , as those elect by the people of Scotland , to fight for their right to choose their own future . ' ' Ms Sturgeon be expect to make a formal request to Westminster later this week for a Section @card@ order - which be need to make a referendum legally binding . last night a UK Government spokeswoman say : ` ` the Prime Minister have be clear that now be not the time for an independence referendum , and we will not be enter into negotiation on the Scottish Government ' S proposal . ` ` at this point all our focus should be on our negotiation with the EU , make sure we get the right deal for the whole of the UK . ` ` it would be unfair to ask people to make a crucial decision without information about our relationship with Europe or what an independent Scotland would look like . ' '
may ' S TRIPLE BREXIT BLAST ; PM A VOGUE Cover Star ; lSingle market axe ; lCourt & custom KO Theresa May will unveil her masterplan for a ` ` swift and clean ' ' Brexit this week , vow : ` ` we ' re on our way out . ' ' the PM will announce a triple whammy departure from the EU to be trigger within @card@ day . it will take Britain out of the single market , out of European judge ' control and out of the custom union - give minister freedom to strike trade deal around the world . Senior source promise she will ` ` nag and cajole ' ' our @card@ European partner to get the good deal for all . Mrs May say she will fight hard to keep trading with the EU but have no fear of walk away if they refuse an agreement . in a speech to diplomat , she be expect to say : ` ` the overwhelming majority of people - however they vote - say we need to get on and make Brexit happen . ` ` Business be n't call to reverse the result but plan to make a success of it . and the House of Commons vote overwhelmingly for us to get on with it too . ' ' Tuesday ' S speech , bill as the Plan for Britain , will be use as a shop window for global representative wait to do business with the UK . but she be not prepare to budge on end free movement as a price for stay in the trade club . former Chancellor Lord Lawson back the PM ' S plan . he say : ` ` this be not a hard Brexit . it be Brexit . ' ' but Labour be plot to challenge Mrs May . Leader Jeremy Corbyn will use the Tories ' expect defeat in the Supreme Court this month to force her to give MP a final EU vote . should the move not win enough MP vote , the party will use its position in the Lords to demand it . meanwhile , driver will be able to return white oval GB sticker to their motor after Brexit and abandon EU number plate , it emerge last night .
may for BREXIT TALKS Jan VISIT THE UK ' S PM be come to Dublin next month for crunch talk on Brexit with Enda Kenny . Theresa May will hold discussion with the Taoiseach before she trigger Article @card@ by the end of March , which will start the clock on Britain ' s exit from the EU . speak to reporter in Government Buildings , Kenny say : ` ` I will have a meeting with Theresa May in Dublin by the end of January and I welcome that when I speak to her in Brussels last week . ' ' in February , Kenny will hold a further plenary session of the All Island Civic Dialogue committee in Dublin Castle , and it will look at the potential fallout from Brexit . and the Taoiseach insist that retention of the Good Friday Agreement will be crucial to the talk - include the promise of a potential vote on a unite Ireland . he also tell reporter : ` ` I be over with Prime Minister Theresa May and we agree a few thing . one , no return to a hard border . two , no derogation from the benefit of the Common Travel Area . these be very important principle that have be build up between Britain and Ireland for a very , very long time indeed . ' '
keep SNP out of Brexit talk as Nicola Sturgeon want another Scottish independence vote , the SNP should not join in the Brexit negotiation . they will not be aim for the good UK deal and will instead do their hard to sabotage any negotiation in an attempt to overturn Brexit for the benefit of Scotland only . David Hadden by email so Superwoman Nicola Sturgeon have emerge from the mist again - two year after the Scottish referendum no vote , she begin her next move . ` ` move over Mrs May , I be the leader of this great country of ours . ' ' this woman will do anything to try to split the UK . I would love to know her forecast for Scotland ' s gross domestic product without the support of the UK Government . Norman Jones Llangefni , Isle of Anglesey Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon blame the Tory party for Brexit yet it be the public who make the decision - exactly the same as the fact it be the Scottish people who state no to independence . she seem to think that Scotland be a member of the EU when in fact it be the UK that be the member state . Theresa May need to call her bluff and begin the Article @card@ process now . Keith Cornish Exeter , Devon be there a remote island somewhere off the coast of Scotland that we can give to Nicola Sturgeon ? she can then realise her dream and declare it independent and stop annoy the rest of the UK . Jim Saunders Peterborough , Cambs it be the job of MP to serve the public . and the public vote for Brexit . I ' m glad Theresa May have refuse MP a Commons vote before trigger Article @card@ . the people have make their choice . sandy Sanford Poole , Dorset Unilever boss Paul Polman should be horsewhip for his greedy attempt to up the price of Marmite while lay the blame on Brexit . good on Tesco for show loyalty to customer by refuse to give in to such blackmail . Robert MYERS Newcastle upon Tyne Well do to Tesco for stick to its gun when Unilever try to raise its price . sell all our manufacturing business to foreign company be come back to haunt us . Let ' s start make our own again . David Hall Dagenham , Essex Unilever seem to want the good of both world . with the pound so low , the dollar buy more UK ingredient for its good . then it can sell them to other country for more profit - pure greed . Vince Lowery Seaham , Co Durham TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply Theresa May should call a snap election . then we can kick out the MP who do n't understand democracy . anon so , more firm will try Brexit blackmail - then we just wo n't buy their product . J Kenny , Kent it ' S time all the MP who vote to remain in the EU resign . they do n't represent the electorate . Norman Applegate , Hull when will we see Trump and Clinton ' S policy , instead of catfighting ? anon email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
you ' Re A PLONKER To Cheer AT BREXIT it will come as no surprise that I have be follow the fallout from the UK ' s Brexit vote of June @card@ very closely . there be endless spat and turf war occur in the cabinet of the new British Prime Minister Theresa May . this be not surprising give the rather ' large ' personality of some of the new minister involve . Brexit be bad news from the point of view of currency , business , investment , job and much more . however , there be some people literally raise a glass to the British decision to leave the EU . it seem that wine merchant have have an unexpected boost from the Brexit fallout , with wine sale reportedly reach a five-year high last month . the reason for this be that many of the top French wine be hold in warehouse in the UK and be price in sterling . this mean that when the pound plummet after the vote of the British people to leave the UK , international buyer of very fine wine find that they could benefit from a ten per cent reduction in the price of these very fine wine . I suppose it may be a small consolation to wealthy business owner who see their firm suffer loss in the wake of the Brexit vote - they could drown their sorrow with a nice Bordeaux wine for a fraction of the cost .
Tories Must GET Clear ON BREXIT Britain need to get on the front foot in the Brexit talk . one of the major challenge in any negotiation be to have your draft as the basis for discussion . the government be fail to achieve this . this be , in part , because its proposal be not detailed enough . some of the rumour about Britain not be prepare for the talk be EU gamesmanship . they be very keen to suggest that they be ready and we be not . but Whitehall insider admit the pace of preparation for the Brexit negotiation be not what it should have be - that the government have spend too long make up its mind on various issue and not enough on discuss how to make thing work . much of the blame for this be pin on the pre-election No10 , whose desire to take every decision create a massive bottleneck . I understand that the government be think of a major speech in September - possibly by the Prime Minister - set out more of its thinking on Brexit and transition arrangement . this speech can not come soon enough . for the government need to offer great clarity on what it want our path out of the European Union to look like . at the same time , it must n't forget the reason why Britain decide to leave the EU . any Brexit deal that do n't allow this country to , in time , negotiate its own trade agreement would not deliver the change that the nation vote for .
now be time to back May what be wrong with Tory MP ? yes , Prime Minister Theresa May make a wrong call in hold a snap election , but they should now get behind her to fight for a good Brexit . then , if she do not come up to scratch they can talk about make a change . do n't send her into battle with one hand tie behind her back . Denis Marshall Worthing , West Sussex in her manifesto , Theresa May have a hard line on Brexit while Jeremy Corbyn want a soft approach to leave the EU . the result be @card@ constituency for May and @card@ for Corbyn - which imply May ' S mandate be more popular . so why do politician now think a hard Brexit be out of the question ? just like the referendum vote , politician do n't like the result so try to influence them . Keith Cornish Exeter BEING a so-called working-class conservative , I would like to warn the top knob - if you do not back your Prime Minister it will show you ' re just like the Labour Party ... spineless . you will do irreparable damage to your party ' s credibility for year to come . bill Granger Brighton Tory MP need to get behind Theresa May instead of stab her in the back and let her get on with the job . the public need to look at themselves too for bail out on her in her hour of need and voting for a party that can only lead this country to ruin . Chris Smith Northolt , Middx I WOULD like to thank Theresa May for stay on as PM in a very difficult situation , unlike her predecessor David Cameron who throw his toy out of the pram when thing do not go his way . Jacqueline Miller Southport for Theresa May to go ahead with Brexit negotiation will result in an unmitigated disaster . it would be good to delay talk and hold a second General Election later this year . a reinvigorate Tory Party and a leader who have a strong determination to deliver on the referendum , but who also engage the electorate over the issue of most concern , will deliver a huge mandate for Brexit . Raymond Rapson Cheltenham , Gloucs POLITICIANS have call for Mrs May to resign say she should stop Brexit . she do not lose vote over Brexit . she lose vote because she go against OAPs like me because the Tories think they have no opposition and could do anything they want . Clive Horner Melksham , Wilts as a life-long Tory it give me no pleasure to say Theresa May should either step down or be vote out as soon as possible . she have be promote beyond her capability and show terrible judgment in all aspect of the election - even call one in the first place . she have alienate conservative such as myself and strengthen Jeremy Corbyn ' s position as Labour leader . Derek Field Middlesbrough if our youngster be be feed extreme right-wing view then rightly something would be do to stop this . but nothing seem to be do to stop the extreme left-wing view be feed to the young generation in school , university and via social medium . Paul Spracklen Winchester , Hants While not a fan of Theresa May , I find it baffle that young people have blame the conservative for tuition fee . Tony Blair ' S government introduce student fee in @card@ . so I wonder how many of the young socialist have consider how they will ever afford to buy a property if we adopt the ` ` soft ' ' Brexit so favour by Jeremy Corbyn . maintain free movement of European citizen will ensure there ' s a housing shortage . Jim Sokol Banbury , Oxon if , after the bad campaign ever by the Tory Party , Corbyn be still behind , when will he ever win ? after all , the Tory Party will never perform this badly again . Paul Brazier Kingswood , Gloucs TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply now we have no political party dictate , when an issue come up can the politician not just decide if it ' s good for us ? or be I ask too much of the people elect to represent us ? mark , York Stop talk up the election result as a disaster and get on with the people ' S mandate over Brexit and show the world we mean business in a unite way . T P Kemp , Bristol why ca n't Tories work with Labour about Brexit ? it ' s what ' s good for Britain not about score point against each other . Jim NEWHOWE , Runcorn , Cheshire Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
true or false THERE be some thing that politician just never do . one of the cardinal rule be not to accuse their opponent of lie . so it be a sign of how desperate relation between the government at Westminster and Holyrood have become when SNP Brexit Minister Michael Russell be prepare to come right out and accuse the Tory government of not tell the truth . his basis for that be this week ' S Supreme Court judgement . it state that the deal forbid Westminster from pass legislation which affect Scotland without Holyrood ' S permission be , for all intent and purpose , worthless . the agreement be actually write into the late version of the Scotland Act . but in spite of all the fanfare and hooplah , it be word in such woolly term that Westminster can pretty much do what it like . that verdict can not be a surprise to anybody - least of all Mr Russell - and he ' S probably more than a little bit please to see it actually write down in black and white . it fit exactly with the SNP version of history that it want to get across and keep on repeat . that be , the notion that the Westminster Government ca n't be trust . that Scotland be be ignore and sweep aside in the rush towards Brexit . so far , at least , there have be no sign that Theresa May and her colleague be willing to acknowledge advice or opinion from anybody else . last week ' s big speech reject everything suggest in the Scottish Government ' s Brexit policy paper contain a firm promise to consider it fully . tellingly , the speech also come before the Welsh Government ' S paper have even be deliver . that be in spite of Mrs May ' s promise just day after take office that she want a Brexit position agree by the whole of the UK . with just week to go before she fire the start gun on Brexit , it would be nice to see the Prime Minister make at least some kind of offer to the devolve nation of the UK . there ' s a big difference between agree with somebody and simply tell them what to do .
the Sun SAYS Crush pro-EU saboteur , PM Sun THE Brexit saboteur of the Commons and Lords must be face down and crush . it be not their blind devotion to the EU we mind . it ' S the fork-tongued deceit . the suggestion they have some noble motive beyond simply reverse the referendum result they can not get over . their ever-so-reasonable concern for ` ` know a few more detail ' ' of Theresa May ' s strategy before back an Article @card@ Bill be entirely phony . article @card@ do only one thing . it serve notice on the EU . it be not dependent on ` ` type ' ' of Brexit . a politician voting for it straightforwardly accept the majority ' s verdict on June @card@ . those delay it with endless amendment intend to kill it , to see their will prevail over the electorate ' S . this affront to democracy be bad enough from the likes of Nick Clegg , the ex-Lib Dem leader whose genius reduce his party from @card@ MP to eight . or Labour pipsqueak Owen Smith , notable only for fail to topple Jeremy Corbyn . but at least they be elect . not so the preposterous Patience Wheatcroft , self-styled chief Brexit denier in the Lords . ` ` it be only right to delay trigger Article @card@ until we have a clear idea of what it entail , ' ' the baroness grandly pronounce - every duplicitous word a new nail in the House of Lords ' coffin . because , make no mistake , that Chamber be on borrow time . it be always controversial for a 21st century democracy to retain an unelected second house . at least we use to value its occasional wisdom . now that it be pack with talentless crony , fleece taxpayer while plot to subvert their will , how can anyone argue for it ? the Lords need total reinvention with far few peer , able still to scrutinise law but unable to thwart the public will or that of the government we elect . it be absurd for Remainers like Wheatcroft to pretend to be still in the dark . the government have pledge post-Brexit to take back control of UK law , include on immigration , and establish ` ` the free possible market ' ' with the EU and beyond . it can not possibly give away its entire negotiate strategy before it sit down with the EU . yet Clegg hope to hold Article @card@ up in the commons until the PM commit to a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit ( ` ` no ' ' Brexit , in other word ) and a second referendum . he be derange by europhilia . Mrs May will not want to call an election next year for many sound reason , practical and political . but if Remainers ' endless amendment stall an Article @card@ bill she must be ready to call their bluff and do so . she would annihilate Corbyn ' s Labour and expose diehard Remain MP to the wrath of their Leave-voting constituent . it be the nuclear option - but a threat she would be mad to rule out . May must be ready to call Remainers ' bluff
get to Ruth of the matter be be read out from the Government front bench just a few hour later . Ms Davidson ' s current view be now Brexit Minister David Davis ' s current view . however , her statement be very strongly word and come close to be openly critical of Theresa May . Ms Davidson ' s stern insistence that ` ` no government of the Conservative and Unionist Party should countenance any deal that compromise the political , economic or constitutional integrity of the United Kingdom ' ' sound a lot like a criticism . and it sound a lot like an instruction when she add : ` ` if regulatory alignment in a number of specific area be the requirement for a frictionless border , then the PM should conclude this must be on a UK-wide basis . ' ' Those close to Ms Davidson insist that she be eager to put down a marker . they also believe that her statement be read out as a challenge to Cabinet hardliner like Boris Johnson and Michael Gove to come up with a good plan - if they can . they ca n't . they have be show up by the Brexit mess they create and it will wreck their career - again . the question now be , what will it do for Ruth Davidson ' S career ?
rebel Target BREXIT DATE March @card@ @card@ ; Marathon Commons DEBATE ' @card@ Tory ' on attack up to @card@ Tory MP have threaten to rebel against controversial plan to enshrine Britain ' s Brexit day in law . their stance threaten to wipe out PM Theresa May ' s tiny majority and plunge the government ' S troubled EU Withdrawal Bill into chaos . Ex-Education Secretary Nicky Morgan be among those planning to revolt over the amendment to bind Britain to quit on March @card@ , @card@ . she tell Channel @card@ news : ` ` I be not vote for there to be an end date . ` ` I ' m not alone , there be a number of colleague who feel exactly the same way . ' ' Yesterday MP spend eight hour debate the first of @card@ amendment to the bill , which aim to copy EU law into UK law . delighted Tory whip see off the first challenge . a vote on whether the Scottish , Welsh and northern Irish assembly have to give consent to Brexit be defeat by @card@ vote to @card@ . the amendment over our date to quit be not due to be discuss until next month . during yesterday ' S debate former Tory Chancellor Ken Clarke insist the amendment be ` ` positively harmful to the national interest ' ' . Twenty-four hour earlier @card@ Tory hold talk with Chief Whip Julian Smith and threaten to rebel against the Brexit date vote . ex-attorney General Dominic Clarke Grieve say the move be ` ` mad ' ' and warn it would tie our negotiate hand . he say he refuse to back down ` ` just because I be tell to ' ' . Ex-minister Anna Soubry describe the meeting as ` ` stormy ' ' . she add : ` ` the date go into the bill have really upset a lot of really top-quality backbench Conservative MP . ` ` these be people , a lot of them ex-ministers , highly respect , and they be genuinely cross about this . ` ` there be some people there who have never rebel and they be now talk of rebel . ' ' today the PM be due to meet with a key ally of German Chancellor Angela Merkel to try and kickstart talk on a trade deal . MEP Manfred Weber think a trade agreement between Britain and Brussels be unlikely until next year .
snag for new talk on Brexit ; Exclusive BREXIT talk hit a fresh stalemate as the UK stall on new discussion . our team fear that without a Brussels shift , ` ` pointless ' ' meeting would kill momentum from last week ' s EU summit and Theresa May ' s Florence speech . the side be deadlock on the Brexit bill and if Euro judge get a say on EU citizen here . the UK say a future trade deal must also be on the table . a source say : ` ` the issue have n't change . there be only so many time we can say the same thing . ' ' Brussels have offer two set of talk before www.December.UK insider insist we want the right agenda to ` ` move forward ' ' . labour MP Barry Sheerman spark fury by say ` ` the well educated ' ' oppose Brexit , add : ` ` nearly all uni town vote Remain . ' '
alien , Brexit , Trump. . and me ; Minister for State ON ... Just ABOUT EVERYTHING TD John Halligan : the British ` ` do n't have the balls ' ' to admit their mistake over Brexit , John Halligan have tell the Irish Sun on Sunday in an explosive new interview . the Minister of State also tell us how NASA have confide in him about the existence of alien and that he would join protest against ` ` ignorant ' ' US President Donald Trump if the billionaire come to Ireland . the Waterford TD believe our neighbour would vote to remain in the European union if give another chance to cast their ballot - but some of their citizen ` ` think they be good than everyone else ' ' because they see off Adolf Hitler . and the Independent Alliance member insist the UK must pay up any money they owe the EU before leave the bloc . Minister Halligan say : ` ` David Cameron will rue the day he call the vote on Brexit and it will be on his CV as be a failed prime minister . the party that be pro-Europe do not engage in Britain and allow a lot of false information , misinformation about Europe . ` ` if there be a vote again I think they would n't go . but they now have to pay their money . ` ` England make a catastrophic error . the only way back be to call another referendum but I do n't think they have the ball to do that . ` ` some of the British think they be good than everyone else and think they can plough it alone . ' we win the Second World War ' , and all that kind of stuff . that will be detrimental to them . ` ` I like the British and my wife be British and keep her passport . they have a lot to offer . I think their place be in Europe . ` ` essentially they know that but they be catch on the hop and they be stick with it . ' ' the Minister of State for Training , skill , Innovation , Research and Development , who previously reveal his love of sex , see possibility post- Brexit for us to exploit . he say : ` ` if they go , you have to look at Ireland as a country that be grow with some of the good scientist in the world . the top multinational be here . ` ` and during this debate on Brexit they be still invest in Ireland . we will be essentially the only English-speaking country in Europe . ` ` I would be worry about a hard border , the psychological effect would be detrimental . and it would open it again to extremist . Britain realise that . ' ' Halligan would join the march against Donald Trump if the US President decide to visit Ireland . the minister say : ` ` my position be he be a misogynist . he be divisive . he be quite ignorant as a president on economics , particularly on Europe . and I think he ' s dangerous . ` ` I personally would not meet him as a minister . and if I do he would be get a piece of my mind , president or no president . ` ` this Donald Trump time will pass and maybe the Americans might come to their sense and see a good way forward than to threaten country around the world and boast about what you can do to woman and get away with . I think that be absolutely outrageous . ` ` it be a very sensitive time for Ireland because the US have so much power . and if he interfere with our corporate tax it could have consequence for us . ' ' on a possible Trump visit to Ireland , Halligan blast : ` ` he can be welcome but I would be demonstrate against him if he do . as would everyone else . ` ` let him come and see how the Irish feel about him . I would be on the street , protest about his view towards woman , his view towards emigrant , migrant , the world in general , goad Iran , goad North Korea . I do n't agree with the North Korea leadership but threaten to obliterate the state - which he could do - that be outrageous from a world leader . ' ' and Halligan also tell us of his belief in alien and reveal NASA have tell them they exist . the minister say Ireland be ` ` recognise across the world ' ' for its work with the European Space Agency with @card@ company here ` ` create nearly @card@ top class job ' ' . and he reveal : ` ` in our galaxy there be @card@ billion planet . be we seriously say after the Big Bang @card@ billion year ago that the only life form put out in the whole of the universe be us ? ` ` there be no scientist in the world would believe that . I think there be other specie . will we be able to contact them ? maybe in time . ` ` I have speak to NASA and be to the European Space Agency and speak to some of the top scientist . they all think that . ` ` I be speak to NASA and their scientist believe even in our solar system they will find some form of micro life . ` ` there be ocean on some of the moon on Saturn cover in ice . Mars be once a pretty normal planet with lot of water . ` ` and if you look on earth , we can go down @card@ foot in the ice in the North Pole and find microbe that be alive . ` ` microbe have be find on the space station , in the hot part of the ocean . they be probably there . they probably survive . it will be a low form of life . but once they find that we can say there be life on other planet . ' ' Halligan have previously reveal that he and his partner Elaine come close to death while on holiday in Spain two-and-a-half year ago . the Waterford TD tell how the couple nearly drown while swimming in the sea in Torreblanca in southern Spain in @card@ . despite be strong swimmer both get into difficulty when condition turn and they be slam against rock . he say : ` ` I be cut and I see Elaine be turn by the water . it be unbelievable . at this stage , we be take in water and I know something be really wrong . ' ' Mr Halligan be able to swim back to shore and a number of people on the beach go to Ms Powell ' S aid.He say : ` ` I think she be dead . you kind of feel you could have do more , but when I be come in I be shook and then when I look around she have be carry all the way out . ` ` we do n't talk about it a lot . ' ' I ' ve speak to NASA and top scientist . they all think we ' re not the only life form in the whole universe ; 6Failed prime minister7 ; 6Alien life be out there7 ; 6Trump ' S time will pass7 ;
PM Warns : BREXIT Ball ' S in EUR COURT Theresa May will today pile pressure on the EU to break the Brexit deadlock by say : ` ` the ball be in your court . ' ' she will tell MP Britain have lay out a clear vision for a two-year transition continue our £9billion-ayear contribution until @card@ . ahead of a summit with EU counterpart next week , the PM will urge more flexibility so they can start address Britain ' s post-Brexit trading relationship . and as she aim to move on from her disastrous conference speech , she will declare the UK can get a deal to prove the anti-Brexit ` ` doomsayer ' ' wrong . in a Commons statement on her Florence speech a fortnight ago Mrs May will say she want a ` ` special partnership ' ' with a successful EU . she will add : ` ` as we look forward , the ball be in their court . but I be optimistic we will receive a positive response . ' ' but it emerge yesterday the treasury be to put aside billion of pound in preparation for a ` ` no deal ' ' scenario . Chancellor Philip Hammond will unlock the fund in the new year if insufficient progress have be make in talk with EU negotiator Michel Barnier . it will help with new border check arrangement . Justice Minister Dominic Raab also say his department be plan ` ` for all eventuality ' ' .
time to unite for good Brexit deal ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think it be good that Ruth Davidson and Nicola Sturgeon can push for a soft Brexit . maybe now the whole country can pull together to get the good deal possible for the country . Allan Marsh Edinburgh Tory MP need to get behind Theresa May instead of stab her in the back and let her get on with the job . the public need to look at themselves too for bail out on her in her hour of need and voting for a party that can only lead this country to ruin . Chris Smith by Email THERE can be no excuse for everyone not to pull together behind the Brexit talk - now , nothing be off the table . but I fear Jeremy Corbyn will use his new-found popularity to disagree with everything . if he do , he might find the tide turn back just as quickly . Brian Winston Glasgow How can Nicola Sturgeon lose a third of her Westminster team and a huge percentage of the party ' S vote , yet continue with a reluctant admission that her obsession with IndyRef cost the party dear ? her personal popularity also fall drastically but her solitary acceptance of responsibility be that she will ` ` consider ' ' the position . in a similar situation Alex Salmond abdicate honourably . what make Nicola Sturgeon bullet proof - or should she be ? D Duncan Aberdeen Labour would have win the election if the party in Scotland have use tactical voting against the Tories instead of try to block the SNP . Labour voter switch to Tory help elect @card@ MP - more than enough to stop Jeremy Corbyn enter @card@ Downing Street . Felix Mccabe Glasgow POLITICIANS have call for Mrs May to resign say she should stop Brexit . she do not lose vote over Brexit . she lose vote because she go against OAPs like me because the Tories think they could do anything they want . Clive Horner by email if , after the bad campaign ever by the Tory Party , Corbyn be still behind , when will he ever win ? after all , the Tory Party will never perform this badly again . Paul Brazier by email the sad thing about the last seven day have be the re-emergence of George Osborne , picture , back on our TV screen . Colin Hart by email
budget jet duty cut plea boss be urge Chancellor Philip Hammond to deliver a Brexit boost by cut air passenger duty in his first budget . they say axe the levy , which cost business £212million a year , would help forge new post-Brexit trade link . the UK have the world ' s high air travel tax , add up to ten per cent to long-haul fare . Tim Alderslade , chief executive of Airlines UK , say : ` ` this high rate of duty risk stifle the government ' s ambition for the UK to make the most of opportunity afford by Brexit . ' ' Mr Hammond ' S budget come three week before Mrs May trigger the Brexit process , make him unlikely to commit to major spending .
no CURBS ON NHS tourist ; HEALTH Service Cash CRISIS ; Hunt shelf fee plan , blame Brexit Jeremy Hunt have shelve plan to charge NHS tourist - blame Brexit . the Health Secretary yesterday tell MP the complexity of quit the EU mean a @card@ deadline be impossible . Then-PM David Cameron promise last May to charge non-EU migrant and overseas visitor who get free treatment . plan be set out to ensure the NHS be recover £500million a year by the middle of this parliament . but Mr Hunt reveal yesterday the NHS ( Overseas Visitors Charging ) Bill have be put on ice . he say : ` ` we do n't actually proceed with the legislation because of Brexit . ' ' the cost of foreign visitor use the NHS in England be around £1.8billion a year , with ` ` health tourist ' ' fly in specially for treatment leave an estimated £280million bill . the Department of Health say minister have not rule out change to legislation . a spokeswoman add : ` ` we have already treble the amount recover from overseas visitor in three year to £289million . ' ' Mr Hunt also insist care home and agency should still be able to hire overseas worker follow Brexit . but he warn Britain face lose the London HQ of the European Medicines Agency , the EU body which evaluate medical product . Lib Dem MP Norman Lamb call it a ` ` real blow ' ' , with @card@ job at risk .
name the MP block Brexit the worm be come out of the woodwork over Brexit . the MP who say they will block the Article @card@ vote , like Lib Dem leader Tim Farron , should be hold for treason and be unelected . we can not go forward with these people block every turn . the country have make up its mind . Vince Lowery Seaham , Co Durham So Tim Farron say his party MP would oppose the vote against trigger Article @card@ unless they be promise a second referendum on the UK ' s Brexit deal with EU leader . if Tim be so confident , he and his MP should resign immediately then re-stand in a by-election to see if they have the support of their constituent . THIEPVAL Young Carrickfergus , Co Antrim All MP who try to block Brexit or Article @card@ should be name and shame so the great British public can confront them in their home town and vote them out at the next election . Elizabeth Phillips Okehampton , Devon Many of our wonderful MP be hellbent on wreck the referendum result by block Article @card@ . I do wish the @card@ hindsight lawyer and commentator have warn us the referendum result would be ` ` not legally binding ' ' before the vote . I take it a vote to remain would also be ` ` not legally binding ' ' ? Anthony Curtis Leamington Spa FOLLOWING the High Court judge ' ruling to allow Parliament to vote on the Brexit referendum , do this also apply if the SNP have a second referendum to take Scotland out of the Union and win ? could the Tories , mainly English , be able to have a vote in Parliament to block the SNP referendum ? Jim Rand Trowbridge , Wilts BREXIT be a democratic vote . this should be accept by MP and the public that want to remain . I do n't vote for David Cameron but I have to put up with him for year . let Theresa may get on with the job of get us out of the EU . Tim Farron should accept the result . Sharron Davies Leeds CONTRARY to popular belief , I do n't think for one minute that Donald Trump be a nutter . but perhaps it wo n't hurt for some of the truly derange on this planet to think that if they mess with someone who have this reputation , they may end up have something big and heavy hurl in their general direction . they might think twice before spread their own particular brand of mayhem and destruction . Gordon Barnes Wolverhampton TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply Prince Harry release the statement about Press coverage of his girlfriend because he ' S madly in love and want to protect her , but he will have to let it go . people will warm to her . bob , Stratford in your article on the @card@ most inspirational woman , where be Joanna Lumley ? tom , Kew , West London Nicola Sturgeon ' s bad nightmare - a US President who like Brexit and own property in Scotland . Ann , Leeds
Keir AS MUD ; Labour BREXIT SHAMBLES Starmer back a 4yr transition deal Corbyn ' no idea ' how long it ' ll take Labour be accuse last night of try to sabotage Brexit negotiation by change its policy on the eve of crucial EU talk . Shadow Brexit Secretary Sir Keir Starmer announce they have adopt a ` ` soft ' ' policy . Labour want to stay in the single market and continue uncontrolled immigration for at least four year . hour later Jeremy Corbyn plunge the new position into chaos by admit he ` ` do not know what the length of it would be ' ' . it could mean freedom of movement would carry on indefinitely with no end to the soar contribution the EU ' S budget . Sir Keir say a Labour government would also stay in the custom union for a transitional period , bar minister from sign new trade deal with country like the US . he say they would even consider stay permanently in the single market if they y can persuade the EU to reform freedom of movement rule . former PM David Cameron fail to achieve this despite month of negotiation . the Lib Dems and SNP urge Labour to match commitment their mit to stay in the single market indefinitely . Eurosceptic Tory MP blast Labour for the timing of its U-turn . they claim it weaken Brexit Secretary David Davis ' s hand as he prepare to meet EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier today . Tory MP Andrew Bridgen say : ` ` her Majesty ' s less than loyal opposition deliberately seek to undermine our national negotiate position . ' ' matthew.dathan
quid PROs Grow ; financial sector ' to double after Brexit ' , say Carney l THE UK ' s financial sector will double in size in the next @card@ year , the Bank of England Governor yesterday predict . Mark Carney say the City and all its asset be already worth ten time more than the annual output of the rest of the country but would flourish post-Brexit . he shrug off fear that the City would lose business to other centre such as Frankfurt , Paris and Dublin . he say : ` ` if the UK financial system thrive in a post-Brexit . world , which be the plan , it will not be ten time GDP , it will be @card@ to @card@ time GDP in another quarter of century because we will keep our market share of cross-border capital flow . ' ' GDP for the UK be about £1.9trillion a year . but this be dwarf by the financial sector ' S asset , such as bank and pension fund . Mr Carney say : ` ` it bring a million job , it pay @card@ per cent of tax revenue , it be the big export industry by some token . ' ' but he warn such reliance be risky and urge minister to hold their nerve on scale back regulation . yesterday the Bank vote to keep interest rate at @card@ per cent . but its Monetary Policiy Committee warn they could go up within a year in a bid to curb inflation .
the Sun SAYS fight for Brexit How long will the government continue to give the most rabid Remainers a clear run at rubbish Brexit ? from every pessimistic anecdote and snippet of negativity , they be build a story that Britain be doom . that David Davis be a fool be humiliate by Brussels ' negotiator , that the whole thing be so obviously already a catastrophe it must be reverse . they plainly hope that if they say it loud enough and often enough the public will begin to believe it . the fact be against them . the economy have defy their dire prediction . the weak pound have be a godsend for manufacturer and exporter and bring a huge surge in tourism . yes , inflation begin to rise . then it fall again . record number - and still climb - be in work . the City , which these Remainers reckon will be destroy , be full of confidence and on a hire spree . trade talk with America begin on Monday . more sober Remainers be finally focus on how Britain can make Brexit work well . the staunchly Europhile business group the CBI claim now to be among them . Boss Carolyn Fairbairn insist none of her member want Brexit reverse - merely a transition period , time-limited and ` ` as short as possible ' ' . if so , fair enough . the Sun back that too . after the summer break , our squabble Cabinet minister must unite - and come out fight for Brexit .
the Sun SAYS Back Brexit Almost anything be now Brexit ' S fault . Remainers lap up the glum ` ` forecast ' ' of the Office for Budget Responsibility , even though they be only partly down to the leave vote and the OBR admit to a @card@ per cent chance they ' re wrong . the same odd as a coin toss . where be the government fightback against the barrage of Brexit bellyache from Remain-obsessed commentator , politician and the brazenly bias BBC ? as Tony Blair orchestrate his plot to rewrite history , only eurosceptic backbencher defend 17.4million voter ' will . the government vow to make Brexit a success . it should be loudly defend it .
Let ' s back business not bash it and Brexit will be brill ; City EXPERT BLASTS Elite SNIPING THERE be , once again , several Britain - and they be no longer even speak the same language . Middle England be delight by our new government and its take on the world . the late opinion poll be phenomenal . the Tories have hit @card@ per cent , the sort of height last reach at the @card@ General Election . Theresa May ' S party , buoy by huge support from woman and old voter , have take a 17-point lead against Labour , accord to ICM , its large while in power since @card@ . this triumph have go almost unnoticed , for one simple reason . Elite Britain , a much small but hugely influential section of the population , be aghast and in open revolt . it can not believe that the Tories be truly intent on pull us out of the EU and that they even want to limit immigration . in provincial , post-referendum , post-Blair/Cameron England and Wales , the Prime Minister ' S style , approach and rhetoric chime with the new mood . in Westminster , the City and Canary Wharf , her pronouncement have be meet with incomprehension , anger and another substantial sell-off of the pound . the problem , of course , be that both group be get this wrong . Elite Britain be hopelessly over-gloomy about the future and chillingly contemptuous of democracy . bizarrely for a meritocratic class that be usually so selfconfident in its own ability , it be convinced that the UK be a desperate supplicant , with little to offer . a small minority of its member even seem , at time , to be willing on Armageddon , deduce that only a full-blown financial crisis could yet stop Brexit and convince the public it now so despise of the error of their way . this be madness . but Middle England and the government be also mistake . Brexit be a great opportunity for Britain but it need to be execute correctly . bash business and the free market never work . crude combination of populism , socialism and nationalism inevitably end in tear . the City be a crucial source of job and wealth . it be worth fight for . we need deregulation , not more labour-market rule . we need a migration system that be acceptable to a newly empower country and work for an economy at full employment , not one that be obsess with a target make up on the hoof by the previous government . the government must also remember that kite-flying be not a good way of make economic policy . its loose thought on quantitative easing , fiscal policy and company that hire migrant have rattle the financial market , add to the sense of doom in some boardroom . in reality , the Pound have long be overvalue . its decline will reduce the current-account deficit by redirect consumer to domestic good and service and make it easy for firm to sell ware abroad . but caution be essential in this febrile , nervy atmosphere . the government ' s big mistake so far lie in its approach to Brexit . Plan A be to disclose as little as possible for as long as possible , apart from emphasise that there would definitely be great control on immigration , and get government department to engage in a thorough factfinding exercise . every side would then present its case , the Prime Minister would decide , then she would go into battle . the mantra be all about not give a run commentary and not reveal the government ' s negotiate hand . the problem be that this worthy , rational approach have fail . the Cabinet be at loggerhead on all the fundamental question . it be unclear whether the Treasury be really plan to recycle the appalling forecast of the suppose long-term hit to growth from Brexit that it produce under George Osborne . but the fact that many Brexiteers be convince this be the plan show how toxic the situation have already become . private memo be be leak , official be brief contradictory message . all of this have create a vacuum which the Remainers have fill , while trader have become obsessed with every statement , briefing , or rumour , send the pound and gilt yield yo-yoing . the more we hear , the less we know about what the government would like to achieve in the negotiation , let alone what we will actually end up with . it ' s time for a completely new approach , a Brexit Plan B - and by that I do n't mean a different outcome but a different way of reach it . this be not really about debate in Parliament . this be about the PM lead from the front , and the Brexit department accelerate their work and up their game . May need to start off by make a major , define speech target clearly at Elite Britain , in which she paint a picture of a successful , prosperous and open post-Brexit Britain . she have speak to Middle England - now she need to address business , make it clear that she be confident she will be able to make Brexit an economic success . she need to stress her commitment to maximise free trade , not just with the EU but also with the rest of the world . she would also be well advise to float the possibility of transitional arrangement after @card@ . she need to name-check key industry , include investment banking and car manufacturing , and make it clear that she understand their concern about market access and the need for skilled worker . last but not least , the speech would explain that Britain be a powerful country that make a huge economic , financial , cultural and military contribution to Europe and be therefore in a strong negotiating position . it would need to be accompany by a series of publication from the Brexit department , reassess the cost and benefit of aspect of our EU membership and create much-need intellectual ammunition for Brexit . take the single market . the European Commission think that it have boost EU-wide GDP by just @card@ per cent in @card@ . David Davis need to produce a new estimate of this as soon as possible , and he and Liam Fox must commission study show what the gain to the UK would be be we able to sign free-trade deal with the world . May be in an enviable position and enjoy huge backing from the public . but the UK ' S establishment be increasingly and dangerously alienate from Middle England . to ensure that the UK ' S economy do as well as possible over the next few year , the PM must now focus her effort on reassure corporate Britain . © Allister Heath/Telegraph Media Group 6Caution be essential in this febrile , nervy atmosphere @card@ @card@ PM enjoy enviable and huge backing from public7
racist smear be typical of sore loser Juncker EU boss Jean-Claude Juncker be in a league of his own as a sore loser over Brexit . he stupidly use the murder of Polish worker Arek Jozwik in Harlow , Essex , to label Brexit voter as racist . the man be an idiot who , like many of the Remainers , ca n't - or wo n't - accept the wisdom of our leave the EU . Brexit have ensure we can wave goodbye to those who the Sun rightly label an ` ` utter clown ' ' . Mick BIDEWELL Newcastle upon Tyne Surprise , surprise , Jean-Claude Juncker try to make political headline that Britain be anti-foreigner because of one very sad attack on a Polish citizen by mindless thug . sorry Mr Juncker , but most brit appreciate the great contribution Polish people make to our society . try to make political gain from this be outrageous and Mr Juncker be seriously demonstrate that he really be the clown of Europe . Duncan SABISTON Swindon JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker be right to condemn the recent murder of a Polish man in Essex . but he have be strangely silent over the rape and murder of Brits by Eastern Europeans - as report regularly on BBC ' S Crimewatch - who have be allow entry into the UK under EU freedom of movement rule . john Morgan Bath David Davis , the Brexit minister , have say he be not into symbolism , only result . in this instance he ought to be . the British public be get highly frustrate that day after day we read nothing positive from Juncker and his acolyte , just more of the same insult . it would boost morale if we could have our once-treasured and respected blue passport back . Allan Mulholland Balby , Doncaster what have happen to British justice ? the Black Lives matter protester , who chain themselves together to disrupt flight at London City Airport , cause misery to thousand of people , have be give a conditional discharge and derisory £95 cost . compare this with someone who park on a yellow line and be fine £130 . they deserve a prison sentence to drive home the message that this disruptive behaviour will not be tolerate . terry Brown Hornchurch , Essex So Judge Elizabeth Roscoe decide to just slap the wrist of the nine protester , all white , of Black Lives Matter . the law be lenient , but the airline should punish the nine by give them life-long ban . THIEPVAL Young Carrickfergus , Co Antrim I WAS sadden to read that a young man with everything to live for be murder by four man for a moped . my heart go out to Ricky Hayden ' S family . I hope the evil human being responsible for this hideous crime be bring to justice and put in jail for a very long time . anna Hammett Ness , Cheshire why be the government still ponder the HS2 link ? it ' s go to cost a lot more than the £55billion budget , and what for ? about @card@ minute off the time it take now . just upgrade the exist track at much less cost . sandy Sanford Poole , Dorset I DO not understand why John Hinckley be a free man . he mean to kill Ronald Reagan in @card@ and that should be enough to keep him in jail for the rest of his life . I wonder if the judge who rule he ` ` no longer pose a danger ' ' would like him as HIS next-door neighbour ? amber Jacobs Frodsham , Cheshire TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply I AGREE , Mr Juncker , that Polish worker should not be attack . but you open the border to terrorist . never hear your comment after the murder in France or Germany . gem PROTEST against the selfish Black life Matter campaigner by boycott anything they ' re involve with . we could call ourselves ` ` all live Matter ' ' . J Taylor , Surrey This week ' s machete attack over a moped prove we desperately need the death penalty back . every man and his dog seem to carry knife or gun . jimmy , Wigan So the BBC will have to show how much it pay presenter on more than £150,000 a www.year.No presenter should be pay that much . Trevor Yapp , Huntington , Staffs email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
it ' S Project BOUNCE Back ; Economic BOOST for BREXIT Carney admit UK outdo prediction the economy have bounce back from a Brexit wobble and be grow faster than Project fear prediction , Mark Carney have admit . the Bank of England boss also tell MP a recession be now far less likely . after a confidence dip immediately follow the vote there be now sign of stabilisation , he add . he be grill by the Treasury Committee yesterday on if he have ` ` over-egged ' ' his grim prediction ahead of June ' S poll . but despite warn leave could lead to recession , Mr Carney insist he be ` ` absolutely serene ' ' about everything he say . and he argue it be largely the Bank ' s intervention since the decision , such as cut interest rate to an historic low of @card@ per cent , that have keep trouble away . he say : ` ` the referendum represent a risk to monetary policy . we be absolutely clear about the risk , be to address have do that . a bounce back the bank take and consequential action . ' ' ` ` the Bank predict the economy would grow only0.1 per cent between July and September . ` ` there be because timely by bet tee the instead Mr Carney tell the committee growth rate for the quarter be more like @card@ per cent . but that be still only ` ` about half as much than it be before the referendum ' ' , the governor add , insist there have be a Brexit hit . Brexit campaigner and Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` if the Bank be go to be so clever , the dire warning be n't necessary be they ? ' ' another anti-EU Tory committee member Steve Baker tell Mr Carney that listen to him sound like ` ` read the apocalyptic literature of Jeremiah and Ezekiel ' ' . but Mr Baker praise the governor for show ` ` great statesmanship ' ' in cut interest rate and increase quantitative easing .
Mr CAMEURON ; Anger of Tory SCEPTICS ; PM : Brexit not answerNo plan if ' leave ' win David Cameron admit yesterday there be no contingency plan in place in case Britain vote to leave the EU . the revelation come as the PM say a Brexit be the ` ` wrong answer ' ' . Eurosceptics claim the lack of planning prove his renegotiation ultimatum to EU partner be simply hollow threat . last night former Europe Minister David Davis fume : ` ` this be disgraceful as we ' ve get two outcome but we do n't know which it will be . ` ` yet there be no plan for Brexit and that ' S really serious as it ' S a very complicated operation to carry out if it happen . ' ' Former Environment Secretary Owen Paterson add : ` ` it would be commonsense for the government to have do some preliminary work if Britain vote to leave the UK . ` ` once the renegotiation be finished there can be no participation by the civil service . ' ' Quizzed on TV by Andrew Marr on a possible Brexit , Mr Cameron say : ` ` I do n't think that be the right answer . ` ` be that to be the answer we would need to do everything necessary to make that work . ` ` the civil service be work around the clock to support my negotiation . ' ' Mr Cameron claim he be ` ` close ' ' to secure a deal on the thing that drive the public ` ` up the wall ' ' . he add that he be ` ` hopeful ' ' a referendum could be hold this summer . but after hint he could put it back until next year , he also say he would n't quit if the country vote to leave . and he refuse to rule out apply restriction on in-work benefit to young brit in a bid to stop the ` ` almost unnatural draw ' ' of the UK ' s welfare system for European migrant . Downing Street be also plot to limit the number of Cabinet minister who will be allow to campaign for Brexit .
May war on Brexit key date Theresa May face a fresh Brussels fight over its bid to end the Brexit transition period early . the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier yesterday announce it must end by Hogmanay @card@ - month earlier than previously think . that 21-month timeframe correspond with the end of the EU ' s current seven-year budget . but the PM have ask for a more flexible period of ` ` around two year ' ' . she call his decree as just ` ` the position come from the European Union ' ' , as the transition should run for as long as its deem necessary . negotiation begin in January over the transition follow Brexit Day , a phase deem vital to save business from a ` ` cliff edge ' ' exit . Mr Barnier also admit the UK ' s Brexit deal will be ` ` tailor make ' ' .
Brexit ' no harm to UK spy ' a former Met Police counter-terror chief insist Britain ' S security wo n't be affect by Brexit - because of our spook ' global reach . Richard Walton say the UK would hardly notice any difference in counter-terrorism work if it cease to be a member of Europol . and he say effort to build up operative ` ` on the ground ' ' and the UK ' s direct , state-to-state , relationship with individual country be far more important . Mr Walton insist : ` ` the reality be that Brexit will have little , if any , impact on UK counterterrorism operation . ' ' he hit back after ex-Lib Dem deputy PM Nick Clegg say Brexit would leave Britain more vulnerable to terror . Manchester attack - P10 & @card@
in Brexit chaos , supermarket be local hero as a country , we be all stun by last week ' s Brexit vote and the reverberation be still very much be feel but what do it mean for Scottish business ? supermarket spring to mind as an important case study after many of the big retailer warn against leave the EU , cite rocket price , inflation and the potential for the value of the pound to plummet . with the economy heavily contingent upon consumer sale and consumer confidence , some believe that the UK ' s Brexit decision will now hit both , in turn send the rate of inflation spiral . indeed , the pound fall dramatically in the aftermath of the vote . will it mean more trade freedom , or will the negotiation of new import and export deal become more fraught ? it ' S still too early to say . certainly , prior to announce his resignation , David Cameron warn that grocery bill could rise by as much as three per cent annually . perhaps it ' s no coincidence then that some of the lead supermarket have really step up their game in recent month in the battle for customer loyalty . it ' S fantastic to fight for Scot produce a recent study by the Local Data Company reveal that Scotland have the most competition between retailer with @card@ per cent of the country ' S town feature a high number of supermarket and discount store compare to the population . so what be our supermarket do to capture the Scottish audience amid the new atmosphere of political uncertainty ? how can they promote great confidence ? Lidl have pledge to source over @card@ per cent of product from Scottish supplier . in recent week it announce deal with dairy farmer across the country and Falkirk-based confectionery specialist Mrs Tilly ' S as well as a £50million investment in eight ` ` Lidl of the Future ' ' store across Scotland . meanwhile , Aldi team up with north-east pig and poultry farmer to chat to customer in its Aberdeen store about the local produce and offer sample . it also hold a Scotland-wide beer festival showcase local brand across its store . Waitrose celebrate its tenth anniversary in Scotland this month and announce that , in that time , it have double the number of Scottish supplier it work with . Waitrose also report a @card@ per cent sale increase in the past few week . it be fantastic to see them champion Scottish produce and support our local business and this ethos have no doubt play a part in their ongoing success . Tesco have focus its effort on some superb community campaign , the late be its Neighbourhood Food Collection . giant shopping trolley have be wheel out at store across the country to launch the campaign which encourage customer to donate food . the donation be distribute to those in need in the local area via FareShare and the Trussell Trust . in the same period , Tesco report its second consecutive quarter of sale growth last week , suggest that give back to the local community have reignite customer loyalty . unfortunately it seem the other two of the big four be sadly lag behind . it might be no surprise to note that the company that have n't concentrate on local initiative to get customer through the door and develop brand loyalty be also the one report poor sale . Asda ' s chief executive announce plan to step down follow the seventh quarter of decline sale for the retailer . similarly , Sainsbury ' S also continue to report poor sale and have decide to focus on the convenience market . it ' S clear to see that the supermarket and discount chain demonstrate their worth on a local level be take the lead in the sale war . with our breakaway from the EU confirm , the notion of ` ` local ' ' have take on new meaning . in such an environment , it be increasingly important for big retailer to illustrate what they give back to the area in which they operate , as well as to emphasise how their product stand out from competitor through strong local source and ever-more sustainable relationship .
OSBO : BREXIT WOULD Spark 1YR RECESSION Britain will be plunge into a year-long ` ` DIY ' ' recession if we leave the EU , George Osborne will insist today . the Chancellor , leave , will deliver his most doom-laden warning One MONTH To Go yet about the risk of Brexit as he publish the Treasury ' s final report . as much as six per cent will be wipe off the nation ' s economic growth by @card@ due to the chaos and uncertainty leaving will cause , the study claim . and it predict a downturn similar to the recession that hit the UK in the early 1990s . but the finding be immediately seize on by Brexit campaigner last night as yet more ` ` Project Fear ' ' tactic to scare voter away from back leave . Mr Osborne will say : ` ` with exactly one month to go to the referendum , the British people must ask themselves this question : can we knowingly vote for a recession ? ` ` Does Britain really want this DIY recession ? ` ` because that ' s what the evidence show we ' ll get if we vote to leave the EU . ' ' in a bid to emphasise the gravity of the warning , PM David Cameron will stand with him as they unveil the report . it will detail by how much wage will fall and how many job will go . inflation will rise and the pound will plummet , send shop price up and house price down , it will also claim . but ex-Tory minister Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` the Treasury have consistently get its prediction wrong in the past . ` ` this Treasury document be not an honest assessment but a deeply bias view of the future . ' ' Bank of England governor Mark Carney and International Monetary Fund chief Christine Lagarde have also warn recession be possible .
do it EURSELVES ; Hamm slam EU for take backseat on Brexit Philip Hammond have tell the EU to devise its own Brexit plan instead of focus on how to punish Britain . the Chancellor attack Brussel for its ` ` silence ' ' when many nation outside Europe be ` ` enthusiastic ' ' about do trade deal after the UK leave . he say the @card@ EU member must spell out the kind of relationship they want and urge them to act instead of wait for Britain to do the legwork . Mr Hammond say they must drop a narrative of punishment and look to the ` ` mutually beneficial relationship we have now and can continue ' ' . he tell the economic summit in Berlin : ` ` they say , ' it take two to tango ' . both side need to be clear about what they want . ` ` the repeated complaint from Brussels have be that the UK ' have n't make up its mind ' . ` ` but in London many feel that we have little , if any , signal of what future relationship the EU27 would like to have with a post-Brexit Britain . ' ' Mr Hammond ' S hope of include financial service in any deal suffer a blow . German official say the EU will only agree if the UK accept hefty payment to their budget and comply with their law . Brexit Secretary David Davis be due to meet German business chief today to urge them to press Chancellor Angela Merkel to offer Britain a bespoke trade deal when it leave .
May and EU ' s fight on Brexit Theresa May face a fresh Brussels fight over its bid to end the Brexit transition period early . the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier yesterday announce it must end by Hogmanay @card@ - month earlier than previously think . that 21-month timeframe correspond with the end of the EU ' s current seven-year budget . but the PM have ask for a more flexible period of ` ` around two year ' ' . she call his decree as just ` ` the position come from the European Union ' ' , as the transition should run for as long as its deem necessary . negotiation begin in January over the transition follow Brexit Day , a phase deem vital to save business from a ` ` cliff edge ' ' exit . Mr Barnier also admit the UK ' s Brexit deal will be ` ` tailor make ' ' .
our NAGGING DOUBTS ABOUT BREXIT ; Breeders ' Warning fear for 30,000-job industry OUR NAGGING Horse breeder fear Brexit will prove to be a mare for the ( Euro ) 2billion industry here . while Ireland ' s thoroughbred horse breeder be world leader in their field , there ' s huge uncertainty over the industry ' s future as Britain be currently the main market . the sector be worth more than ( Euro ) 1.8billion and support almost @card@ job , which could hang in the balance if Britain make a hard Brexit from the EU . Harry Mccalmont , whose Norelands Stud in Co Kilkenny be a prominent middle market-breeder , say : ` ` it be a huge employer in the countryside , so anything that damage it be something to be really worry about . ' ' Brexit talk dominate last week ' S foal and breed stock sale at Goffs , Ireland ' s premier public auction house , where buyer from across the world spend ( Euro ) 41million . however , short-term joy about the lively trade could not blow away Brexit worry . Mccalmont say that it would nullify the tripartite agreement between Ireland , England and France over the free movement of horse . once Britain leave the EU ' s single market and custom union , horse could be subject to passport control at the border unless some new agreement be reach . Mccalmont add : ` ` we do n't envisage any change between Ireland and France but the problem be we have to travel through England . ' ' figure compile by auditor Deloitte show Ireland sell horse worth ( Euro ) 169million to England in @card@ - @card@ per cent of the total sale at public auction of Irish bloodstock . Mccalmont ' S concern be share by Goffs chief executive Henry Beeby , who be angry with the lack of clarity from British Prime Minister Theresa May ' S government . Beeby , who have be in his present role for ten year , believe the British industry will suffer as well . he say : ` ` they can not be serve by just the foal crop in England as they do n't produce enough horse . they need import and the majority come from Ireland . in @card@ , @card@ foal be bear in Ireland compare with @card@ in Britain . Beeby , who have raise such concern with Taoiseach Leo Varadkar and Minister for Agriculture Michael Creed this year , agree that small breeder would suffer . he say : ` ` if you look at the Irish breeder , the majority have one or two mare and they be go to get hurt . ' ' for Irish training great John Oxx , who have twice land the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe , Europe ' s most prestigious horse race , Brexit be a pivotal moment for the industry . Oxx , @card@ , say : ` ` we have see decade of close and close co-operation and the simplification of the rule to do with race and breed , and now we be look at the possibility of a backward step . ' '
the Sun SAYS Brexit snake Until yesterday Labour have no real policy on the big Brexit issue . now , Shadow Brexit Secretary Keir Starmer ' s proposal to keep Britain in the single market and custom union for year after we leave show they ' ll betray the million who vote to quit the EU . the Sun be n't against a transition period in principle . we know it ' ll be tricky to totally untangle ourselves from the EU by March @card@ . but it ' s vital we leave the custom union so we can cut independent trade deal with fast-growing major economy - and exit the single market to get back control over our border . what do Labour imagine will happen if the will of the people be ignore ? voter would rightly be outrage . Labour ' S announcement be aim at whip up discomfort as Brexit chief David Davis land in Brussels today for the late round of talk with Michel Barnier . but Europhile Tory MP think about rebel and vote with Labour should beware . however wed they be to the EU , Jeremy Corbyn in No10 ca n't be what they want ... both Labour and the Tories stand on leave platform at the General Election and get a combined @card@ per cent of the vote . the majority of people now want to crack on with it . Labour have try to be all thing to all side of the Brexit debate . now we know their true colour , they can not be allow to sabotage our exit .
lord HELP Them ; Peers defeat PM ... and abandon 1m expat brit ; BREXIT Shock @card@ peer be last night accuse of abandon a million brit live in Europe after defy Theresa May on Brexit . they vote @card@ to @card@ in favour of guarantee the right of 3.2million EU citizen to stay on after we exit . the PM insist the amendment have to be part of a reciprocal deal protect UK expats . her position be now weaken when negotiate for the right of brit live on the continent . Senior government source immediately vow to overturn the rebellion with a fresh vote in the Commons . Ex-Tory minister Lord Tebbit slam peer for ` ` look after foreigner , not the British ' ' . Ex-Chancellor Lord Lawson brand the defiance ` ` deplorable ' ' . the fresh commons vote , a process dub ` ` ping pong ' ' , will delay Brexit ' s trigger by at least a week . the PM will now miss her aim to trigger Article @card@ at an EU summit next Thursday . there be angry scene in the Lords because member traditionally never challenge a bill that have not be amend by the Commons . three ex-Tory minister , Lady Altmann , Lord Livingston and Viscount Hailsham , be among the rebel .
BREXIT SIGN ; HOME SEC ' S EU PLEDGES ' Consult over migrant cut-off ' ' movement as we know it ' ' . to end ' the Home Secretary will listen to view from the public and business chief about Britain ' s post-Brexit immigration plan . Amber Rudd say the exercise this summer will help her ` ` end freedom of movement as we know it ' ' . but she warn there would be no sudden drop in number come to Britain after we have quit the EU . she confirm Sun revelation last week that new migrant will likely be block from benefit and have to leave when their job end . but she insist no final decision have yet be make . she say in the ITV interview : ` ` we will be end freedom of movement as we know it . ' ' Mrs Rudd do not rule out suggestion that minister be look to make immigration less of a political headache . one plan could see the independent Migration Advisory Committee give power to decide how many visa need to be issue in key industry such as software engineering , healthcare , farming and hospitality . PM Theresa May be reportedly try to guarantee the right of EU national resident in the UK on the day she trigger Article @card@ . but she be insist on a similar deal for Brits in Europe . Mrs Rudd say there will be no sudden drop in number after Brexit . her comment echo Brexit Secretary David Davis , who say last week that the door would not be ` ` suddenly shut ' ' . Mrs Rudd say the government will spend the come summer ` ` engage with business and other stakeholder ' ' on immigration . she add : ` ` there ' s always a lot of anecdotal evidence about who ' S come , who ' S go but we want to make sure that any future policy be base on fact . ' '
' SPECIAL STATUS ' BREXIT CONCERN Secretary of State James Brokenshire have say special status for Northern Ireland after Brexit would be the wrong approach , amid fear such a deal could undermine its place in the UK . dup MP Sammy Wilson say there should be no special circumstance ` ` that will weaken our position within the United Kingdom ' ' when Britain leave the EU . Mr Brokenshire agree , say that special status would be ` ` the wrong approach ' ' . he add that the government intend instead to look at address individual issue specific to Northern Ireland during Brexit negotiation . this week Sinn Fein launch a campaign in a bid to secure special status for Northern Ireland within the EU after Brexit . speak at Northern Ireland question in the Commons , Mr Brokenshire also renew his pledge to maintain a ` ` frictionless ' ' border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland . but he be accuse of give vague answer on the detail of such an arrangement , as MP press him on the relationship between the two country after Britain leave the EU .
Brexit be far from easy task ; the Scottish Sun ON Sunday SAYS @card@ @card@ @card@ the fallout from the EU referendum be get ever more heated . it be clear that some MP will not accept the result of June @card@ . on Wednesday , @card@ Labour MP welcome a speech by Tony Blair ' S ex-guru Will Hutton in which he say the ` ` overwhelming majority of British people ' ' want to reaffirm our EU membership . he urge MP to fight to overturn the result . and First Minister Nicola Sturgeon insist her Nat MP would oppose any Brexit Bill , follow last week ' s court ruling in London which say Westminster politician should have the final word when it come to trigger Article @card@ . Ms Sturgeon also indicate she be consider get involved in the appeal the PM have vow to take to the Supreme Court . Mrs May , for her part , vow yesterday to stick to her timetable to deliver Brexit . she say MP must accept the result and prepare for our EU exit . she ' S talk tough - which be more than can be say about Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn . he be gently ask yesterday if he fancy an early election . he bolt like a startle hare - squeal that he be be ` ` harass ' ' . Corbyn himself be now a pitiful irrelevance - but the past week have show there be plenty of other thorn in Mrs May ' S side . her hope of a smooth Brexit process be long go .
a new chapter ... now give us a happy ending it be the great shock in modern British political history - and one that almost no one see come . on Thursday evening , the Goves invite several of those who have work on the Brexit campaign and some friend for dinner . several of the guest talk about how their hope be that the margin of defeat would be close enough to keep alive the idea of a second referendum . meanwhile , a confident Number @card@ be worry that Gove might resign if Brexit lose , scupper the plan to reunite the Tory party . Gove himself go to bed before any of the result be in . those at the dinner say he be n't expect Brexit to win when he head up the stair . the first he know of the result be when his team call him at 4.45am , shortly after ITV have call the referendum for leave . they tell him the epoch-making news . around 7am , David Cameron call him to concede defeat . I be tell that , despite the bitterness of the campaign , Cameron be polite and decent . Britain be now in exciting but uncharted water . the most important business face the country be how to leave the EU . Britain , in the word of one Brexiteer , now face ` ` the most complicated negotiation since @card@ ' ' , when Henry VIII meet King Francis I of France to increase the bond of friendship between the two nation . Angela Merkel ' s conciliatory tone be an encouraging indicator that the EU ' s most powerful leader be intent on approach these negotiation in a constructive manner . not every European leader , though , can be rely upon to behave rationally . one influential figure on the leave side warn : ` ` there will be powerful individual who try to muck this up . ' ' Cameron , however , have ensure that it will be the new Prime Minister who determine when to start the process for leave the European Union . some influential Tory be argue that the pro-Leave Justice Minister Dominic Raab , a whip-smart former Foreign Office lawyer , should be send to assess what kind of deal can be make . any new Prime Minister be likely to go to the country to seek a mandate for the aim of their exit talk . one wellplace source on the leave side say : ` ` it be hard to imagine how it would happen without that . ' ' this approach would also ensure that any new Prime Minister have the maximum time between leave the single market and a new General Election . what be vital be that the promise make in this campaign be keep . a failure to do so would be disastrous for people ' S faith in politics . so , immigration policy must be put under UK control , worker ' right must be protect and VAT must be take off domestic fuel . but any new Prime Minister must think of some other policy that would show the world that Britain be still an outward-looking nation which be open for business . cut corporation tax to ten per cent be one idea advocate by several senior figure on the leave campaign . a new chapter in the history of Britain be start yesterday . we now wait to see whether our leader can make it one with a happy ending . James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator Seek a mandate
EU ' S in Charge ? ; UK force to accept @card@ law since Referendum Britain have have to accept every EU law it have oppose since the Brexit vote , campaigner claim . the UK abstain or vote against @card@ out of @card@ propose piece of legislation . but all @card@ have be pass by member state without Britain ' S support . they be in area from fund programme to a port directive - which Brexit Secretary David Davis say threaten ten of thousand of UK job . Change Britain say the @card@ law would cost the UK £60million . the pro-Brexit campaign group say it show why it be wrong of pro-EU MP to argue Theresa May should keep Britain in the single market to influence the bloc ' S policy-making . they urge the PM to take back ` ` full control of our law ' ' . it come day after Mrs May hold a Cabinet showdown on her vision for a Brexit ` ` end state ' ' . change Britain chairwoman , Labour MP Gisela Stuart , say : ` ` Brussels already ignore our concern and this will only continue if we remain answerable to EU law without be a member . ' ' but pro-EU campaigner Best for Britain say that by only lose the battle on @card@ out of @card@ law , Britain have win the argument on @card@ . lord Heseltine spark outrage yesterday by insist most Tory share his view that Brexit could be more damaging than a Jeremy Corbyn-led Labour government .
Brexit rebel be disgrace SOME rebel MP be again try to thwart the will of the public over Brexit . if these MP can not accept the democratic vote of the nation , then surely it be now time for them to do the honourable thing and resign . what sort of democracy do we have when the people elect by the nation will not accept the will of the majority ? David FOAKES Leeds it ' S beyond my reasoning why @card@ Conservative MP be push against the democratic vote to leave Europe . they may get what they want - at the expense of lose power and Jeremy Corbyn get into No10 Dowing Street . I ask them to take stock over what be at stake . Alan Greaves Manchester be bitterness go to get in the way of solve Brexit ? why be these rebel Tory MP revolt against any decision put forward ? can we not , for once , all pull the same way and get Brexit pass so this country can get back to normality ? Brian Henry Bury St Edmunds , Suffolk WE seem to preach that we live in a great democratic country and we trust our elect MP to carry out our wish . so why be these rebel Tory backbencher now hellbent on destroy the government ' s Brexit negotiation ? they should be eject from the party because they be fail to carry out the wish of the voting public . the country simply can not be govern with all this constant in-fighting over Brexit - but maybe this be the Tory rebel ' agenda . graham Rosamond Southampton be N'T it time that politician from all party finally realise the country vote by a clear majority to leave the EU . it seem to me they only think about self-preservation . all they go on about be ` ` people in my constituency do n't vote leave ' ' , while think to themselves , ` ` I ' ve get a steady salary , thanks very much ' ' . Let ' S back the majority . stop listen to the BBC and be man enough to just walk away from the EU . john Wells Bedworth , Warks NOW that the name of the MP try to disrupt the Brexit process and ignore the democratic will of the people be become know , we can all show our appreciation at the next general election . Brian Richardson Romford , Essex How will Britain be bad off out of Europe , when it cost so much just to even belong ? joseph Young Sunderland it be unbelievable that we read , yet again , report of certain member of the House of Lords dip their snout into the expense trough - with one , Lord Kirkhill , apparently claim £43,896 . this be without doubt pure greed . surely , again , it make the case for abolition or complete and total reform of the House of Lords . john Smedley Willenhall , West Mids NEW foreign aid chief Penny Mordaunt have state Britain can be proud of its aid programme . this may be heart-warming to brit who live very comfortably in nice part of the country . but what Ms Mordaunt do not say be that this ` ` generosity ' ' be be pay for by the NHS be underfund , benefit cut and care home close , people live on the street , and so on . the list be endless . Gordon Scott Dunstable , bed why be population growth and control such a taboo subject for politician ? the world population be at 7.6billion and expect to be 8billion by @card@ , 9billion by @card@ and 11billion by @card@ . this be simply unsustainable . international aid should be link to birth control and in the West family should not be subsidise for have child . Clark Cross Edinburgh TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply the EU should know we be work on a walk-away Brexit . it will show them we wo n't be hold to ransom . why should we subsidise the country who bring nothing to the party ? Chris , Norfolk AM I the only one who think the country be go nut ? teacher will ban a boy for have dreadlock but be tell not to take any notice if a boy come in dress as a girl . madness . J Taylor , SurreyTV host Lizzie Cundy talk of a ` ` fat tax ' ' on clothes . whatever next ? Anne C , Southampton Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
Theresa May Spark Early BREXIT for UK Theresa May could start Brexit within week as she face ` ` quite vicious ' ' leader at the EU table , Enda Kenny have warn . ahead of yesterday ' s Brexit impact meeting in Dublin , the Taoiseach also cauruary . ' ' tioned Europe against ` ` lose the plot ' ' over the UK ' s decision to leave the EU . Kenny say the Prime Minister have indicate she will trigger the leave mechanism ' article @card@ ' before the end of March . he add : ` ` that do n't mean it might n't be trigger in December ... or January , or Feb- ' ' and Kenny suggest some European leader would become very hostile to Britain . the Taoiseach say : ` ` the other side of this argument may well get quite vicious after a while because there be those around the European table who take a very poor view of the fact that Britain decide to leave . ' ' Kenny also tell the All-Island Civic Dialogue forum , which the DUP snub , that he and May agree ` ` the benefit of the Common Travel Area be preserve ' ' . he add : ` ` Neither I , nor the Prime Minister , desire to limit the freedom of people on both side of the Irish Sea to trade , to live , to work , to travel freely across these island . ' ' and he say the peace process would be central to Dublin ' s priority in the negotiation between Britain and the remain @card@ EU leader over the term of Brexit .
may ' S MUTINY ; PM DEFEATED By Tory MP Rebellion over Brexit bill vote Theresa May last night lose her first Commons Brexit vote as MP win the power to amend a final EU divorce deal . a rebellion by @card@ of her MP see the PM defeat by just four vote on a key amendment to her flagship EU Withdrawal Bill . the blow on the eve of a Brussels summit leave her in the humiliate position of be unable to guarantee to Europe ' s leader she can implement the exit term they agree . Rebel Dominic Grieve ' s amendment to the Bill will now give Parliament ` ` a meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal . Mrs May , below , spend the day love-bombing MP . she have vow not to implement an exit deal without give MP a take-it-or-leave-it vote . but despite minister and whip carry out late strong-arm , they lose the vote @card@ to @card@ . one whip be allege to have reduce a female MP to tear . Ex-ministers include Nicky Morgan and Ken Clarke be part of the revolt . Labour Peer Lord Adonis say : ` ` this be abeer od : the first step towards the defeat of Brexit . ' ' Ukip ' S Nigel Farage hit back : ` ` my contempt for career politician know no bound . ' ' Tory MP Nadine Dorries call for rebel to be ` ` deselected and never allow to stand again ' ' . No10 say : ` ` we respect the will of the House , and will continue to focus on prepare the country to leave the EU . rebel Stephen Hammond be ` ` disappointed ' ' after be axe as Tory vicechair second after the result . harry.cole @ thesun . www.co.uk
May in crisis over Brexit report revolt a constitutional crisis erupt last night after Theresa May be force to accept a Labour demand that she publish assessment of Brexit ' S impact . a pro-EU Tory rebellion see the government abandon a Commons vote to oppose it . minister refuse to reveal all secret paper , insist they would damage negotiation . but Speaker John Bercow tell the government that it ` ` do have to respond ' ' . Brexit Minister Steve Baker pledge that No10 would ` ` reflect on Parliament ' S debate ' ' . international Trade Secretary Liam Fox warn Cabinet colleague ' inflammatory language on Brexit be harm prospect of agree a trade deal with the EU .
time for May to sort Brexit talk ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think AFTER the late round of ` ` talk ' ' , it ' S quite clear that the EU have no intention of do a deal with Britain . it ' s a question of teach us a lesson - and also to discourage any other country that may have the temerity to want to leave . we might as well stick to the March @card@ exit date and take our chance in the world rather than prolong this pointless exercise . Chris Jordan by Email THERE be ` ` no question ' ' of the EU make concession over our Brexit divorce bill negotiation . do the EU not understand the meaning of the word negotiate ? the dictionary definition be : to have formal discussion with someone in order to reach an agreement with them . they must consider compromise for the benefit of us all . sally Wale by Email Good on Theresa May , picture , for take control of the Brexit talk . Downing Street can talk all it want about this being a longstanding meeting with EU chief , but it be obvious she think she need to step in . David Davis talk a good game but have achieve very little and I be sure his smirk face be irritate the EU negotiator . we need progress on these talk . Fraser Munro Inverness it would seem that the Dementia Tax be back on the table . Jackie Doyle-Price have just hand Corbyn and the Labour Party a golden stick to beat them with . ken Lawson Edinburgh it would appear that Donald Trump be spoil for a fight after all . not content with push North Korea to the brink , he have now set his sight on Iran . it ' s bad enough in the Middle East without add another country to the list of US casualty of war . Richard Low Glasgow I Read R McGee ' S letter ' s letter with interest . the reason for STV not show Scottish home and away game be down to the fact that the SFA sell the right to Sky . so neither STV nor the BBC be permit to show their game . M Fisher by email the organ donor debate could be easily solve . if you be n't register and you develop problem with any of your own internal organ and need a transplant then you will not be entitle to someone else ' S when they die . those on the register will be treat first . Lionel Mcmillan Falkirk THEY say nothing should be ban from comedy , but James Corden ' s joke about sex abuse and Harvey Weinstein be out of place and tasteless . I be glad he apologise quickly , but that be probably more to do with the public reaction . Shona Mckay Aberdeen
trump So TWEET ON BREXIT ; U.S. SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP ; Prez big up UK deal after talk Donald Trump yesterday tweet that the US be work on a ` ` very big and exciting ' ' trade deal with Brexit Britain . the US President praise the UK , and blast the EU , as Tory Trade chief Liam Fox end a charm offensive in Washington DC . Mr Trump tweet the talk with Mr Fox show ` ` our special relationship with the UK be go to be even good ' ' . hour later he add : ` ` work on major trade deal with the United Kingdom . could be very big & exciting . job ! ` ` the EU be very protectionist with the US . stop ! ' ' his excitement come as the UK publish a list of the business our firm do with each one of the @card@ congressional district in the States . it top a flurry of good news for PM Theresa May as German car giant BMW say it will build its new all-electric Mini in the UK . separately , the CBI say factory order be rise at their fast for nearly @card@ year . New Zealand Foreign Minister Gerry Brownlee speak of ` ` strong interest ' ' in quickly do a post-Brexit free trade deal with the UK . Lib Dem leader Sir Vince Cable urge the government to guarantee Parliament a vote on any post-Brexit deal . he say while a US deal could be significant it would not compare to the benefit of be in the EU single market . Official figure be today expect to show an economic slowdown with April to June GDP growth tip at @card@ per cent . the International Monetary Fund on Monday cut growth forecast for @card@ from @card@ to @card@ per cent . president Trump take to Twitter to accuse his own Attorney General Jeff Sessions of a ` ` VERY weak position ' ' on ` ` crime ' ' by Hillary Clinton . insider believe he may axe Sessions , @card@ , for refuse to oversee an FBI probe into Russian collusion in the US election . Carmageddon - Pages @card@ & @card@
Brexit ' to blame for cosmetic ops drop ' the number of cosmetic surgery ops in Britain fall @card@ per cent last year , with doc blame Brexit . surgeon perform @card@ procedure - down from a record @card@ in @card@ . it be the first time the figure have be below @card@ since @card@ . Ops on man almost halve to @card@ , while those on woman be down @card@ per cent to @card@ . fella have tummy tuck buck the trend , with a @card@ per cent rise to @card@ . the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons say people be be cautious in the light of the political unknown . Surgeon Rajiv Grover say patient be opt for less invasive procedure instead . he add : ` ` negative news and uncertainty surround Brexit seem to have reinvigorate the famous British stiff upper lip . ' '
Foster & Aiken in dog fight on Brexit A POLITICIAN brand a ` ` Chihuahua ' ' by Arlene Foster claim her comment mean he be ` ` intelligent and ferocious ' ' . the First Minister have a go at UUP MLA Steven Aiken when he accuse her of a Brexit U-turn . she say that UUP ` ` attack dog ' ' Aiken be ` ` more like a Chihuahua ' ' . but he tweet : ` ` first time I ' ve ever be compare to small but intelligent and ferocious Mexican attack dog ! ! ' ' the snarl match begin when Foster and Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness jointly write to Theresa May outline their priority for the Brexit talk . they outline their priority and area of concern for the negotiation - include the Irish border , trading cost and the energy market . some , include Aiken , say the letter show a ` ` pro-Remain ' ' stance .
I can be a bloody difficult woman ... as EU chief be about to find out ; Tory Leadership FAVOURITE OUTLINES Her DREAM for POST-BREXIT UK when the country vote in the referendum about Europe a little more than two week ago , the message to politician be clear . we want out of the European Union - and we want serious change in the way politics work . incredibly , lot of our political and business leader have respond by show that they still do n't get it . some politician - democratically-elected politician - have even suggest the government should ignore the referendum result and keep Britain inside the EU . some business leader , rather than planning for Britain ' S departure or think of the opportunity withdrawal present , have choose to complain about the result and criticise the voter . well , I could n't be clear . Brexit mean Brexit . there must be no attempt to remain inside the EU , no attempt to rejoin it by the back door and no second referendum . the country vote to leave the European Union and , as Prime Minister , I will make sure that we leave the European Union . of course , there be some risk in leaving , which be why we need strong , proven leadership to steer us through a period of economic uncertainty . but there be also some great opportunity cause by leave the EU . the government will be able to do more to control immigration to Britain from other European country . referendum be a vote for change we will be able to negotiate our own trade deal with country outside Europe . and we ' ll be able to do lot of common-sense thing , like cut back on red tape and let local council buy British . so we have to seize the chance to get out into the world and help British firm to do business all around the globe . but as I ' ve say , the referendum be not just a vote against our membership of the EU . it be a vote for change - and I understand why . in Westminster , I be sometimes criticise for do politics my own way . as Ken Clarke say about me this week , I can be a ` ` bloody difficult woman ' ' . but as I say afterwards : ` ` Yes , and the European Commission be about to find out . ' ' because I ' m not your typical politician . I do n't tour the television studio , I do n't gossip about people over lunch , I do n't go drinking in Parliament ' S bar . I do n't often wear my heart on my sleeve . I just get on with the job and I think that be the kind of no-nonsense politics people want . they also want a clear , optimistic , positive view of what Britain should look like in the year to come . and this be important , because , while negotiate the deal that get us out of Europe be go to be a big job , we still need to be able to get on with govern the country and change it for the well . my vision be simple but it be bold . I want to make Britain a country that work not for a privileged few but for everyone , regardless of who they be and where they ' re from . because we ' re a long way from that point right now . if you ' re bear poor in today ' s Britain , you will die on average nine year earlier than other . if you ' re black , you ' re treat more harshly by the criminal justice system than if you ' re white . if you ' re a white , working-class boy , you ' re less likely than anyone else in Britain to go to university . if you ' re at a state school , you ' re less likely to reach the top profession than if ' d t d it l ' you ' re educate privately . if you ' re a woman , you still earn less than a man . if you suffer from mental health problem , there ' s too often not enough help to hand . if you ' re young , you ' ll find it hard than ever before to own your own home . these be all appalling injustice and I be determine to fight against them . but the mission to make Britain a country that work for everyone go further than fight these injustice . if you ' re from an ordinary , working-class family , life be much hard than many people in politics realise . you have a job , it but you do n't always have job security . you have your own home but you worry about mortgage rate go up . you can just about manage , but you worry about the cost of living and the quality of the local school - because there ' s no other choice for you . under my leadership , there will never be any doubt about whose side the Conservative Party be on . we be go to put ourselves at the service of ordinary , work people . it be a big job , but we will make Britain a country that work for everyone .
loser ' PLOT To Block BREXIT by Tom Newton Dunn Senior politician and Remain backer be plot against Brexit . Ex-PM Tony Blair fuel call for a new referendum , while Scotland ' S First Minister Nicola Sturgeon say her MP may try to block withdrawal . eleven Labour frontbenchers also quit in a bid to replace leader Jeremy Corbyn with a pro-EU candidate . Mr Blair say it would be hard to re-run but add : ` ` why rule it out ? ' ' German leader Angela Merkel ' s Chief of Staff Peter Altmaier urge a UK re-think , say our politician ` ` should have the possibility to reconsider the consequence of an exit ' ' . the call come as David Cameron today lay out a route to Brexit as he face the commons for the first time since announce his resignation . he will tell MP that civil servant be start work on a formal split . Pro-Leave Tory MP want him to implement the EU ' s Article @card@ to start a UK exit , instead of wait for his successor to do it in October . tension spiral yesterday after senior figure claim the country be descend into anarchy . as Labour ' s leadership coup also erupt , one Tory MP describe Westminster last night as ` ` a cluster goat f*** with knob on ' ' . Chancellor George Osborne will make a statement today about his safeguard to protect the economy . the Cabinet will also meet for the first time this morning since the poll . Sturgeon Veto Threat - Pages @card@ & @card@
may ' S MUTINY ; PM DEFEATED By Tory MP Rebellion over Brexit bill vote Theresa May last night lose her first Commons Brexit vote as MP win the power to amend a final EU divorce deal . a rebellion by @card@ of her MP see the PM defeat by just four vote on a key amendment to her flagship EU Withdrawal Bill . the blow on the eve of a Brussels summit leave her in the humiliate position of be unable to guarantee to Europe ' s leader she can implement the exit term they agree . Rebel Dominic Grieve ' s amendment to the Bill will now give Parliament ` ` a meaningful vote ' ' on the final Brexit deal . Mrs May , below , spend the day love-bombing MP . she have vow not to implement an exit deal without give MP a take it or leave vote . but despite minister and whip carry out last minute strong-arm the vote be lose by @card@ to @card@ . one alleged reduce MP to tear . former Conservative minister include Nicky Morgan and Ken Clarke be part of the Morand ke rt e revolt . Labour Peer Lord Adonis say : ` ` this be the first step towards the defeat of Brexit . ' ' Ukip ' S Nigel Farage hit back : ` ` my contempt for career politician know no bound . ' ' Conservative MP Nadine Dorries declare that the rebel should be ` ` deselected and never allow to stand again ' ' . a No10 sp man say : ` ` respect the w of the Hou and will co tinue to fo on prepare country to le the EU . ' ' spokesman we will house , continue focus the leave cole the Sun . harry.c @ thes yco www.co.uk
Boris in a Brexit face-off with PM Theresa May will hold crunch talk with Boris Johnson ahead of her crucial Brexit speech in Florence this week . the Foreign Secretary be one of only a few close ally invite to stand by the PM ' s side as she outline her vision for life outside the EU . but source last night warn the show of unity be in the balance after he spark Tory civil war at the weekend by publish his Brexit vision . one say : ` ` the invitation come before Friday . who know what happen now . ' ' Home Secretary Amber Rudd brand Boris a Brexit ` ` back seat driver ' ' . full story - Page Two
weak and feeble ALONG with all those other important catchphrases ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' and ` ` strong and stable ' ' , Theresa May warn of a ` ` coalition of chaos ' ' . well , I think it would be fair to say that the election do n't quite go to plan but , at the time of writing , Mrs May have so far fail to deliver her coalition of chaos . on Saturday night , we have the spectacle of Downing Street announce a deal with the DUP , while the DUP say there be no deal . No10 then issue another statement , agree that , right enough , there be n't . if this be strong and stable government , I ' m the Prima Ballerina of the Bolshoi Theatre . and if Mrs May ca n't manage to sort out an agreement with that lot , I do n't think the Brexit talk will go too well .
may : EU Chiefs ' Election Fix Bid ; PM ' S EU Chiefs RAP Theresa May accuse EU boss yesterday of try to fix the General Election . the PM blast Commission chief Jean-Claude Juncker uncker by Tom Newton Dunn and his aide on the step of No10 . she claim Mr Juncker and other be continue on Page Two continue from Page one try to influence the election ' S outcome . she say : ` ` Threats against Britain have be issue by European politician and official . ` ` all of these act have be deliberately time to affect the result of the General Election . ' ' as the Queen give the PM her formal blessing for the election : l the Sun can reveal Mrs May be draw up a ` ` nuclear option ' ' of immediately end our annual £18billion EU payment if talk stall ; l the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier cast doubt on controversial account of a No10 dinner bust-up last week by reveal he bond with the PM over hill walking ; l and it emerge Britain will leave the EU an hour early , at midnight Central European Time rather than GMT on March @card@ , @card@ . the PM accuse the same commission figure of try to sabotage Britain ' s chance of a good Brexit deal . Mrs May say : ` ` in the last few day , we have see just how tough these talk be likely to be . ` ` Britain ' s negotiate position in Europe have be misrepresent in the continental press . the European Commission ' s negotiate stance have harden . ' ' without name Mr Juncker , she make a point of separate him from more friendly leader say : ` ` there be some in Brussel who do n't want these talk to succeed . ' ' she add pick Jeremy Corbyn over her to take the UK ' s negotiate seat would mean ` ` we let the bureaucrat of Brussel run over us ' ' . Downing Street have be batter by briefing from Brussel which have be blame on Mr Juncker ' s chief of staff Martin Selmayr . the late yesterday be a rumour £84million Brexit bill . Mr Selmayr , nickname Darth Vader in Brussels , hit back to say Brexit ` ` will never become a success as it be a sad and sorry event ' ' . he blast ` ` very basic misunderstanding ' ' that Brexit ` ` will not be a walk in the park ' ' . before the PM make her charge , Mr Juncker say he see her as a ` ` tough lady ' ' . Nicola Sturgeon brand Mrs May ' s blast an ` ` irresponsible attack on our European neighbour ' ' . and the First Minister say the PM aim to use the EU as a ` ` bogeyman ' ' to ` ` divert attention ' ' from the Tories ' record . Scottish Labour ' s Europe spokesman Lewis Macdonald add : ` ` Theresa May have go full Donald Trump with this bizarre intervention . ' ' a senior EU source brand Mrs May ' s interference claim fantasy . the Sun say - Page Ten Jez ' S Death Wish - Pages @card@ and @card@ BREKKIE Boozer JEAN-Claude Juncker be know for his booze and federalist view . the chain-smoke EU president , @card@ , be say to have brandy for breakfast and a deep love of French claret . Juncker have to quit as Luxembourg prime minister over a spy scandal and confess he ` ` often have to lie ' ' . Darth Vader TOUGH Martin Selmayr have earn the nickname Rasputin , Darth Vader and Juncker ' S monster . the 46-year-old , Mr Juncker ' s chief of staff , be fear yet respect in Brussels . Selmayr once say : ` ` Juncker be the good guy and I ' m the bad guy . that ' S how it be . ' '
EU should be pay Britain ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter so Angela Merkel and Francois Hollande be demand that we pay a £50billion ` ` divorce bill ' ' to the EU . should n't we demand that Germany pay us for rebuild London and other city that the Germans destroy in the last war ? and we should also demand payment from France for every British soldier who fight and die to liberate France from a German occupation . les Kozak by Email I ' M with Iain Duncan Smith on his comment about how , after @card@ year of EU membership , it be the EU that owe us billion of pound . when the economy of Portugal , Ireland and Greece crash a few year back , as non-member of the Single Monetary Union it be naff all to do with us . yet once again , the EU con us into pay million into the bailout fund when we be not accountable . the EU should pay us a few billion back - or we walk . Mick May by email it be ironic that Nicola Sturgeon say the PM have take a ` ` leap in the dark ' ' and can not answer basic question about what Brexit would mean for the UK . it be obvious that Nicola Sturgeon have an agenda to knock Brexit and use it to bring about a second Scottish independence referendum . while we have a good idea of what Brexit would mean for the UK , Ms Sturgeon can not give us any idea what independence would mean for the people of Scotland . Theresa May be carry out the will of the people in the UK , whereas Nicola Sturgeon be not carry out the will of the people of Scotland who have already speak . Jason Findlay Glasgow Nicola Sturgeon and her SNP powergrabbers be a big threat to the UK than any one of the EU member state . if anything do not go her way the SNP want to jump ship . they would destroy the UK to suit their own ambition . john Carr by email I be feed up with read about what Nicola Sturgeon be try to dictate on the Brexit deal , and want another referendum for Scotland . we be a democratic country who vote for Brexit , so why should she keep try to split the country ? let Theresa may get on with get a good deal for the UK . and that include Scotland . James Bellamy by email
Bah HAMMMBUG ! ; Chancellor RUBBISHES Nicola ' S BREXIT DREAM ' no separate deal ' for Scots Scrooge Phil blast by Nat Philip Hammond yesterday rubbish Nicola Sturgeon ' S plan for a separate Brexit deal . the Chancellor insist it be unrealistic to push for a special Scots package when Britain negotiate to leave the EU . he accuse the First Minister of look backwards and ` ` clutch at straw ' ' . and he tell Nat chief not to ` ` resist the will of the people ' ' follow June ' s Brexit vote - despite the majority here opt to stay in Europe . ahead of a meeting with Ms Sturgeon in Edinburgh , Mr Hammond blast SNP hope of a special agreement - before Nat have even publish plan for one . he say : ` ` I honestly think this be not a realistic prospect . ` ` the European Union be clear it will negotiate a deal with the United Kingdom . the United Kingdom be a member state . ` ` you only have to think about it for a few moment to realise a separate immigration deal for any part of the United Kingdom would be impractical . ' ' he add : ` ` I want to work closely with the Scottish Government and the other devolve administration to make sure that we approach these negotiation in a way that secure the well possible deal for all part of the United Kingdom . ` ` and I look forward to us move on from this sort of slightly backward-looking , clutch at straw , try to resist the will of the people to embrace it , recognise it ' s go to happen and commit to work together to make sure it ' s do in away most supportive of the UK economy and the Scottish economy . ' ' Reminded by reporter that the ` ` will ' ' of Scot be to remain in the EU , Mr Hammond reply : ` ` well , this be a United Kingdom issue and the will of the people of the United Kingdom be to leave . ` ` and we ' re clear that we ca n't have a different deal or a different outcome for different part of the United Kingdom . ` ` we have to work together as a United Kingdom now to get the well possible deal with Europe and then to make our way in the world as a United Kingdom , to the benefit of all part of that United Kingdom . ' ' amid threat by Nat to call a second indy referendum if they do n't get their way , Mr Hammond - who meet engineer at Heriot-Watt University before visit Standard Life ' S Edinburgh HQ - say Scotland ' s trade with the UK be ` ` four time more important to Scotland than its trading relationship with the rest of the European Union ' ' . and regard a separate Brexit deal , he say : ` ` I would suggest it would be a disadvantage overall to Scotland . ' ' official last night remain tightlipped about the atmosphere in his meeting with Ms Sturgeon . a spokesman for the First Minister say : ` ` the Chancellor say he look forward to hear our proposal on Scotland ' s place in Europe , and that they will be consider fully by the UK Government - in line with the specific undertaking give to the First Minister by the Prime Minister when they meet in Edinburgh in July . ' ' a source later reveal that the proposal Mr Hammond pledge to consider would be idea for how the whole of the UK approach Brexit . but SNP MP Pete Wishart slam Mr Hammond for his outspoken visit . he say : ` ` another Tory Chancellor get Scotland ' telt ' . ' ' and a senior Nat source add : ` ` this will backfire badly oHammond ` ` a Tory Chancellor come north to throw his weight around and try to lay down the law to Scotland will go down very poorly with people who be worry Xmas See about the impact of Brexit on job , household budget and our economy . ' ' Earlier , Ms Sturgeon stick to her gun at Holyrood . she tell MSPs at First Minister ' s question : ` ` I do n't believe there be any mandate or any economic , social or cultural justification for take the UK out of the single market . ' ' the Scottish government be expect to publish a list of option in the come week show how they think Scotland could have a different Brexit package . minister have argue they would like some control over immigration , guarantee access to the single market and power over broker trade deal . but the Scottish Sun understand party insider reckon their Brexit dream will be reject by No10 . strategist plan to present their case at the next meeting of the Joint Ministerial Council where leader from all four UK government discuss Brexit . a source say : ` ` the ideal solution be they adopt our plan and present them to Europe as part of the negotiate position : this be what we want , include this for Scotland . if they do n't , it ' s up to them what happen next . ' ' we tell yesterday that a YouGov poll reveal @card@ per cent of Scot reckon a separate Brexit deal would ` ` probably not be possible ' ' while just @card@ per cent say it ` ` probably be possible ' ' . would proba among per ce ces Cen More a gen w Nat supporter , @card@ cent doubt the chance of a deal , while @card@ per cent think the idea be realistic . misery Page @card@
8YR INFLUX ; SOFT BREXIT Cabinet RIFT ; leu migrant still let in until @card@ lPlan blast by leave minister a Fresh Cabinet row have erupt over a bid to delay the full introduction of a tough immigration system until as late as @card@ . Home Secretary Amber Rudd have draw up plan for a visa-based scheme to block unskilled worker from the EU . but Ms Rudd be ally with Chancellor Philip Hammond to also insist it could only be bring in gradually . the ` ` soft Brexit ' ' duo fear a sudden end to British business ' access to cheap foreign worker could be a hammer blow to the economy . they be push for a gradual transition into the visa-based system that could last as long as five year after we leave the EU . Britain wo n't exit until @card@ at the early , mean we face at least eight more year of an Eastern Europe influx . the system be debate by the Cabinet ' s Brexit subcommittee last week . one Cabinet minister who back a gradual introduction say : ` ` Withdrawing unskilled EU labour instantly would create a cliff-edge for the hospitality and construction industry . sounding from those sector be make it clear we will need a transition period . ' ' but the idea have anger leave campaigner in the Cabinet , such as Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and Development Secretary Priti Patel . immigration campaigner say firm should start prepare for workforce change now . migration Watch UK boss Lord Green say : ` ` a transition period be completely unnecessary . ` ` it ' S not as if all three million EU worker already here be go to disappear in a puff of smoke . ' ' Migration Watch UK be also today call on farmer to boost worker ' wage so they can employ some of the 1.6million jobless brit instead of migrant . the Home Office last night say it do not comment on government meeting .
PM must ignore the delusion of anti-Brexit crew SORE-loser Remainers can demand Theresa May reveal her Brexit plan until the cow come home . but for the time be , the less Brussels know about them , the well . Nick Clegg , Keir Starmer and Co ' s demand that Parliament be give a veto over Mrs May ' S intention be too stupid for word . she need to hold back until she ' s good and ready . Angela Fortune Newcastle upon Tyne WITH all these people try to stop or delay the UK leave the EU , perhaps the 17million-plus voter who vote to leave should take out a legal action and sue all politician and business that try to stop the will of the people from be honour . Chris Giles Bicester , Oxon UP pop Clegg , who take his party to defeat and near extinction , to stir trouble again over Brexit . the country vote leave and he once again go against the nation . James Hughes Derby NOW be the time for Remain MP to look at their position in Parliament . if they do not wish to uphold the will of the people , they need to resign and allow nominee who will stand in their constituency . Chris TORODE Richmond , North Yorks it look like a dictatorship be slowly creep into British politics though the back door . Anti-Brexit rebel MP be form an alliance to challenge the Prime Minister about Brexit . but they be also challenge the @card@ per cent of people who vote for Brexit . voter have a long memory and will remember the MP try to sabotage a democratic referendum at the next election . les Kozak Norwich it be time that the population outside London stage a general strike to prove what might happen if the Remainers try to derail the Brexit negotiation . Malcolm Flight Tenbury Wells , Worcs My blood boil at the undemocratic stance take by sore-loser politician , namely Ed Miliband , Nick Clegg and pro-Remain Tories . I hope all these anti-democracy MP be name so the public can vote them out at election time . the vote be for take back our border and sovereignty . all MP should be co-operate to make our break from the European state as quick and efficient as possible . Alan Greaves Manchester Nicola Sturgeon be again say how undemocratic the result of the In/ Out vote be , as it do not take into account the Scottish vote . be this the same Nicola Sturgeon who lead the SNP MP to defeat the vote for extended opening hour in England , something that voter in the South want ? once again we see the Remain side only think it be democratic if the result be the one they want . tom Lennon Nazeing , Essex FIVE year of court battle , five year of hell for the girl at the centre of it . two year spend in jail for Ched Evans , one acquittal , a potential £500,000 compensation for the footballer and the toxic legacy this case will leave . rightly , or wrongly , Evans win his retrial for rape and he have win his freedom . but at what cost ? Ashley Smith March , Cambs ADMITTEDLY Ched Evans ' behaviour on the night be not honourable but it be time to let him get on with his family life and career . Brenda TITTERTON Chesterfield , Derbyshire TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply SOME MP appear to forget they be elect to serve the electorate , not dictate to them . annoy the elector can mean have to find a new career . Eddie Vickers , Goole , East York Let ' S hope the Clegg and Miliband union do as much for try to sabotage Brexit as Clegg do for the Lib Dem party , so Theresa May can get on with get the good deal for the UK . bob , Stratford I Hope all of the child be bring from Calais be DNA test against relative , to make sure they be not be traffic . James Percy , London INSTEAD of a scheme to compensate for the @card@ baby a year injure at birth , why not make sure there be none in the first place , Mr Hunt ? Stevie B , Atherton , Gtr Manchester email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
good time to grab a mortgage ; BUYERS Benefit From BREXIT uncertainty in financial market mean borrower can be sure of one thing - a mortgage price war be under way and they will be the winner . lender fear that Brexit jitter may put some potential home buyer off , so they be go all-out attract any business they can . rs to so nt5 and they be already factor the Bank of England ' s expect cut in the base rate next month to @card@ per cent , so rate be come down . in u25 nts ly n.s y Rachel Springall of Moneyfacts say : ` ` the Brexit vote have definitely fuel uncertainty . a ` ` but despite all this , it ' S still good time for borrower to grab a decent mortgage deal . ` ` lender be lock in a heated price war to attract new business , make this the perfect time to take editor ss ke ds , e advantage of low rate . ' ' er eil rt ll ` ` David Hollingworth from broker London & Country add : ` ` market expectation be that the base rate will stay low for long . en er nr , ` ` as a result , lender have be able to cut fix rate even low , especially the long-term product . ' ' Kis -ss . this be great news for those thinking about remortgaging , as there be now the chance to reduce outgoings by move to a cheap fix deal . gs l. on here , expert give their top tip n make the most of the deal . Gir te Think CAREFULLY ABOUT FIXING with so much uncertainty in the air , the security offer by a fixed-rate deal may seem very appealing . r , e ias -s there be currently very competitive ten-year fix available , such as Coventry Building Society ' s deal at a record low of @card@ per cent . this give you the peace of mind of know that whatever happen in the come week and month , your mortgage payment will stay the same until @card@ . but Mark Harris from mortgage broker SPF private client warn : ` ` whether you should fix for this long depend on your circumstance . ` ` if you fix for long than you be absolutely sure about , you may find you have to pay a hefty early redemption charge to get out of the mortgage during the fix term . ' ' do THE MATHS it be also essential that you check the number before settle on a ten-year fix , or any new mortgage deal for that matter . this be because while some will come with low rate , they will also have high fee . David Hollingworth from London & Country add : ` ` these low-rate deal can carry big fee of £1,500 . ` ` Borrowers with small mortgage can often find good value in a deal with low switching cost , despite a slightly high rate . ' '
the Sun SAYS Gove vs May the final choice for our next Prime Minister must be between Theresa May and Michael www.Gove.No one else will do . May have huge support among Tory MP , as the first round of vote prove . but on June @card@ , 17million-plus people vote for Brexit by a decent majority . a leave candidate must be in the last two - and of those left only Gove could credibly be our PM . we salute Andrea Leadsom ' s spirited campaigning to leave the EU and the substantial support she have . but the Energy Minister be entirely untested at the high level . we know too little about her and what she really believe . even those who vote for her yesterday can not be entirely confident she be the leader Britain need at this pivotal moment in our history . her pro-Brexit MP may baulk at switch to Gove after his perceive betrayal of Boris Johnson . but we believe he do that from the genuine conviction that Boris would have be bad for Britain as PM . even though ex-candidates Liam Fox and Stephen Crabb be now back Ms May , their supporter should switch to Gove and put him in the final two . he be a principled , brave politician without whom we would not be leave the EU . his track record in Cabinet as Education Secretary and Justice Secretary show him to be a man of great intelligence and reform zeal . he be a heavyweight politician capable of lead the world ' S fifth large www.economy.No one can surely say that yet of Leadsom . she would be a huge gamble . Home Secretary Ms May be a formidable candidate too . she have insist ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' and fair enough . we do n't doubt she mean it . but it must not be forget she back Remain . and while she style herself as a safe pair of hand , be that good enough ? should n't Britain be more ambitious , especially after the vote to leave ? that should be the choice : two big beast with contrast style , idea ... and view on Brexit . it Must be those two .
tusk LETS PM GET To 2ND Base ; BREXIT ' BREAKTHROUGH ' next phase of EU trade talk Euro Cheer @card@ EU boss Donald Tusk last night hint at a start to phase two of Brexit trade talk after meeting Theresa May . in a breakthrough follow divorce bill discussion , he say it be ` ` possible ' ' . he give the PM ten day to more detail . leave Brussels , Mrs call the meeting ` ` positive ' ' . she say : ` ` we ' ve be talk about how we can progress the issue in relation to the financial settlement . ' ' the PM push for swift agreement in return for up the divorce payment to £38billion . talk touch on how to ` ` stage manage ' ' the offer in return for the go-ahead , the Sun understand . it come a week after European Council President say ` ` much more progress ' ' be need talk could ahead with all @card@ leader . but last night he tweet : ` ` sufficient progress in Brexit talk at December EU Council be possible . but still a huge challenge . we need to see progress from UK within ten day on all issue . ' ' the sign of a breakthrough come after Mrs May spend a day butter up fellow EU leader . she tell Germany ' S Angela Merkel Brexit talk must move to ` ` the next stage ' ' . after meet the PM , her Belgian counterpart Charles Michel tweet supportively : ` ` Clarity on our future relation be in everyone ' S interest . ' ' Mrs May also meet her Danish and Lithuanian counterpart . last night EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker say : ` ` there be some movement . ` ` I do n't know in which direction but I hope in the right direction . ' ' however the Irish border remain a huge sticking point . one EU diplomat warn the problem with plan to avoid a hard border be ` ` unsolvable ' ' .
get tough with EU blackmail ; Scottish Sun letter the page where you tell Scotland what you think WE have now reach a point in the Brexit talk where whatever divorce bill payment we offer , it be never go to be sufficient to meet the greedy EU demand . while we keep up our offer - the late be believe to be £40billion - the EU assume it be in control . well , now be the time for us to show the EU we be in control and that our final offer be , indeed , final . we will be make our own trade regulation in our own free trade market . we will control our own law and not be restrict by EU court . so take it or leave it . David Roberts by Email I FEEL that whatever figure we come up with for Brexit would not be enough . EU negotiator be never go to accept it - but I do n't think we will walk away . there will be many other negotiation - it will go down to the last minute then a deal will be agree . harry King Edinburgh WE be promise tough negotiation yet the government have just fold and offer more money and get nothing in return . Brexit would have be a great opportunity if we have have the right people do the negotia-tions - David Davis just come across as arrogant . mare Wilkie Glasgow WE be head towards a water down and expensive Brexit . Theresa May be set to promise more money for the EU , but no one vote for that . it will infuriate both Remainers and Leavers . Theresa May and her government will not survive this betrayal of the British people . Ian Forbes Glasgow WE read every day about politician behave badly . yet some of these people be responsible for the alcohol minimum pricing policy , suggest that we be a nation of drunk who ca n't be trust to control themselves without help . if they close the subsidise bar at Holyrood and Westminster maybe these politician would behave in a manner expect of the rest of the population . James Robertson Grangemouth , Stirlingshire I WAS sad to read about the passing of the likely Lads star Rodney Bewes , picture , who come across as a very gentle man with a witty sense of humour . the likely Lads remind me of my young day , with girl , pub and football very prominent . thanks to television we will be able to see Rodney at his good for many year to come . mike O'ROUKE by Email I WAS intrigue by Kezia Dugdale ' s claim that being on I ' m a celebrity will let her meet ` ` people from all walk of life ' ' . all walk of life ? she should be meet worker , the homeless and unemployed , not celebrity who be pay large sum to appear on TV . David Brown by email
BREXIT Border ' UNACCEPTABLE ' ; POSITION PAPER PUBLISHED Customs post not on the return of manned border check on this island be ` ` completely unacceptable to the UK ' ' , the EU will be tell today . but Theresa May have bow to DUP demand and rule out push the custom boundary to the Irish Sea . the Prime Minister will today outline her key principle on Brexit talk about Northern Ireland ' s border with the Republic . the position paper propose no physical infrastructure such as custom post . instead , they wish it to remain ` ` seamless and frictionless ' ' . and place custom check at transit point between Northern Ireland and the British mainland be dismiss as ` ` not constitutionally or economically viable ' ' . the latter proposal - vehemently oppose by DUP leader and Westminster powerbroker Arlene Foster - be report to be favour by Taoiseach Leo Varadkar . last month he make it plain that ` ` there should not be an economic border ' ' . now London be seek a time-limited transition to a new custom system that could work in one of two way post-Brexit . their first proposal be there would be ` ` no custom border at all between the UK and Ireland ' ' . the other option would allow waiver on entry/exit declaration , as well as measure to streamline the cross-border delivery of good by business North and South . however , one sticking point be likely to be the insistence by the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier that ` ` frictionless ' ' trade be a perk reserve for member nation only . a Government source yesterday tell the Sun : ` ` both side need to show flexibility and imagination when it come to the border issue and that be what our late position paper do . ` ` as Barnier himself have say , the solution can not be base on a precedent , so we ' re look forward to see the EU ' s paper on Ireland . ` ` top of our list be to agree upfront no physical border infrastructure - a return to the border post of the past be completely unacceptable to the UK . ` ` Protecting trade be vital for the UK and Ireland - in @card@ Northern Ireland sell £2.7bn of good to Ireland , while last year Great Britain export £13.6bn worth of good to Ireland , and import £9.1bn . ' ' the paper will also make clear plan to protect Common Travel Area right for UK and Irish citizen , and uphold the Belfast Agreement .
Nic ' s Barn storm FALLOUT Nic ' s Barn storm Cola LAVE Nicola Sturgeon sit down with EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier and push her plea to keep the UK in the single market . by Christine Lavelle Scottish Political Reporter say : ` ` I outline that our priority be to protect Scotland ' s economic interest . the Scottish Government will do all it can to build a consensus against an extreme Brexit outside the single market . ' ' the First Minister tell the bigwig how a hard Brexit could have ` ` catastrophic ' ' result on job , investment and living standard . Ms Sturgeon also highlight what she believe be Scotland ' s priority during the ` ` useful ' ' 45-minute chat in Brussels . she ` ` Mr Barnier , who also meet Labour leader Jermey Corbyn , later tweet : ` ` good meeting . cola Nicola Sturgeon sit down with EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier and push her plea to keep the UK in the single market . the First Minister tell the bigwig how a hard Brexit could have ` ` catastrophic ' ' result on job , investment and living standard . Ms Sturgeon also highlight what she believe be Scotland ' s priority during the ` ` useful ' ' 45-minute chat in Brussels . she say : ` ` I outline that our priority be to protect Scotland ' s economic interest . the Scottish Government will do all it can to build a consensus against an extreme Brexit outside the single market . ' ' Mr Barnier , who also meet Labour leader Jermey Corbyn , later tweet : ` ` good meeting . ' '
` ` I be all for Brexit ... but it ' S criminal now ! ` ` ; go into politics ? no way , say Hotel Inspector Alex Polizzi - she ' d rather keep her private life private Alex Polizzi have make a TV career out of be brutally honest with delude hotelier who be drive themselves out of business . so it do n't surprise us to hear that she also have a strong opinion on other subject - notably Brexit . ` ` I hate Brussel and how [ the EU ] think they can interfere in every aspect of our life , ' ' say Alex , @card@ . ` ` I ' m not racist in any shape or form , I just do n't like the fact we ' ve lose our democratic sovereignty . I be all for Brexit , but who the heck know there have be so little preparation do ! it ' s criminal that we ' ve find ourselves in this situation and I ' m not entirely sure our government be up for do what ' s necessary . I ' ve get child age four and eight and I often think : ' what have we do ? ' ' ' Would Alex ever fancy swap hotel for the House of Commons ? ` ` no ! ' ' she insist . ` ` I find politics so toxic , I ' m scare of get involve . you ' re not allow a personal life - and I ' m not a whiter-than-white person , I ' ve do thing I do n't particularly want scrutinise ... I do n't know why anyone in their right mind would put themselves through that . it ai n't gon na be me , babe . ' ' besides , the granddaughter of hotel mogul Lord Forte be far too busy bring business back from the brink . and as she return with the 13th series - and her 10th after take over host duty from Ruth Watson in @card@ - of the Hotel Inspector , she think her help be need now more than ever . ` ` because of the difficulty with the economy over the last two year , a lot of hotel have go out of business , ' ' Alex explain . ` ` I want to help this industry that I love so much , even if I ' m only contribute in a small way . and if people go on watch the Hotel Inspector , I ' m willing to keep on do the show . it ' s such fun . ' ' retain her firm but friendly approach , Alex have no intention of turn into her F-bombing restaurant equivalent , Gordon Ramsay . ` ` I be a nought-to-sixty kind of person - I scream and shout at my family like there ' s no tomorrow , but the great advantage as you get old be that you realise how important it be to be kind to people and to stay professional , ' ' she say . ` ` it ' s devastating for anyone that they ' ve have to call me in . I ' m the last resort , be n't I ? they ' ve try everything , they do n't have any money and they ' ve put their health and their family ' s future at risk . ' ' but that ' S not to say Alex do n't enjoy a bit of confrontation ... ` ` I never mind my idea be challenge , but I generally get my own way , ' ' she smile . ` ` the firm favourite of mine this series disagree with me about load of stuff ; we have frank discussion . that be fun . another be a real procrastinator and I feel like scream . ` ` it ' s amazing how tenacious owner can be , and they only want to hear that I ' ve find a solution , but I ' m not a fairy godmother and I do n't come with a magic wand and fairy dust . sometimes problem be n't fixable and I have say before : ' this be n't go to work and you should sell up . ' ' ' Fresh from a holiday in the Caribbean , Alex confess that while she can relax on a sunshine break , she ca n't resist ensure standard be up to scratch at the place she stay and eat . ` ` basically , darling , I ' m a complete tanorexic , I love the sun and I ' m really good at switch off , ' ' she explain . ` ` we stay somewhere call GoldenEye in Jamaica and it be incredibly expensive and very simple and that be a winning combination . ` ` but I be recently in a restaurant in Cornwall with my mum and two kid and the service be so bad that , for the first time in about @card@ year , I ask for the service charge to be take off the bill . then I call the manager and explain why and that they need to understand that good or bad service can make or break any business . ` ` and I find ugly hotel room hard to handle . if there ' s a mirror on the wall and a sofa underneath , of course the sofa ' S get to be centre on the mirror . I ca n't sit in a restaurant and see that without move it because it ' S just go to ruin my meal ! ' ' ? preview p41 new ! the Hotel Inspector Tuesday 9pm C5 ` ` I ' m not white than white - I ' ve do thing I do n't want scrutinise ' '
BREXIT BLINKERS Will LEAVE US All CHEESED-OFF it would appear that Brexit have claim a second Irish food victim . the humble block of Cheddar cheese have be smash by the fall of sterling , lead to a dramatic drop in the amount that we export across the water . in January , the UK import just @card@ ton of the toasties ' essential from abroad , a total that be @card@ ton down on the same month last year - a significant @card@ per cent wedge . the amount of Cheddar the brit ship in during the whole of last year also , well ... crumble to @card@ ton , a fall of @card@ ton from @card@ . give that Irish Cheddar account for around @card@ per cent of those import , our dairy processor and farmer have be particularly hard hit . the amount that make it over to Britain ' S chill shelf slump by @card@ per cent , or @card@ ton , in @card@ . and unfortunately for them , the UK represent the only viable market for Cheddar . Department of Agriculture chief Aidan O'Driscoll recently tell the Oireachtas Public Accounts Committee that while our dairy industry be less expose to Brexit blow than other sector , the exception be Cheddar sale . reveal that @card@ per cent of Irish Cheddar export currently go to the UK , he say : ` ` nobody else eat Cheddar . it ca n't be divert off to France . ' ' we ' ve already see the damage that Brexit have do to the mushroom sector . I fear for Irish business - and their employee - who rely on the UK for business . they need help , and I do n't think they be get it at the moment .
brit SPOKE , now it ' S time To LISTEN ; Judges ' BREXIT Warning Public vote ' irrelevant ' if MP make EU call Britain ' S top judge must respect the clear mandate give by the people on Brexit , the government ' s law boss say yesterday . Attorney General Jeremy Wright say June ' S referendum would be render ` ` legally irrelevant ' ' if an Act of Parliament be need to begin Brexit . he issue the warning as a landmark four-day Supreme Court hearing on leave the EU begin yesterday . Theresa May want to overturn last month ' S High Court ruling that give MP the right to authorise Article @card@ talk to leave the union . she fear it could delay Brexit for month . and Mr Wright say it could also do serious harm to Mrs May ' s negotiate strategy . the case be deem so important that all of its @card@ Supreme Court judge be sit for the first time since its creation in @card@ . Senior Tory MP Mr Wright ask them to recognise that the PM be not plan to leave the EU ` ` on a whim , or out of a clear blue sky ' ' . instead , she be act under a royal prerogative with a very clear mandate give by voter on June @card@ . that be ` ` in line with parliamentary sovereignty and legitimate public expectation ' ' , he add . he say Parliament have have ` ` multiple opportunity ' ' to restrict the ability to begin the process and ` ` have not choose to do so ' ' . president of the Supreme Court Lord Neuberger say all the judge will consider the case ` ` impartially ' ' follow criticism about some of their link to EU institution . he also impose a ban identify some people who bring the original case after they be threaten with ` ` serious violence ' ' . the bid to give Parliament the final say be be lead by wealthy investment fund manager and philanthropist Gina Miller , @card@ , who be bear in British Guyana . meanwhile , the Scottish Government ' s appeal to have Article @card@ authorise by the Holyrood Parliament will also be hear tomorrow . senior leave campaigner back the government ' s stand last night and warn the judge to butt out . minister have already draw up a very short bill to be introduce to Parliament immediately if the Supreme Court refuse the government ' S appeal . the verdict be not expect until the New year .
PARLEZ Le BREXIT ; EU bid to negotiate in French EU negotiator Michel Barnier yesterday call for Brexit talk to be conduct in French - in another hostile act from Brussels eurocrats . Theresa May , who have have a bruising first EU summit , immediately slap down the suggestion . question on the plan , the PM snort and hit back : ` ` we will conduct the negotiation in the he have yet to make the formal bid for British diplomat to speak only in French - but be keep the option open . in a tweet in English , he write : ` ` never express myself on negotiation language . work as often in en as FR . linguistic regime to be set at start - to be agree btw negotiator . ' ' as an EU commissioner until @card@ , Barnier have repeat run-in with London as he seek to tighten regulation over its financial service industry . his failed ambush come with EU leader livid at some British Cabinet Ministers ' plan for a hard Brexit . the PM be repeatedly force to fight her corner , say last night as she leave Brussels : ` ` we way that be go to make sure that we get the right deal for the United Kingdom . ' ' Downing Street aide swiftly make it clear they will conduct the two year of talk in English . a senior No @card@ source say : ` ` we will discuss Brexit in English . the Prime Minister be clear there be to be no doubt about that . ' ' last night ex-French foreign minister and long-running British foe Barnier row back . he say will continue to play our full role in the EU and I can assure you I have n't be backwards in come forward on issue . ' ' French lose its status to English as the EU ' S main work language after northern and eastern state join in the past two decade . even official from the EU ' s founding power France and Germany now communicate with each other mainly in English . t.newtondunn @ www.the-sun.co.uk
Tory civil war over quit talk vote ban Theresa May escalate her stand-off with Parliament last night by refuse MP a vote on her Brexit negotiation plan , spark a fresh Tory civil war . Senior MP furious with the Prime Minister turn on their own minister in a heated sixhour commons debate . Pro-EU Conservative Claire Perry accuse Brexit Secretary David Davis of ignore the national interest to put his ` ` narrow ideological interest first ' ' . four ex-ministers also side with Labour to demand MP have the right to water down a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' clean break . Mr Davis hit back to attack other EU country and bank for mount a ` ` blame Brexit festival ' ' and accuse some of use the vote as an excuse to sack staff . back up the PM , Mr Davis pledge Downing Street would take in all MP ' view . but he insist : ` ` what I wo n't allow be any party to have a veto on the decision to leave the EU . ' ' Earlier , at Prime Minister ' S question , Mrs May tell MP to put their faith in her , say : ` ` we will negotiate the right deal for the UK - that be what matter to everyone in the UK and that be what we will deliver . ' ' the government will go to court today to try to stop a bid by lawyer to force a Commons vote on when Mrs May can trigger Article @card@ . Attorney General Jeremy Wright will appear in person to insist the power rest with the Prime Minister alone as a Royal prerogative .
project Old Dear ; PENSIONS S-CARE TACTIC Cam ' S dire Brexit warning to oldie David Cameron last night warn the elderly a Brexit would wreck pension and cost them their carers . No10 ' s late ` ` Project Fear ' ' attack target the over 65s , the age group most likely to vote leave . the PM say quit the EU would shrink Britain ' s economy by six per cent , mean ` ` less money to pay pension ' ' . and he say it could cause a shortage of migrant worker in the care sector hand out medicine . he tell Saga magazine : ` ` there be @card@ skilled EU worker in our health and social care system . if we leave there will be uncertainty around visa and residency permit . ` ` that could cause some to return home and have an unpredictable impact on hard-pressed service . ' ' he separately insist a Referendum win by just one vote would put the issue to bed for a generation . a Brexit source claim the PM ' s late attack show Project Fear have hit ` ` hysterical height ' ' . but No10 be confident its focus on the economic risk of a Brexit will push Remain to victory . last night a www.Gransnet.com survey say the over 50s be in favour of leave by @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent . but in Japan for the G7 Summit , the PM claim the Remain campaign have win the economic argument . his ` ` great concern ' ' now be urge UK youngster , the most likely pro-EU group , to register to vote , describe the referendum as a ` ` vote for your life ' ' . steve.hawkes @ www.the-sun.co.uk the Sun say - Page ten @card@ % of over 50s on Gransnet want to leave EU with @card@ % for remain @card@ skilled EU worker in the the British care system 65+ age group most likely to vote for Brexit
EU GOTA Deal ; BREXIT Bill ' Decision ' Brussels claim £52bn talk victory Britain have offer to only pay £38bn Fresh hope of a December Brexit breakthrough be raise after Brussels official claim a deal have be do on the controversial divorce payment . but British negotiator deny sign up to a bill of between £42billion and £52billion . official in Brexit Secretary David Davis ' S department say they do not recognise the figure and insist talk be continue in Brussels . the claim emerge from the EU side just a week after PM Theresa May signal she be willing to up Britain ' s offer to £38billion to get talk move . a further sign of significant movement come as Michel Barnier travel to Berlin to talk number . the tight-lipped EU chief negotiator meet with German leader Angela Merkel and her top team last night . meanwhile , attention turn towards the crunch EU meeting to potentially give Brexit trade talk the green light on @card@ December . EU source tell the Telegraph a deal be seal in a behind-thescenes flurry of meeting with British official last week - and Mrs May talk sum with EU chief . but last night Mr Davis ' S department insist these ` ` intensive talk continue to take place in Brussels this week as we seek to reach an agreement ' ' . separately , the Foreign Office reveal it be bring diplomat back from around the world to help secure the Brexit deal . Foreign Minister Sir Alan Duncan tell MP that a number of civil servant post in place like Afghanistan and other Asian country be be reduce to pay for @card@ new position in EU country . Brussels have be blast over plan for a new Parisian guesthouse that critic fear could be a love nest for MEPs and Eurocrats . EU official be to splurge £270,000 of taxpayer ' cash on land just outside the French capital , with proposal to build a luxury lodge for guest attend conference .
scotch ; May ' No ' To 2ND Indy Bid PM : now be not time for vote Theresa May have tell Nicola Sturgeon to stop call for a second independence vote as she will not change her mind on allow one soon . during showdown talk in Glasgow yesterday the PM insist : ` ` my position be n't go to change . ' ' just @card@ hour before Mrs May trigger Brexit tomorrow she again tell Scotland ' S nationalist First Minister that ` ` now be not the time ' ' for another referendum . she also refuse to be pin down on any future date for it , say Scot must first be able to see how leave the EU work out . instead Mrs May call on the nation to join the rest of the Union in ` ` pull together to make sure we get the well possible deal ' ' for the UK . the PM ' S visit come before the Scottish Parliament vote today on whether to back the call for a referendum . SNP leader Ms Sturgeon say she be ` ` disappointed ' ' with Mrs May ' s refusal to discuss an independence vote . and she say the PM also fail to offer Scotland any new power once EU control on area such as fishing , agriculture and energy end after Brexit . Ms Sturgeon also claim to have trap Mrs May by force her to admit Britain ' s trading relationship with the EU would be know by the autumn of @card@ - when she want the referendum . the First Minister say : ` ` she be adamant that the term of Brexit will be clear before the UK exit the EU . ` ` it make it very difficult for the Prime Minister to maintain a rational opposition to a referendum in the timescale I have set out . ' ' Research by think-tank Demos yesterday reveal Wales be the region most at risk from the consequence of a hard Brexit with no deal , follow by Northern Ireland . both rely heavily on EU funding , have high level of export to the union and a large number of EU worker . and manufacturing , agriculture and energy will be the sector of the economy hardest hit . meanwhile , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier say all of the EU and the UK will face ` ` severe consequence ' ' if Britain leave without a deal . but he say it would ` ` undoubtedly leave the UK worse off ' ' .
off WITH HIS Ed ; Cam try to get newspaper boss axe over Brexit former PM David Cameron secretly try to get a newspaper editor sack for back Brexit , it be claim . he be say to have urge Daily Mail owner Lord Rothermere to axe Paul Dacre . the peer refuse and Mr Cameron be himself force to quit after lose the referendum vote . in public , the Premier have repeatedly champion Press freedom , call it ` ` vital to democracy ' ' and urge paper to ` ` stand up to the powerful ' ' . but BBC ' S Newsnight say he want Mr Dacre fire after the editor refuse to cut him ` ` some slack ' ' in its strong support for Brexit in the runup to last June ' S vote . Mr Dacre insist he would not ` ` change his position ' ' on ` ` such a core principle ' ' when he meet Mr Cameron in Downing Street early last year . the editor be ` ` incandescent ' ' to learn the PM have lobby Lord Rothermere . last night , medium professor Tim Crook , of Goldsmiths University , London , say it highlight ` ` shabby , sordid shenanigan ' ' use to control medium . a spokesman for Lord Rothermere say he have be ` ` lean on by more than one PM ' ' over the year , but never interfere . Mr Cameron ' S spokesman say : ` ` it be wrong to suggest he believe he could determine who edit the Mail . ' '
137-word Bill to divorce EU MPS be urge to respect the will of the nation as the government unveil its Brexit Bill yesterday . the 137-word motion formally ask Parliament to give Theresa May the power to break from Brussels . and minister reveal they want the legislation rush through the commons in just five day . that would allow the PM to seek approval from the Lords next month and then trigger Article @card@ to start official EU divorce proceeding by the middle of March . Brexit Secretary David Davis say : ` ` I trust that Parliament will respect the decision take by the British people and pass the legislation quickly . ' ' the government be force to introduce the motion after the Supreme Court rule MP have to be give a say . the European Union ( Notification of Withdrawal ) Bill be greet with jubilation by Brexit campaigner . Tory backbencher Stewart Jackson declare : ` ` it ' S a historic day . ' ' but it plunge Labour into yet more chaos as MP rebel over hapless leader Jeremy Corbyn ' s order to back the bill . and former Shadow Business Secretary Chuka Umunna accuse the Tory of try to ` ` muzzle ' ' the Commons . lib Dem chief Tim Farron also say his party would block Article @card@ without the guarantee of a second referendum on the term of the EU departure deal .
good Friday Accord ' be Safe AFTER BREXIT ' Gerry Adams ' claim Brexit will destroy the good Friday Agreement be wrong , Whitehall say . the Sinn Fein president have allege human right enshrine in the @card@ accord could be undermine . but the top legal adviser to Stormont minister have insist that not one word in the agreement would be affect . a statement from the government say none of the institution and provision set out in the Belfast accord be in any way undermine by the decision of the UK to leave the EU . it add : ` ` ( Adams ' ) comment be totally without any basis in fact . ' ' the Sinn Fein leader say special status for Northern Ireland within the union of @card@ state after Brexit would not affect the constitutional settlement secure its status as part of the UK . but a Whitehall spokesperson say : ` ` the UK Government be fully behind the implementation of the Belfast Agreement and its successor , include Stormont House and Fresh Start . there will be no return to the border of the past . ' ' Adams , a Dail TD , tell a conference in Dublin on Saturday that Prime Minister Theresa May have make plain her intention to end the jurisdiction of the European court in the UK . he say : ` ` along with her commitment to remove Britain from the European convention on Human Rights , this stand threaten to undermine the fundamental human right element of the Good Friday Agreement . ' '
hols biz king back Brexit A MULTIMILLIONAIRE holiday resort boss be behind a £500,000 pro-Brexit ad campaign . Butlins and Haven chief Peter Harris be urge the public to vote by fund newspaper ad feature a British bulldog in a Union Jack tie . the campaign include the slogan : ` ` let ' S be the top dog again ' ' and ` ` you would be bark not to vote , this be our chance to leave the European union . ' ' it will be run in the Sun today and over the next week . Peter ' S spokesman say last night : ` ` this be something Peter believe very passionately . he believe it ' s very important people get out and vote . he really want to make a difference . ` ` he know a lot of Sun reader want Brexit but he be try to persuade them to get out to vote . it ' S all very well to say you want Brexit but you ' ve get to do something about it . ' ' Peter , @card@ , be a former Tory donor and racehorse fanatic who set up holiday firm Bourne Leisure in @card@ . it be now worth £2.5billion and be the big leisure company in Britain . Peter also have a stake in spread-betting firm Spreadex . the Sunday Times Rich List estimate his personal wealth at £400million in @card@ .
Tories ' BREXIT £5M Major Tory donor be prepare to pour up to £5million into the Brexit campaign amid fury at the government ' s pro-EU leaflet . member of the Midlands Industrial Council , which have bankroll the Tory for @card@ year , will give the money after the £9.3million taxpayerfunded mail-out leave them ` ` incandescent with rage ' ' . Council secretary David Wall reveal five member of the council have already give £500,000 towards the campaign for Britain to leave the European Union . and that be set to increase dramatically ahead of the vote on June @card@ , with Mr Wall predict ` ` a potential of £4million or £5million ' ' . the cash pledge come as the Electoral Commission prepare to declare which of various Brexit group be the official ` ` leave ' ' campaign - with its spending cap at £7million . Mr Wall , right , suggest that ` ` significant sum ' ' could go to small group make up the grassroots out umbrella , which would vastly increase the amount Eurosceptics can spend . it will be see as an attempt to level the play field after the government spend taxpayer ' cash on pro-EU propaganda . Mr Wall say : ` ` a number of my member be incandescent with fury about this leaflet . they see it as a blatant misuse of power . ' ' IMF Blasted - Page six
Sun THE SAYS give PM time Rebel Tories call for Theresa May ' S head must quit their sniping and let her crack on with make Brexit a success . she ' S rightly cop flak since the election - but it ' d be crazy to dump her as she negotiate our EU exit . Tories must put our national interest first and forget their ambition until the talk be over . rebel , such as ex-Minister Andrew Mitchell who say she ' s ` ` dead in the water ' ' , should remember what ' S at stake . a coronation to replace her wo n't happen and the leadership battle will be a bloodbath . it ' ll put Brexit talk on hold and make us a laughing stock in Brussels . the rebel will probably force a General Election , too , where an irritable electorate will give them a kick . you ' d think Jeremy Corbyn become Britain ' s first Marxist PM would be enough for them to pipe down . imagine him in Brussel try to get us a decent deal ... but it be n't just ambitious Tories who threaten Brexit . Cross-party Remainers be join force this week to derail a repeal bill sever tie with Brussels . they should remember : politician be elect to enact the will of the people , not deny it . such a principle be lose on wannabe Lib Dem leader Sir Vince Cable who claim Brexit wo n't happen . even our chancellor Philip Hammond plainly want to stay in the custom union . forge trade deal with large economy outside the EU be crucial to our prosperity . Donald Trump ' s promise of a deal be a stark reminder of how much we ' ve get to gain . it ' S in our national interest to make sure Mrs May be allow to get on with it . politician on all side must allow her to do so .
EU Cons TURFED Out By BREXIT ; and UK to pay Brit tourist ' health bill criminal from the EU living in Britain face be boot out after Brexit . murderer , rapist and other serious offender who have serve more than @card@ month in prison will be deport , minister say . anyone apply for ` ` settled status ' ' will be refuse if check reveal they have criminal record . however , law-abiding EU citizen have no need to worry about be allow to stay here , Brexit Secretary David Davis insist . there be no risk of deportation ` ` unless they have commit a crime or some sort of security problem ' ' , he say . meanwhile , he pledge Briton would be guarantee free health cover on trip to EU country . Mr Davis vow that Britain would foot the £155million per year bill if Brussels refuse to continue with the European Health Insurance Card scheme . he add : ` ` if we ca n't get one then we will provide one unilaterally . ' ' the number of foreign criminal in British jail have double over the past decade and make up ` ` more than @card@ per cent of the prison population . there be around @card@ foreign con here - @card@ be await deportation . but only @card@ crook from EU country be send home in @card@ . deny criminal the right to stay here be among demand Britain £will make in Brexit talk . official will send a 12-page document to the EU today lay out Britain ' s position on migrant right . but Mr Davis tell the BBC ' s ` ` Marr Show he want to end EU citizen ' anxiety about deportation by get their current status ` ` lock in place ' ' . lynn.davidson
the World ACCORDING To Me DOBBO ' S DOLLOP who would ' ve think it would take Scotland to knock the wind out of Theresa May ' s Brexit sail ? Nicola Sturgeon , who follow Scotland ' s tradition of name its first minister after fish , have request permission for a second independence referendum in two year ' time . over @card@ per cent of Scot vote to remain in the EU and be none too happy when little Englander decide to take them out whether they like it or not . some of the Leavers be so racist they refer to the Scot as ` ` whisky- ' ' whiskydrinking Eskimo ' ' . Britain ' s Brexit superfans at once jump up and down to sturgeon ' s ` ` unnecessary ' ' referendum might cause ` ` division ' ' and ` ` uncertainty ' ' . these Tory toff be such a lark . you ' ve already have one of those , remember ? Brexit be a referendum so unnecessary it be basically an Eton boy ' club score-settling contest between Dave Cameron and Boris Johnson , who beat him once in a school debate . the old ` ` uncertainty ' ' that Remainers warn about be exactly what ' s happen in the UK right now . Theresa May and her cabinet look as clueless as Westlife ' s backing singer Kian Egan try to figure out how to mime along to Shane Filan ' s lead on we get ta Little World of Our Own . ` ` Division ' ' be the only result of the Brexit decision so far , with UK consumer confidence implode , lead Leavers admit they wo n't get access to the single market and talk of a unite Ireland no longer the preserve of a diesel-smelling Wolfe Tones fan drive a Massey Ferguson through Tyrone . and then there ' s the Republic of Ireland , put all its hope on a caretaker Taoiseach on his last leg who claim to have do a lot of heavy lifting in Europe over the year . this probably mean he once help carry Angela Merkel ' s luggage into an EU summit where the leader then queue up to pat him on the head . maybe the UK be n't the only country that be clueless when it come to its Brexit strategy after all ...
Britain ' WO N'T Have To pay £50BN EU Bill ' Theresa May can quit the EU without pay a penny of Brussels ' £50billion divorce bill , peer say last night . a Lords committee find EU law mean there be no ` ` legal obligation ' ' to cough up if no deal be strike . baroness Falkner , EU Financial Affairs Committee chair , say under the Vienna Convention , the termination of a treaty ` ` release party from any obligation to perform the treaty ' ' . she add : ` ` the UK appear to have a strong legal position , and this provide important context to Brexit negotiation . ' ' Mrs May be due to trigger Article @card@ and launch two year of divorce talk in two week ' time . this mean the UK will leave the EU by April @card@ . Michel Barnier , the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator , want to hit us with a £50billion divorce bill . source have claim Berlin and Rome want the PM to agree to this before talk about a post-Brexit free trade deal . but the Lords Committee report say : ` ` as a matter of EU law , Article @card@ allow the UK to leave without be liable for outstanding contribution . ' ' the peer say member state may seek to bring a case against the UK , but add : ` ` international law be slow to litigate and hard to enforce ' ' . Steve Baker , the Tory MP and Brexit campaigner , say : ` ` it ' s great news that legally we owe nothing . ' '
Wills and Kate be weapon on Brexit William and Kate be be use as unofficial Brexit ambassador . the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will be send to France , Germany and Poland to charm leader . they will visit Paris in two week to pay respect to victim of the @card@ terror attack . they will also attend a do at the UK ambassador ' S and watch a France vs Wales rugby match . then in July , just a few month into negotiation on leave the EU , they will fly the flag in Berlin and Warsaw . Royal tour be organise by the Foreign Office . an aide say : ` ` after the Queen , the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge be the ultimate in soft diplomacy . they ' re very much see as unofficial Brexit ambassador . ' ' the Sun say - Page ten
' BREXIT To Bring Back A Border ' Border check will return after Brexit , former Foreign Affairs Minister Dermot Ahern insist . but the retire Fianna Fail TD say a ` ` hard border ' ' with Northern Ireland will be a ` ` disaster ' ' for the Republic . he say : ` ` one way or the other I think there be go to be some sort of a hard border which would be terrible for us . ` ` there will be a hard border of some sort and there will have to be check , particularly on the southern side . that would be a disaster for us . ' ' British Prime Minister Theresa May have say both government want to see a Fury . . ` ` seamless , frictionless border ' ' after Brexit . and Taoiseach Enda Kenny claim last week that we ` ` have commit to no return to a hard border ' ' . but Mr Ahern blast the UK government for not think through the reality of Brexit . he tell RTE yesterday : ` ` whoever decide to put that referendum before the people in Britain do n't think out the implication for Ireland , both north and south . ' ' the former Louth TD add : ` ` one way or the other , I think it be particularly bad news for border area . ' ' Ahern
the Sun SAYS Brexit fightback why be the government not turn its gun on Blair ' s gang of self-confessed Brexit ` ` saboteur ' ' ? why have it abandon the battlefield , give Remoaners free rein to ramp up the hysteria and bolster both their dangerous campaign against democracy and the EU ' s negotiate position ? Brexit be leave to random Tory , some long retire , and paper like the Sun to champion . No10 should counter every baseless scare with evidence undermine it . the six-year productivity high announce yesterday , for example . or the tech investment in London outstrip every other EU capital combine . David Davis have enough on negotiate our exit . who , then , will bat for Brexit ? likewise , who will seize command of a house-building strategy still far too timid ever to produce the home need to get young people on the ladder ? that single issue could defeat the Tory in @card@ and hand Corbyn power . yet there be still no urgency . the new year-long review be a ponderous navelgazing exercise . Theresa May must answer both question with a bold reshuffle . she should create a new Secretary of State specifically for housing . Sajid Javid , maybe . she should appoint new heavy-hitters into the Brexit department - commit Leavers to take on those who would risk riot or bad to reverse the referendum . do it , Theresa .
EU ' S @card@ vision ; PM fight Barnier ' s bid for an early transition BREXIT News @card@ THE Prime Minister face a fresh fight with Brussels over its bid to end the Brexit transition period early . the EU ' s chief negotiator Michel Barnier yesterday announce it must end by New Year ' s Eve @card@ - month earlier than previously think . the 21-month time frame correspond with the end of the EU ' s current seven-year-long budget . but Theresa May have ask for a more flexible period of ` ` around two year ' ' . slap down Mr Barnier , she describe his decree as just ` ` the position come from the European Union ' ' , as the transition should run for as long as deem necessary . negotiation begin in January over the gradual phase-out after Brexit day that minister deem vital to prevent any ` ` cliff edge ' ' for business . Chancellor Philip Hammond yesterday issue a call for certainty and clarity on the issue as soon as possible to help the economy . Mr Barnier also admit that the UK ' s Brexit deal will be ` ` tailor make ' ' after all . it come after he upset EU chief by speak beyond his brief in say Britain could not ` ` cherry pick ' ' its deal . last night Mrs May cave in to Tory rebel over her plan to write March @card@ , @card@ as Brexit day into law . to avoid a Commons defeat , she allow ` ` wriggle room ' ' over the date .
away WITH THE BLAIRIES ; IDS BLAST AT former PM for Claims Over BREXIT source not name it ' S beyond parody Tony Blair be brand ` ` away with the fairy ' ' last night over his claim the EU want to strike a deal to keep in Britain . the ex-PM say leader have tell him they be ready to cave in to our demand for reform - include curb on mass migration . but he refuse to offer any evidence , or name those behind the move . Mr Blair say he have hold conversation with key player in Brussel who be willing to compromise on free movement if the UK stay in the single market . he insist the mood have change from the Brexit vote a year ago and declare : ` ` Europe be look at its own reform programme . they will have an inner circle in the EU that will be part of the Eurozone and an outer circle . ` ` they will make reform that I think will make it much more comfortable for Britain to fit in that outer circle . ' ' but Tory MP Iain Duncan Smith say : ` ` he refuse to name the people he ' s speak to because they do n't exist . only last week , the EU ' s Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier tell us free movement be not up for discussion - we be either in or out . ` ` that be exactly why people vote to leave . but Mr Blair be one of those stubborn establishment figure who ca n't accept the result . ` ` his promise of reform be beyond parody . he ' S away with the fairy . ' ' Former Ukip leader Nigel Farage accuse Mr Blair of a ` ` loathsome ' ' bid to reverse a democratic decision . he say : ` ` he be show people why he be now one of the most dislike live figure in British politics . he suggest public opinion have shift when there be more people in favour of Brexit now than there be at the time of the referendum ` ` the real irony here , of all the people to argue that we can get a reform deal with the European Union , Tony Blair be probably the worstplaced person to do so . ` ` he be EU president for six month in @card@ . he promise reform on the Common Agricultural Policy and get none - and yet give away £7billion of our rebate . ` ` so I do n't think he ' S a trust figure on this or , frankly , anything else . ' ' Junior Brexit Minister Robin Walker add : ` ` by call for the will of the people to be overturn , Mr Blair be demonstrate once again that he be out of touch . ' ' Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn also dismiss Mr Blair ' S remark and say : ` ` we do recognise the result of the referendum . ' ' Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell add : ` ` if you listen to ordinary people in this country now , what they want be basically a Brexit that will protect their job and the economy . what we do n't want be division again . ' '
the Scottish Sun ON Sunday SAYS @card@ @card@ @card@ time for action at No10 FIRST it be David Cameron ' S Big Society . now Theresa May have come up with the shared www.Society.No one ever have a clue what the Big Society mean . it be a phrase in search of a policy . the Shared Society certainly sound well - because we know instinctively that we share common institution . but label from politician be as worthless as their promise . all that matter be what they actually do . and so far , although we ' ve have a series of promise from Mrs May , there ' s be very little action . in a TV interview today and a speech tomorrow she ' s go to make two main point . first , she say she ' ll act against the ` ` everyday injustice ' ' that blight life for so many of us . that ' S an important aim for any government . but it need detail to mean anything - and then action . time for action at No10 secondly , she ' ll say that the ` ` central challenge of our time be to overcome division and bring our country together ' ' . you do n't have to be Einstein to work out that she ' s talk about Brexit . because , in the end , everything now come back to Brexit . Mrs May have promise to trigger Article @card@ by the end of March . but the PM ' S great Brexit plan have so far yet to surface - as former First Minister Alex Salmond point out on this page . little wonder he accuse her of ` ` dither and swithering ' ' . Mr Salmond be far from her only critic , of course . and his successor Nicola Sturgeon have call for more clarity on Brexit . but one thing be already apparent . the PM must reveal her strategy - and soon .
racist smear be typical of sore loser Juncker EU boss Jean-Claude Juncker be in a league of his own as a sore loser over Brexit . he stupidly use the murder of Polish worker Arek Jozwik in Harlow , Essex , to label Brexit voter as racist . the man be an idiot who , like many of the Remainers , ca n't - or wo n't - accept the wisdom of our leave the EU . Brexit have ensure we can wave goodbye to those who the Sun rightly label an ` ` utter clown ' ' . Mick BIDEWELL Newcastle upon Tyne Surprise , surprise , Jean-Claude Juncker try to make political headline that Britain be anti-foreigner because of one very sad attack on a Polish citizen by mindless thug . sorry Mr Juncker , but most brit appreciate the great contribution Polish people make to our society . try to make political gain from this be outrageous and Mr Juncker be seriously demonstrate that he really be the clown of Europe . Duncan SABISTON Swindon JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker be right to condemn the recent murder of a Polish man in Essex . but he have be strangely silent over the rape and murder of Brits by Eastern Europeans - as report regularly on BBC ' S Crimewatch - who have be allow entry into the UK under EU freedom of movement rule . john Morgan Bath David Davis , the Brexit minister , have say he be not into symbolism , only result . in this instance he ought to be . the British public be get highly frustrate that day after day we read nothing positive from Juncker and his acolyte , just more of the same insult . it would boost morale if we could have our once-treasured and respected blue passport back . Allan Mulholland Balby , Doncaster what have happen to British justice ? the Black Lives matter protester , who chain themselves together to disrupt flight at London City Airport , cause misery to thousand of people , have be give a conditional discharge and derisory £95 cost . compare this with someone who park on a yellow line and be fine £130 . they deserve a prison sentence to drive home the message that this disruptive behaviour will not be tolerate . terry Brown Hornchurch , Essex So Judge Elizabeth Roscoe decide to just slap the wrist of the nine protester , all white , of Black Lives Matter . the law be lenient , but the airline should punish the nine by give them life-long ban . THIEPVAL Young Carrickfergus , Co Antrim I WAS sadden to read that a young man with everything to live for be murder by four man for a moped . my heart go out to Ricky Hayden ' S family . I hope the evil human being responsible for this hideous crime be bring to justice and put in jail for a very long time . anna Hammett Ness , Cheshire why be the government still ponder the HS2 link ? it ' s go to cost a lot more than the £55billion budget , and what for ? about @card@ minute off the time it take now . just upgrade the exist track at much less cost . sandy Sanford Poole , Dorset I DO not understand why John Hinckley be a free man . he mean to kill Ronald Reagan in @card@ and that should be enough to keep him in jail for the rest of his life . I wonder if the judge who rule he ` ` no longer pose a danger ' ' would like him as HIS next-door neighbour ? amber Jacobs Frodsham , Cheshire TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply I AGREE , Mr Juncker , that Polish worker should not be attack . but you open the border to terrorist . never hear your comment after the murder in France or Germany . gem PROTEST against the selfish Black life Matter campaigner by boycott anything they ' re involve with . we could call ourselves ` ` all live Matter ' ' . J Taylor , Surrey This week ' s machete attack over a moped prove we desperately need the death penalty back . every man and his dog seem to carry knife or gun . jimmy , Wigan So the BBC will have to show how much it pay presenter on more than £150,000 a www.year.No presenter should be pay that much . Trevor Yapp , Huntington , Staffs email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
£ SHRUGS Off BREXIT SLUMP THE Pound yesterday climb to its high level against the US dollar since the Brexit vote . Sterling rise by more than one per cent to $ @card@ , the good since June @card@ , @card@ . it follow report that Spanish and Dutch finance minister believe a hard Brexit be now less likely . the pound have be trade at about $ @card@ before the EU referendum but slump to a low of $ @card@ in January last year . analyst at global investment giant Morgan Stanley have forecast sterling ' S recovery will continue through the year . the pound be also @card@ per cent high against the euro at @card@ . Analyst Neil Wilson say : ` ` the direction of travel for the UK with regard Brexit be a lot more positive . ' ' it come as the FTSE @card@ index continue its remarkable run , climb @card@ point to @card@ to finish on another all-time high . CARILLION in CRISIS - City P48
a game of EU HALVES ; BREXIT Threat To FOOTIE SPFL plea to protect foreign ace BREXIT could see the standard of Scottish footie get bad , the game ' S chief warn . SPFL boss fear leave the EU will send the cost of attract foreign star soar - damage our profile and telly revenue . and they call on PM Theresa May to ensure any divorce deal protect club ' ` ` flexibility ' ' to woo ace from abroad . a Holyrood report on industry leader ' concern say : ` ` these player add enormously to the standard of the game in Scotland , generate increasPFL sed profile and muchneeded revenue from the SPFL ' s overseas broadcast contract in over @card@ country . ` ` the SPFL be keen to ensure that any change to the visa system will enhance , or at the very least maintain , the flexibility enjoy by club . ' ' Edinburgh Uni and shortbread firm Walkers also tell of recruitment fear post split . SNP Brexit Minister Michael Russell say : ` ` business must be listen to . ' '
LEAVEOLUTION ; 20YRS AFTER DEVO Vote , Nic Warns of BREXIT ' REVERSAL ' Nicola Sturgeon today blast Theresa May ' S Brexit Bill for ` ` reverse devolution ' ' - @card@ year to the day after Scot vote for it . th Fi t Mi it th PM ' bl t t the First Minister say the PM ' s ` ` blatant power grab ' ' be the big threat to the Scottish Parliament since its birth follow the @card@ referendum . and she plead with MSPs of all party to unite and defend Holyrood by block the EU Withdrawal legislation unless the UK Government make substantial change . the SNP leader say : ` ` today be a day to quietly celebrate a landmark in Scottish democracy . but it should also mark the start of concerted , crossparty effort to defend our parliament . ` ` the Scottish Parliament , and the entire foundation of the devolution settlement it be base on , face its big challenge since it receive such a decisive democratic mandate @card@ year ago . ` ` the UK Government ' s Brexit proposal , through the EU Withdrawal Bill , constitute a blatant power grab . ` ` Far from enhance the power of the Scottish Parliament as have be claim , it would throw the process of devolution into reverse for the first time in two decade . ' ' Ms Sturgeon add : ` ` it be inconceivable that the Scottish government would recommend to MSPs they should give legislative consent to the bill as currently draft . ` ` it ' s up to UK minister to make the appropriate change that would protect the existing devolution settlement . ' ' last night the Tory Government deny the Brexit Bill be a power grab and insist it will ` ` strengthen ' ' devolution . a spokeswoman say : ` ` the Scottish Parliament will lose none of the decision-making power it currently exercise and we expect it will gain significant new power . ' ' Today ' S anniversary be welcome by other party as a chance to move forward . Scottish Labour ' s interim leader Alex Rowley say : ` ` we need to leave the division of the past decade behind and build for the future . ' ' Tory chief Ruth Davidson say education should be the ` ` top priority ' ' for Holyrood , add : ` ` we should talk about what we want to change over the next @card@ year . ' ' and Willie Rennie say he and his fellow Lib Dems be ` ` proud of the part we play in bring about devolution ' ' .
' BREXIT BUG ' in SAUSAGES TENS of thousand of brit be be infect by a bug in European sausage and other pork product - dub the Brexit virus . the potentially fatal new strain of hepatitis E call HEV be find in import bacon , sausage , pork pie and salami link to pig farm in France , Holland , Germany and Denmark . pregnant woman and organ transplant patient be say to be most at risk . Dr Harry Dalton , a gastroenterologist at Exeter University , say HEV have become a major threat and attack the liver and nerve . he add : ` ` I call it the Brexit virus . it be particularly dangerous for people with suppress immune system such as those who have have organ transplant and possibly cancer . it seem to come from Europe . ' ' the virus be infect more than @card@ people in Britain a year , the Sunday Times claim . most suffer flu-like symptom - but figure from Public Health England show serious case rise from @card@ in @card@ to @card@ in @card@ . the virus affect ten per cent of sausage , scientist estimate . it have also spread to British pig , with @card@ per cent infect . expert recommend cooking pork until it be no longer pink , and advise pregnant woman and transplant patient to avoid it .
Eck ' s stir carefully . it look increasingly like the SNP might be edge towards a half-baked option as far as European policy be concern .
may ' S Power Offer To SCOTS ; TWO Days Till BREXIT BEGINS ; Referendum ' torpedo ' Theresa May will today hint at more power for Scotland after Brexit in a bid to torpedo a second independence referendum . the PM be fly to Glasgow for a showdown meeting with nationalist First Minister Nicola Sturgeon . the trip come just @card@ hour before she fire the start gun for Article @card@ EU exit talk on Wednesday with a letter to Brussels boss . the symbolic visit be also ahead of tomorrow ' S Scottish Parliament vote on whether to push for a second poll in three year over break away from the rest of the UK . raise the prospect of another power transfer from Westminster to Edinburgh , Mrs May will say in a speech : ` ` I believe when we work together , there be no limit to what we can do . in Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , that mean fully respect , and indeed strengthen , the devolution settlement . ' ' but the PM will also insist it mean ` ` never allow our union to become loose and weak , or our people to drift apart ' ' . a heated debate be under way over which former EU power should be take on by the UK government or regional administration . SNP leader Ms Sturgeon want control of agriculture and especially fishing with Scotland ' s large coastline . meanwhile , Labour threaten to vote Mrs May ' S final Brexit deal down unless it meet six new test . the big be for it to deliver the ` ` exact same ' ' economic benefit as Britain currently have as a member of the Single Market and Customs Union . Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn say ` ` unfettered access ' ' to trade with the @card@ other member state be ` ` fundamental ' ' for his party ' S support . Shadow Brexit Secretary Keir Starmer will say today : ` ` there be a worrying and increasingly powerful move on the government bench to sever our link with Europe . ` ` this ideologically drive approach to Brexit would be disastrous and divisive . ' ' it also emerge the Brexit ministry want to allow EU national already live here to keep all their state benefit after Britain leave . that cut across a manifesto pledge to stop migrant send child benefit abroad .
lord will not take kamikaze leap on Brexit THE House of Lords wo n't block Brexit . despite there be no government majority in the Upper House and the fact most peer be pro-EU , the Brexit Bill will make it through . why ? because the reason this unelected chamber still exist in the 21st century it that it have a very strong self-preservation instinct . it know how far it can push thing . to obstruct something back by 17.4million people in a referendum and which just get a House of Commons majority of @card@ , would be suicidal - and the Lords know it . cabinet minister admit initial government talk of abolish the House of Lords if it do n't vote for Article @card@ be ` ` over the top ' ' . ' constitutional crisis ' but the reason David Davis and Theresa May have be use much soft language in the past few day be because they be confident the Lords wo n't do anything stupid . indeed , I understand the Labour front bench have make clear , through the usual channel , that they be n't interested in try to wreck the bill . this do n't mean there wo n't be attempt to fiddle with it . but as one Cabinet minister note , the fact the Commons pass it without any amendment ` ` put a massive pressure ' ' on peer to do the same . another minister point out the government defeat all the amendment in the commons with ease , May ' S majority never dip below @card@ . this mean she would have the vote to strip any amendment out if the Bill be send back to the Commons . the exception to the Lords ' sense of self-preservation be the liberal democrat . ` ` the Lib Dems would love to try to create a constitutional crisis , ' ' warn one senior figure in the Brexit department , point out that they be pro-EU and anti-Lords . but independent peer , whose support be key to defeat the government , will be put off by the Lib Dems ' attitude . they do n't want to bring the house down . once Theresa May have get her Brexit Bill through Parliament , she face the diplomatic challenge of work out when it be good to formally tell the EU that Britain be off . Downing Street now think the Brexit Bill wo n't receive Royal Assent until March @card@ . this mean Theresa May ca n't use the European Council meeting on March @card@ to formally start the process of leave the EU , as key figure in Government have want her to . but it would n't be wise to trigger Article @card@ too close to the Dutch election on March @card@ , where the anti-EU Geert Wilders be expect to top the poll , as this will prompt European leader to circle the wagon . then there be the celebration of the 100th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome on March @card@ . you do n't turn up to an anniversary party with your divorce paper . May , though , be head into these negotiation with a strong hand . not only be the UK economy in far strong shape than the EU expect it to be , but it be also clear that Parliament be n't go to derail Brexit . l James Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator
No10 set for court verdict on Brexit Ministers have draw up contingency plan for today ' S Supreme Court verdict to ensure Brexit begin within nine week , No10 have reveal . the nation ' s top @card@ judge will today rule on the Article @card@ court case . as well as decide if MP should authorise Britain ' s EU walkout with a vote , the court will decide if Scotland and Northern Ireland ' S parliament can also veto it . plan of action have be work on for week to confront ` ` every single possible outcome ' ' , a No10 source insist . Brexit Secretary David Davis will make a Commons statement today . four foreign worker fight Brexit will have their identity protect , it be confirm . the Sun say - Page ten
could it be beer googles that cause Brexit ? what in the name of good God have you do ? and I ' m not talk about the Twelfth ( not yet , anyway ) . or Theresa May or thingie Leadsom ( but I will ) . no , I mean Brexit . now the dust have settle , we know this be go to go on for year . I be n't in favour of an exit , and I ' m proud to say the majority of those who vote here share my view . I ' m not go to claim that those of us who vote to remain be clever or good than those of you who vote to leave , there be genuine argument on both side . sadly , both political camp fight the debate decide to ignore fact in favour of campaign base on fear . and it be fear of unfettered immigration to the UK from the EU that seem to have tip the balance in favour of withdrawal . once again , the promise of controlled immigration by the Brexit campaign be another lie that can not be deliver . if the UK want to continue to trade within the EU - and remember , it ' S not only our big market now , but always will be - then one of the basic tenet of such trade be free movement of worker . it be soon obvious nobody in power ever really believe there would be a vote to leave , so nobody have any idea what to do when that become the reality . Brexit be akin to those night when , and we ' ve all do it , buoy by too much to drink , we see the partner of our dream . Nature take its course and have go to bed with a thing of beauty , we waken to a beast snore beside us . at that moment , there be only two possible course of action : either we get up and make our new friend breakfast or Ninjalike , we sneak from the bedroom , dress on the way to the car . Nigel Farage prove himself a sneak in that as soon as a win be announce , he announce he be resign from Ukip , leave the mess he ' d just create for other to try and work out . Prime Minister Cameron who promise he ' d stay on whatever the result announce his immediate departure . I mean , can we believe anything politician say , ever again ? it look like bumble Boris Johnson would be a shoe-in for the Tory leadership and PM designate until the embodiment of a Dickensian villain , Michael Gove , make his move . Gove announce that even after have work with him for the whole of the Brexit campaign , he ' d suddenly decide he could n't support Boris and want the PM job himself . but the drama be far from over . the next obvious Tory candidate for PM , Theresa May , suddenly find herself in a face off with new girl on the block , Andrea Leadsom . Andrea decide to come out swing and a womb war be declare , with claim by Leadsom to a reporter that her be a mum mean she ' d more invest in the future of the country compare to her barren opponent . chauvinistic , misogynistic male around the country wince at this example of post-feminism and the medium go into meltdown . it be n't really a surprise that Leadsom then withdraw from the contest , leave the key of number @card@ in the hand of May . this mean the Tory Minister who vote to remain will be the one leave work out the mechanic of how to leave . once again , the law of unintended consequence have play out . one of the top complaint by many within the Brexit camp be they be sick of be govern by unelected Eurocrats . well , now they have a new Prime Minister not even vote in by the member of her own party . while Theresa May look the big winner from the Brexit vote , that title may in fact belong to Scotland ' s SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon who be push for , and will inevitably get , another vote on Scottish Independence due to the result . juxtapose Northern Ireland First Minister , Arlene Foster - fixate on call NI ' our wee country ' - with the statesmanlike Nicola Sturgeon stridently fight for Scottish Independence . if Sturgeon get her way for another referendum , and the vote go her way then the ' our wee country ' Arlene often comment on will reside within a much diminish UK . and , while at present Arlene can reject any call for a border poll , if Scotland vote to leave the UK a precedent will have be set that can never be undo , somewhat like Brexit itself . take this one simple reality - unionist who would never have consider take an Irish passport be now see the practical advantage in have one , with rumour that application form be even run out in East Belfast . remember only two week have pass since the vote for Brexit and the whole political horizon have change forever . we ca n't even begin to imagine what more damage will ensue as the actual exit begin .
time To MOTHBALL THE EU ; l REMAIN Poll LEAD COLLAPSES l BREXIT ROCKET BOOST To Shares l . . and NASTY Euro MOTHS HIT UK ; ( Vote Leaf To PROTECT OUR Country ... and OUR CABBAGES ) ; BELEAVE in Britain Poll COLLAPSE ; time To MOTHBALL EU David Cameron ' s Remain campaign be yesterday rock by a triple whammy of bad news . an exclusive Sun poll show support for the pro-EU camp have dwindle to a one-point lead . analyst also predict UK share would get a ` ` rocket boost ' ' and firm would boom post-Brexit . and Britain have be invade by crop-ravaging moth from Europe continue on Page Two continue from Page one that have swarm across the Channel . the blow to the campaign to keep us in the EU follow the Sun ' s declaration of support for a leave vote . the nation go to the poll for the In/Out referendum in just eight day . but yesterday the Remain camp be rely on Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn to front their so-called ` ` Project Fear ' ' . on another dramatic day in the Brexit battle , a ComRes poll for the Sun last night put support for stay in the EU at just @card@ per cent , with backing for Brexit at @card@ per cent . last month Remain have a commanding @card@ point lead of @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent . the late poll be a hammer blow to the PM . the survey of @card@ voter be highly-respected ComRes ' bad showing for Remain since its polling begin on the referendum more than a year ago . it show the outcome be still on a knife edge . meanwhile strategist at Deutsche Bank predict that the UK ' s top company will outperform their EU-based rival by as much as five per cent in the wake of a Brexit . they say a vote to leave the EU would cause panic on Europe ' s stockmarkets - cause them to fall by as much as ten per cent . but London ' s FTSE @card@ index of blue-chip company will perform well , boost by a weak pound . that will also be good for exporter , as it will make British good cheap for European country to buy . the bank ' S Sebastian Raedler , who help compile the research , say : ` ` if this be correct , the FTSE @card@ should outperform the Stoxx @card@ ( the wide European market ) by around five per cent ' ' . financier Jeremy Hosking , a successful investment manager who found the campaign group BrexitExpress , say : ` ` the City will experience an unprecedented boom when we be liberate from the EU . ` ` the City have prove itself time and again to be a flexible and innovative market place with world-beating expertise . ` ` I know that many more City people support Brexit than say so publicly because they be confident in what we have to offer , despite the histrionics . ' ' Shares in UK firm in the FTSE @card@ rocket by a fifth after the UK leave the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in @card@ . John Higgins of Capital Economics , write earlier this year , say it be partly due to a fall in sterling , ` ` something that might occur in the event of a Brexit ` ` . meanwhile UK cabbage and Brussels sprout crop be under threat from ten of million of migrant moth . LDOWNING Street last deny report it be look to strike a last-ditch deal with the EU over free movement by re-opening David Cameron ' s renegotiation with European leader .
capital Still Top and Building ON Success THE City threaten that thousand of job could be lose as a result of Brexit . and yet @card@ month after the vote to leave the EU , the London skyline be full of crane . talk pessimistically while do the opposite and invest real cash be what many have be do . Mike Bloomberg , owner and founder of the dominant financial datum and news firm name after him , recently say , ` ` Brexit be the single stupid thing any country have ever do ' ' , besides the US elect Trump . yet at the same time , he have be sign huge cheque for a new London headquarters - reportedly the most expensive building per square foot that the City have ever see . various executive at the American investment bank Goldman Sachs have be warn for year of the damage that will be do to London as a financial centre as a result of leave the EU . yet Goldman be also spend a fortune build a new London HQ . and this summer , a year after the vote , Deutsche Bank sign a lease for a new City building after warn it would also move job out of London . despite all the downbeat talk , in virtually any ranking of global financial centre , London retain its No1 spot . Paris do n't even make the top @card@ . so consider Brexit doommongering as just another form of lobbying . the Brexit threat be the perfect excuse for big business to demand low tax and less regulation . it be notable that even though the indebted government be desperate for cash , it be continue its commitment to low corporation tax - currently just @card@ per cent , one of the low of all major economy ( and considerably low than personal income tax rate of @card@ , @card@ and @card@ per cent ) . but EU leader look with jealous eye at the finance industry and the huge tax it pay into Westminster ' S coffer . the EU will try as hard as it can to drag business away from the City over the come year . but it try before , when the UK choose not to join the euro . and it lose out - @card@ per cent of all global trading of euros occur in London . however , the game have change . Outside of EU rulemak , will the UK win again ? Louise Cooper be a financial analyst .
free us from Euro judge Theresa May must make good on her pledge to free us from the vice-like grip of the European Court of Justice . when it come to decision regard Brexit , how can we trust the ECJ to be impartial ? the idea of independent panel to overview any dispute make much more sense . Theresa May have lose her way of late . but she must stick to her gun , regardless of the tension her stance may create . Steven Smith North Shields , Tyne and Wear THOSE who would prefer the UK to remain in the EU have be drive to propose all sort of nitpicking technicality that will frustrate the wish of the majority vote . one way out of the dilemma they imagine be to simply say in no circumstance will the European Court of Justice have any authority in the UK after March @card@ . job do . john Collins Chelmsford , Essex THE EU have get this Brexit thing back to front . if it be 40-odd year ago and we have just vote to join the EU , it would make sense for our new leader to dictate their term and condition to us . but it be n't . last year we vote to leave - no EU , no ECJ , just the UK free to make our way in the world . Ashley Smith March , Cambs it ' S time now to take Brexit seriously . instead of argue with each other , Theresa May need to stamp her authority and tell her committee how she want Brexit to be , then to do it . there be too many finger in too many pie - and now all the Blairs and the Mandelsons be panick . we manage perfectly well prior to be con by Ted Heath in @card@ . Chris TORODE Catterick , North York WHERE will all the European country who export to Britain be if we decide walk away from a trade deal be for the good ? David Davis be spot-on to warn that they face disaster . Germany have already express fear for its economy . a poor trade deal be bad news for all concerned . it ' s high time we have some serious negotiation instead of titfor-tat bickering . carol Davies Stannington , Northumberland I SET up an account with Dartford Toll , handy for visit my daughter who live just @card@ minute from me in Essex . as a 60-year-old working single grandmother , I manage . it be very annoy to find out tourist avoid the toll charge . I ' m sick of struggle to prop up everyone else that do n't pay . dawn Hawes Canvey Island , Essex Brit Toby Robyns be a naive fool when he decide to take home @card@ coin he find while snorkelling in Turkey . but to be lock in a Turkish jail with no end in sight and a possible three-year prison sentence be overkill on the part of the Turkish authority . Turkey rely on foreign tourism but terror attack and the increasingly dictatorial nature of the Erdogan regime will put people off . so well do , Turkey - you have give me yet another reason not to come and spend money in your country . Luke Russell Wakefield , West Yorks how can it be sensible to reject a £2,500 donation raise by man dress up as nurse ? over the year man and woman have be dress up to raise fund for various charity . maybe to redeem herself , Jan Ditheridge of Ludlow Hospital should take a cut in her salary of £2,500 to pay towards the monitor for the amount she reject ? THIEPVAL Young Carrickfergus , Co Antrim Have the townsfolk of Ludlow really empower hospital boss Jan Ditheridge to take such a high-handed and selfish approach as to refuse a donation for an ECG monitor from man in fancy dress ? I would say to the League of Friends of Ludlow Hospital : ` ` Camp it up , lad . you ' re do a great job . ' ' the arrogance of her attitude have leave me spit feather . mike Jones Kidderminster , Worcs TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply if the Barcelona killer ' van only stop because the air bag trigger and cut the power , why do n't they fix all vehicle to cut the power if they hit anything ? that could save a lot of life . anon I Ca N'T believe security at Stevenage FC need to check a woman ' s bra at Saturday ' S match . away supporter could rename them Cleavenage . Richard Parris , Devon the world would be a good place with more people like former Royal Marine Matthew Goodman . a true hero . Adam , Cumbria Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
Branson slam on Virgin Brexit ad Sir Richard Branson have be blast for oppose Brexit while his airline Virgin Atlantic tout it in America as a www.boon.TV ad which be also be roll out to Dubai , Shanghai and Delhi hail the upside for tourist . in one commercial , an American be see in a pub get four beer for the price of three thanks to the weak pound . the ad be trumpet as show the ` ` bright side of Brexit ' ' despite Branson , @card@ , demand a second referendum . he say that the public ` ` shoot themselves in the foot ' ' by vote leave last year and brand the EU divorce a ` ` disaster ' ' . Tory MP David Davies say : ` ` this show the rank hypocrisy of millionaire businessman like Sir Richard Branson . ` ` they continually try to talk up scare story surround Brexit and at the same time play on its advantage . ' '
biz Cash for BREX Britain ; BREXIT Cash Business investment in Britain be barely affect by Brexit - with more than £170billion pour into the country last year . Trade Secretary Liam Fox , leave , yesterday reveal the UK have already continue on Page nine continue from Page one start negotiate deal with at least @card@ country . he will also be buoy by new investment figure show the total spend by company last year be just @card@ per cent down on @card@ . minister claim the stat - due to be release next month - reflect a ` ` huge vote of confidence ' ' in Britain amid uncertainty cause by Brexit . one insider tell the Sun last night : ` ` Everyone say the sky would fall in but it just have n't happen . ' ' big name firm include GLAXOSMITHKLINE , Jaguar Land Rover and Honda announce plan to invest here last year . Mr Fox say yesterday : ` ` since join the EU , trade as a percentage of GDP have stagnate in the UK . that be why it be time for Britain to get out into the world and rediscover its role as a great global trading nation . ' ' Stat release before Christmas reveal investment in the three month after the June poll be £44billion - @card@ per cent down on the year before . the Sun say - Page ten
£16BN BREXIT BOOST ; UK industry deal Trade Secretary Liam Fox have hail £16billion of foreign investment in UK industry as a huge vote of confidence in Brexit Britain . he welcome commitment from Apple and Google plus cash injection in the North East . Dr Fox say it show the nation be ` ` innovative and business-friendly ' ' . the boost come a day after the value of Britain ' s top company hit a record high on the stock market . but PM Theresa May have be criticise for dither over Brexit by former EU Commissioner Lord Hill . he say the debate have freeze and minister need to ` ` move forward rapidly ' ' . he also warn that Brexit negotiation will be ` ` difficult and painful ' ' . meanwhile , Mrs May be draw up plan for the UK to maintain a key role in the EU crime-fighting agency . she want a deal with Europol similar to one secure by America . the US have permanent staff base at its HQ in the Netherlands . the UK have a lead role in set up the agency in @card@ and Brit Rob Wainwright head it . a Government source say : ` ` we provide a lot of the expertise and datum . ' '
wage of SPIN ; Autumn Budget : the AFTERMATH ; Sturgeon blast Tory ' Brexit con ' ..as worker face 10yr pay squeeze Nicola Sturgeon yesterday accuse the Tory of mastermind a ` ` Brexit con ' ' as expert warn worker face a grim decade of lost earnings . the First Minister blast Philip Hammond ' s bleak economic forecast and insist his mini-budget have reveal the ` ` true cost ' ' of the UK ' s vote to leave Europe . she claim his failure to deliver leave campaigner ' pledge of a £350million-a-week NHS boost prove it be a false promise all along . and she again hint independence might be the only way for Scotland to escape the impact of quit the EU amid fear pay will be stick in a rut for the long time since World War Two . Ms Sturgeon tell First Minister ' s question at Holyrood : ` ` we start to see perhaps for the first time lay bare the true cost of Brexit . rather than there be the promise of £350million extra a week for the National Health Service , what we see yesterday be that the additional borrowing , just the additional borrowing , cause by Brexit will amount to £225million a week . ` ` that ' s the Brexit con that so many people in the Conservative party have preside over . ` ` that ' S why I ' m so determine that we continue to explore every option to protect Scotland ' S interest and in particular to protect our place in the single market . ` ` because that ' S how we minimise the cost of Brexit that be be impose on us by the Conservative party . ' ' her blast come as economist continue to draw dire conclusion over the Chancellor ' S Autumn Statement yesterday . till up lave @card@ % Though wage will still continue to creep slightly ahead of inflation in the next five year , they will be per cent low in real term than have be predict in March . @card@ an @card@ al projected growth in average -dill per earnings . think tank the Resolution Foundation say average earnings will grow by a paltry @card@ cent from @card@ to @card@ . @card@ ee a he re ry h that compare with @card@ per cent hike in the 2000s , and rise of more than @card@ per cent in every other decade since the 1920s . he @card@ % al st of he a increase average between the Institute for Fiscal Studies find the low earn @card@ per cent society will be hit the hard . and son ess that be ade without t its boss Paul Johnson say : ` ` one can not stress enough how dreadful - more than a decade real earnings growth . we have not see a period remotely like it in the last @card@ year . ' ' he say OBR forecast of a £122billion increase in borrowing over five year - almost half due to Brexit - be ` ` more upbeat ' ' than other , include the Bank of England ' S analysis . as we tell yesterday , the figure show Mr Hammond have abandon predecessor George Osborne ' s key election pledge to eliminate the deficit by @card@ . spending increase include £820million for Scotland mean national debt be set to spiral to £2trillion in the next five year . speak during a visit to Gloucestershire with Prime Minister Theresa May yesterday , Mr Hammond say debt be ` ` not out of control ' ' but admit it be ` ` large than we would like it to be ' ' . defend his economic plan , he insist : ` ` it make sense , give the warning signal from the OBR report , to keep a little bit of firepower in the locker , to build a little bit of a reserve so that , if there be a slowdown next year , we ' ve get enough capacity to support the economy , to protect job , to ensure that the economy can get through any headwind it encounter . ` ` the OBR itself would say that there be a wide range of uncertainty around its central forecast . ` ` it be n't only the uncertainty around Brexit negotiation . there be many factor which be cause uncertainty in economic forecasting . ' ' ` ` Ms Sturgeon have accuse Mr Hammond of sleight of hand over£820millio boo as up tuh the £820million capital spending boost in Scotland , aresult of his uplift for infrastructure project south of the border . th sh th t Holyrood figure show that despite Chancellor ' S sweetener , the grant would still be @card@ per cent low in @card@ than it be in @card@ after inflation . h the sw wo cen tha aftT d -so from @card@ to dayals the big pot for day-to-day spending be also on course to fall £1.5billion in real term between @card@ and @card@ thanks to austerity measure announce a year ago by Mr Osborne - unless Nat choose to hike tax . als by ter anungn aau an ag in earnings . un hi @card@ @card@ the suspicion be back up yesterday expert . ba by T ment in centre calculated f the Scottish Parliament independent research calculate day-to-day spending would face a cut of just over three per cent , from £26billion to £25.2billion by @card@ . Ms Sturgeon welcome the ` ` small increase in capital investment ' ' , but stress by @card@ the capital budget would be around eight per cent low in real term than when the Tories take office . Conservative MSP Murdo Fraser praise the Chancellor ' s £820million boost as well as £3.3million for Scottish charity , the City Deal funding scheme for Scotland and a freeze in fuel duty . he say : ` ` why ca n't the First Minister stop be so miserable and just welcome this good news ? ' ' Greens co-convener Patrick Harvie say the Autumn Statement contain a ` ` great deal more good news for the wealthy ' ' , and call for the Scottish Budget to include ` ` progressive ' ' tax policy and to go further on the live wage , energy efficiency and top up benefit .
Sun THE SAYS the sole choice for our new PM Theresa May must be Britain ' S next Prime Minister . the Home Secretary be by far the most experienced and most credible of the two final contender to run the country at this pivotal moment in our history . it may seem odd for us to endorse her after our campaign to leave the EU . Mrs May back Remain , albeit reluctantly . but she have promise ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' and we believe she would deliver it . it would be politically suicidal - and dangerous - to betray the 17.4million people who vote for it . Andrea Leadsom do back Brexit . but three day ago we say she would be a huge gamble as PM and we believe that even more strongly today . Britain know nothing about her or her ability . she be untested at Cabinet level . there be question-mark over her finance and apparently mislead job claim on her CV . she have be unconvincing when question . she be nowhere near ready for power . Mrs May ' s record at the Home Office be not perfect . she fail , for example , to make big cut to the immigration she could control , from non-EU country . but it speak volume that she have hold down that extremely tough role longer than anyone in history . damage for Britain to be rudderless it be true she have be so narrowly focus on it that she have yet to reveal her wide vision for Britain . we urge her to tell the nation , and Tory member , all about it right away . Post-Brexit , a ` ` safe pair of hand ' ' wo n't be enough . Britain need a new economic plan to transform the country . Business Secretary Sajid Javid have imaginative idea for cut tax and build business confidence . do Mrs may agree ? what be her view on the welfare reform pioneer by Iain Duncan Smith ? or on education , or defence ? the @card@ Tory member who will decide who become PM must ask themselves this : who will well run Britain - and win an election in @card@ ? anyone would beat Jeremy Corbyn . but if Labour have a credible leader by then , Mrs May have a far great chance than Mrs Leadsom of keep power . we be hugely disappoint Michael Gove be out of the race . he be a man of courage , principle and imagination who would have be a fine choice . we hope he will be appoint head of the negotiate team as we extricate ourselves from the EU . the excellent Priti Patel should be in the Cabinet too . we hope Chancellor George Osborne retain a prominent role . it be absurd that Britain must wait till September @card@ for a new Prime Minister , while our current one kick back and tick off the day . it be hugely damaging for Britain to be rudderless for so long . for the sake of the country , the Tories must cut that voting period in half . we believe they should put Mrs May in Downing Street as soon as possible .
carney ' S CARNAGE THE Bank of England boss yesterday threaten to make another doomsday intervention day before the Brexit vote . Mark Carney have already say leave the EU could trigger a recession , high interest rate and hit job . and he refuse to rule out fresh warning when a report on interest rate be due a week before the June @card@ polling day . opponent claim his view compromise the Bank ' S independence . Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg accuse Mr Carney of collude with Chancellor George Osborne on anti- Brexit propaganda . but the Governor , right , tell the Treasury Select Committee there be no ` ` undue influence ' ' from the Treasury . and he concede inflation will not rise as sharply Mr Osborne ' S economist be warn if there be a vote for Brexit . the Sun say - Page Eight
silence the Press be a travesty , your majesty ; AUTHOR DEFENDS Story of Queen ' S BREXIT BUST-UP SHOULD the British public be allow to know about an alleged political bust-up between our head of state and the Deputy Prime Minister ? p eli an elitist alliance of Palace flunky ytist and Labour ' s phoney democrat seem to think it ' s none of our business . this month the Sun boldly announnced Queen ' S BACKING for BREXIT , report a ` ` senior political source ' ' reveal how the Queen ` ` let rip ' ' at a Windsor Castlt e lunch with Government minisi ters in @card@ . groupie Nick Clegg , then lel ader of the Liberal Democrc ats and Deputy Prime MinM ister , that she ` ` believe the t EU be head in the t wrong direction ' ' . announce BREXIT , Queen Castle minister she apparently tell EU groupie leader Democrats Minister , the the Palace official quickly declare Majesty they take the extraordinary of about to Standards Organisation Dec d lared that her Maj-a est e y be not amuse . ex e traordinary step of o make a formal m complaint ab a out the article to the Independent Press Standards Organisatio - the watchdog to which the Subscribes . the complaint refer accuracy . yet nobody have seriously able to claim the Sun misrepresent the royal view of the EU , or deny convincingly that the use the word report . truth the ` ` accuracy ' ' complaint more like a cover for the Palace ' s real protest , against the insolence of the tabloid press . Sun Su to accu be a sented even Queen in t look Palace ' insolen The ca n't s message be , ` ` you f***ing pleb say that ! ' ' but why not ? public interest an alleged argument between the of state and political leader such a big issue be surely a legitimate matter of public interest . the Labour Party rush to take cudgel on behalf of the Palace , the freedom of the Press to matter of state . head about legitim yet t up cud against report deman investig Michae Sun st Privy Tom Watson , deputy Labour leader , demand that the Tory Government investigate whether Justice Secretary Michael Gove be the source of the story . member of her Majesty ' s Council , Watson object , be swear to secrecy about anything she say . so , if privy councillor Gove really have reveal any secret , he ` ` should be remove from office if he wo n't honourably resign ' ' . this , remember , be the Labour Party of suppose republican Jeremy Corbyn , who reportedly object to kneel before the Queen to join the Privy Council . the Crown no longer have a licence to dictate what can and can not legally be publish . but it ' s little wonder the palace think it have a new unofficial licence to attack medium freedom . after all , in the wake of the Leveson showtrial of the tabloid , every party now support a regulatory system involve a Royal Charter and her Majesty ' S privy Council - the first attempt at state-backed regulation since the end of Crown licensing in @card@ . back in @card@ , King James VI & I tell member of Parliament they have no business discuss royal affair of state or his European alliance . in response , MP tell him where to go . now in @card@ , Buckingham Palace tell the Press that they have no business discuss royal affair of state or what the Queen say about Europe . in response , Labour MP have rally to defend the palace ' s secrecy rule . so much for @card@ year of progress for democracy and liberty .
PM ' S @card@ VOW PM ' S @card@ VOW THE Prime Minister have a plan by Steve Hawkes to fight the @card@ General Election , her deputy have reveal . Damian Green say Theresa May be judge too harshly in June and want to put her agenda ` ` into practice ' ' . people who may not have previously benefit from Conservative success can do so ' ' . furious Tories blame her for the dire June election - when the party lose its majority . the First Secretary of State tell the Spectator : ` ` by @card@ , she will have a big record of achievement to show . ' ' MP believe she could limp on only until the end of the Brexit negotiation in @card@ but her speech in Florence last week effectively push the exit PM ... election plan back until @card@ . he insist he be ` ` optimistic ' ' about a good Brexit deal and a domestic agenda to ` ` show that the Prime Minister have a plan to fight the @card@ General Election , her deputy have reveal . Damian Green say Theresa May be judge too harshly in June and want to put her agenda ` ` into practice ' ' . the First Secretary of State tell the Spectator : ` ` by @card@ , she will have a big record of achievement to show . ' ' he insist he be ` ` optimistic ' ' about a good Brexit deal and a domestic agenda to ` ` show that people who may not have previously benefit from Conservative success can do so ' ' . furious Tories blame her for the dire June election - when the party lose its majority . MP believe she could limp on only until the end of the Brexit negotiation in @card@ but her speech in Florence last week effectively push the exit back until @card@ .
remain fan shift on Brexit NEARLY seven in ten voter now back a ` ` hard ' ' Brexit with full border control , a study find . researcher claim it show Brits ` ` accept ' ' the decision to quit the EU . they say @card@ per cent favour modest tariff and contribution to Brussels against the ` ` soft ' ' option of free movement and ongoing payment . over half of Remain voter back take complete control of immigration and leave the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice . nearly @card@ per cent of them back pay no ` ` divorce ' ' settlement , about the same as leave voter . the London School of Economics and Oxford Uni study put various Brexit scenario to @card@ voter . LSE professor Thomas Leeper say : ` ` Remainers be fall towards be more pro-Brexit than expect . ' ' Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg say : ` ` the British people love democracy . ' '
go ON JUNCK Make My Day ; SHOWDOWN WITH Europe ; PM ' s no deal Brexit plan Theresa May be consider the dramatic step of publish Hard Brexit plan to show Britain be serious about go it alone . she would go public with the contingency measure be put together by Cabinet Secretary Jeremy Heywood in the event EU divorce talk break down . Downing Street want to prove to Brussels chief that it really be prepare to walk away rather than sign up to a bad deal , Sun columnist James Forsyth reveal today . her Dirty Harry-style challenge not to test her follow a volley of hostile briefing from Brussels as Eurocrats ratchet up the pressure on No10 . it have be blame on Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker ' s chief of staff Martin Selmayr . the PM have accuse Brussels bureaucrat of deliberately try to swing y y g g the election . but there be claim senior EU figure be embarrass by the behaviour of Mr Juncker . they be say to include the Commission ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier . the PM now want to send a message to the EU to rein in the Commission . source fear the EU still think she will not walk away in the event of a bad deal and enough to pressure . so it feel confident ramp up the pressur Mr Heywood have a ernment departm prepare for a scenario after say no Brexit well than a she have remain her and the Go could immedi Britain ' s annual budget to the EU if talk source say the take the ` ` nucle if the EU i demand t can not meet . ask government department to no-deal Mrs May deal be bad deal . say that position . government immediately stop £18billion payment collapse . pm could nuclear option ' ' insist on that she still due to contribution EU budget two year in @card@ . Britain be st make annual tion to the E in the next t until we leave Mr Barnier say Britain m assurance tha zens will b ` ` properly humanely ' ' p before tra can begin . yesterday must offer that EU citizen be treat and post-Brexit trade talk say that without them can be trust ' ' when build a new relationship . and he withou there ` ` no whe ing relat Ste @ the steve.hawkes www.the-sun.co.uk James Forsyth ' S column and Page Ten The Sun say -
Joyota ; City Sun THE FTSE @card@ Rose @card@ TO @card@ EDITED By Rhodri Phillips £1 Buys ( Euro ) @card@ , us $ @card@ Brent Crude $ @card@ Tel : @card@ @card@ @card@ e-mail :
BREXIT : trust in the People ; COUNTDOWN To article @card@ ; PM ' s warning to let Bill pass Rebel MP will be defy the will of the people if they block a bid to kickstart Brexit , the PM have warn . Theresa May say MP vote for the referendum so must stand by its result . it come on the eve of the Brexit Bill ' s launch in the Commons . MP be be ask within the next @card@ hour to give Government the power to trigger Article @card@ . speak in Ireland , Mrs May say : ` ` I hope when people look at the Article @card@ bill they will recognise that it be a very simple decision . ` ` do they support the will of the British people or not ? ' ' the blast come amid speculation more than @card@ MP will vote against the Brexit Bill . a vote be expect to come tomorrow night after two day of debate in the Commons . but Tory whip have tell MP to stay in Parliament until midnight tonight . they fear a sudden opposition vote design to block the entire bill . the Supreme Court last week rule the government must win MP ' approval before invoke Article @card@ . if pass on Wednesday night , the Commons will have a further three day of debate next week where MP can try to amend the Bill . minister hope it will then go before the Lords and be clear ready for Mrs May to formally begin divorce talk from the EU in the middle of March .
BREXIT Case DELAYS May ; but Irish Govt get ready for talk Britain ' S top judge have order that their parliament must be give a say on trigger Brexit . the Supreme Court in London yesterday order a bill to be pass through parliament before Prime Minister Theresa May can lead the UK out of the EU . that could give pro-European MP the chance to soften the term of the exit . Downing Street insist the court defeat will not derail May ' s plan to launch negotiation on withdrawal from the EU this spring . and that have please Foreign Affairs Minister Charlie Flanagan . he say : ` ` I welcome the confirmation from the UK Government that it will proceed with the trigger of Article @card@ by the end of March at the late . this provide welcome certainty for the beginning of negotiation between the UK and the EU . ` ` preparation and our programme of engagement with our EU partner be continue and we will be ready for the challenging negotiation ahead . ' ' Finance Minister Michael Noonan have say the UK ' s exit from the EU will take six year to negotiate . he warn the negotiation would be difficult , include issue such as arrangement with Northern Ireland . meanwhile , Michelle O'Neill , new leader of Sinn Fein at Stormont say yesterday ' S outcome ignore the will of the people . the judge rule the devolve assembly will not have to be consult when parliament vote on trigger Brexit . Ms O'Neill call on the Irish government to help secure special status for Northern Ireland within the EU once the UK leave . she say : ` ` clearly the ruling again ignore the will of the people of the North who vote by a majority to stay in the European Union . ' ' in its judgment , the Supreme Court unanimously rule not only do devolve body have no role in decide the future of the UK as a whole in the EU , Northern Ireland have no special status either . May ' s Brexit secretary , David Davis , tell the House of Commons yesterday that official would be introduce a bill within day . investment manager Gina Miller , one of the campaigner who bring the case , say Brexit be ` ` the most divisive issue of a generation ' ' and add the result ` ` be not about politics , but process ' ' . meanwhile , May have decline an invitation to make a historic address to the Dail . she be ask by Taoiseach Enda Kenny to give a speech there during a one-day official visit to Ireland before the end of the month , but say she be far too busy .
BREXIT Oil RIG ; Petrol giant ' use EU vote to fleece us for £500m ' Huge RIP-OFF @card@ PETROL giant be last night accuse of deliberately exploit the Brexit vote to fleece motorist out of £500million . fuel should have be 3p per litre cheap last month but firm hold on to the cash and blame the weak pound , campaigner claim . FairFuel UK have write to Chancellor Philip Hammond urge him to set up a new regulator - OfPump - to smash the cartel , and also call for a fuel duty cut . founder Howard Cox say : ` ` we have clear evidence that , follow the EU Referendum , cheap wholesale price be not pass on to driver . it seem the market be deliberate exploit post Brexit uncertainty to hike profit . ' ' Oil fall from $ @card@ a barrel in June to as low as $ @card@ a barrel this month . FairFuel say a 2p-a-litre drop in July should have fall to 5p despite Sterling ' S collapse . former Chancellor George Osborne cut fuel duty in @card@ after our keep it down campaign and keep it frozen . in a report , FairFuel UK have reveal low fuel price last year generate an extra £12billion of economic activity . they write to Mr Hammond : ` ` Lower oil price have undeniably help in the last @card@ month but the confidence create by fuel tax policy have be a strong stimulus too . ' '
Let ' s see May ' s Brexit strategy Andrea Leadsom ' s quest to be our next Prime Minister end as it begin - in farce and failure . some might praise Mrs Leadsom for quit upon realise she be n't up to the task . not us . from the outset of the contest she appear too inexperienced to be a serious candidate to lead the country , and under the first real scrutiny Leadsom and her campaign fall apart . a single newspaper interview should n't be enough to derail even the most junior MP , yet Leadsom ' S bungle effort with the Times last Saturday betray a dreadful lack of judgment . she have show she ' S entirely unsuite for high office and the wisdom of the @card@ Tory MP who back her must now be question . worse still , her overconfidence and risible retreat have rob Britain of a proper contest - something the Sun call for from the start . Theresa May might be the right choice for next PM , but it ' S concern that her plan for the country have n't be fully examine before she move into Downing Street . the last time the UK witness a competent Cabinet minister take the top job without any competition - when Gordon Brown succeed Tony Blair - the result be disastrous . we sincerely hope Mrs May have the right idea for Britain , and her speech yesterday be a good start . she ' s right to pinpoint the inequality in society , and her idea to put employee on company board to curb the salary of greedy fatcats be welcome . but it ' S on Brexit that ' reluctant remainer ' Theresa May will really be test . Mrs May yesterday repeat her mantra that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' and rule out any attempt at a second referendum . this be the right stance and both this and her economic proposal show she understand that million of people across Britain have have enough of the status quo - where unchecked immigration and a London-centric economy benefit the very rich while the rest lose out . but to convince the country she ' s serious about make Brexit work , Mrs May must ensure her Cabinet make use of all the talent in the Tory Party - in particular appoint a capable Brexiteer , such as Michael Gove , to lead negotiation with Brussels . we ' re please that David Cameron have move quickly and Theresa May will be PM on Wednesday . this will provide the country and the economy with some much-need certainty . then we need to see a clear plan for Britain leave the EU as quickly as possible . the Tory leadership contest might be over , but the real test for May be just begin .
may BANK LOLLYDAY ; BREXIT Britain ON Roll ; lPM victory trigger amazing rally lStock market 11-month high , £ up Theresa May ' S victory trigger a market rally yesterday - with share and the pound jump high . the FTSE @card@ leap @card@ to an 11-month high of @card@ on relief Andrea Leadsom would not be in No10 . it mean the London index be technically in a ` ` bull market ' ' - @card@ per cent up on the year ' s low point of @card@ in February . the boost come as firm announce multi-billion pound deal at the Farnborough Air Show , with US plane giant Boeing set to create @card@ job in the UK . expert say the far more experienced Mrs May would engineer a ` ` soft Brexit ' ' , with continued access to the EU ' s single market and far less volatility for the economy . the FTSE @card@ close @card@ per cent higher . and the pound leap against the dollar and euro . at one point it move back above the $ @card@ barrier . Daniel Vernazza , lead UK economist at UniCredit , say : ` ` in our view it ' s positive news as Leadsom be one of the face of the ' leave ' campaign and be likely to favour a ' hard Brexit ' . ' ' Boeing plan to build a £100million site in a £3billion deal to supply the UK with nine new marine patrol P-8A Poseidon military plane . it will also deliver @card@ Apache AH-64E attack helicopter . and Virgin Atlantic sign a £3.4billion order with Airbus for @card@ aircraft . the wing will be make in the UK and Brit firm Rolls-Royce will supply engine . Barclaycard reveal brit be still splash out at record level post-Brexit . spending in the week after the EU poll be up @card@ per cent on the week before . share in several house builder , include Barratt and Taylor Wimpey , rise more than seven per cent . bank - hard hit after the Brexit vote - also enjoy a share rally .
the Scottish Sun ON Sunday SAYS @card@ @card@ @card@ Nic step up fight on Brexit in Case anyone be in any doubt , Nicola Sturgeon will this week signal she be most definitely not give up on her Brexit battle with Theresa May . the First Minister will go on the offensive against the UK Government and its handling of talk with the EU . and she will unveil a study on the economic implication of Brexit on Scotland - because she say that it ` ` beggar belief ' ' the Tories have not publish such an analysis . the paper give its conclusion on matter include continued membership of the single market and continued freedom of movement . the question be , will the Westminster Government take any notice ? and if they do , will it impact on their negotiation ? probably not . study ... Sturgeon Nic step up fight despite Ms Sturgeon ' S constant champion of remain in the single market and of free movement , this continually fall on deaf ear down south . the Tory hard Brexiteers will see that this remain the case . on Brexit and the UK Government have call on Holyrood to support it during its EU negotiation - mean it ' S only go to be do their way . the two government be simply not go to see eye to eye on Brexit . where that leave us be not go to become clear for many month to come . this be a battle that will be fight to the bitter end of the UK ' s messy exit from the EU - and beyond .
Tories owe us Euro answer when the Brexit campaign be under way last year , Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson say Boris Johnson be lie to the voter about the impact of Brexit . but now he be serve in the Cabinet alongside Home Secretary Amber Rudd , who say she would n't accept a lift home from the man who be now foreign Secretary . that be all the background you need to the chaotic , ferrets-in-a-sack atmosphere inside the UK Government as they plough on with the Brexit process . yesterday Ms Rudd order a yearlong study into the impact of immigration on the UK economy . the most striking thing about that be that the work have n't already be do . why be n't this information available before the big Brexit vote ? why do nobody think about ask that sort of question until now ? cut Ms Rudd say new control will be phase in and EU citizen will still be allow to come and go for a grace period . and that ' s more or less it as far as policy go . be the conservative still commit to cut immigration to under @card@ a year ? we do n't know . will there be a targeted immigration policy , guide new worker to area and industry where they be need - like Scotland ? we do n't know . absolutely everything in the UK economy from the NHS to care home to the restaurant trade to fruit grow to highly-skilled engineering depend on immigration . all those sector - and the thousand of EU family now happily settle here - need to have some kind of certainty about what the policy be . and the answer be , we do n't know .
Carney : we ' ll not be sink BANK of England boss Mark Carney say Britain will cope with Brexit - as it be claim the economy will grow faster than forecast this year . Governor Carney predict the nation ' s ` ` dynamism ' ' can help it cope as its relationship with Europe become clear . he speak out as the International Monetary Fund say Britain be perform well than expect after last June ' s Brexit vote . it expect the economy to grow @card@ per cent this year , the same as Germany ' S . Governor Carney say in a speech : ` ` the dynamism of this economy will help it adjust as its relationship with the EU be clear and opportunity with the rest of the world open up . ' ' he say UK household seem to be ` ` look through ' ' Brexit-related uncertainty , and that interest rate could go either way depend on how the economy fare . yesterday , the pound hit a 31-year low against the dollar .
don Deal ; BREXIT Britain be HIRED ; lUS to offer fair trade agreement lTrump : more country will quit EU Donald Trump last night declare he want to help make Brexit a ` ` great thing ' ' with a bumper transatlantic trade deal . the president-elect say he ` ` love ' ' the UK and will offer a quick and fair trade agreement with the US within week . in an interview with Michael Gove for the Times , the Sun ' s sister newspaper , he reveal he be invite PM Theresa May to visit him right after he get into the White House . Mr Trump say : ` ` I love the UK . we ' re gon na work very hard to get it ( a trade deal ) do quickly and do properly - good for both side . ' ' Mr Trump add : ` ` she ' S request a meeting and we ' ll have a meeting right after I get into the White House and I think we ' re gon na get something do very quickly . ' ' he also predict more country would follow Britain by leave the EU because of the migration crisis and Angela Merkel ' s ` ` catastrophic ' ' decision to open Germany ' S border . he say : ` ` people , country want their own identity . I believe other will leave . ' ' the revelation will be a boost to Mrs May ahead of her Brexit speech tomorrow . the pound sink last night on fear she will commit to leave the single market and the custom union . but the prospect of such a close relationship between the US and the UK will pile pressure on the EU . Mr Trump say he think ` ` Brexit be go to end up be a great thing ' ' . and he welcome the fall in the value of the pound for have help to boost the attractiveness of British product abroad . President Trump will be inaugurate on Friday and last night a rehearsal be hold in Washington . Army band member stand in for Mr Trump and wife Melania . Gen Maj Greg Lowery , @card@ , and SPC Sara Corry @card@ , dress in a red tie and suit and white coat respectively .
pub , DINERS PROFITS of Doom Over BREXIT Pubs and restaurant here believe the fallout from the Brexit vote be harm their business . they be claim a @card@ per cent average downturn - rise to as much as @card@ per cent along the border . the hospitality industry say it be suffer the effect of high excise and the weakening of sterling follow the vote in June which will see the UK leave the EU . the Restaurant Association of Ireland and the Vintners Federation of Ireland say business be be badly hit , with British tourist reluctant to spend . but they be unable to put a value on the loss when ask yesterday . the Support your local campaign , back by both organisation , be now plead with the government to cut the excise rate by @card@ per cent in the Budget , describe the problem they ' re face as the ` ` perfect storm ' ' . RAI CEO Adrian Cummins say : ` ` the combination of high excise and the uncertainty over Brexit have cause the perfect storm for the restaurant trade and Irish tourism market . excise be a tax on job , it be a tax on tourism and it be a tax on Irish consumer . ' ' VFI CEO Padraig Cribben add : ` ` Our member be feel the pinch . member in the border county be see a downturn of between eight and @card@ per cent spend of British tourist compare to this time last year . ` ` we firmly believe that the Brexit Vote have result in an even strong case for a significant reduction in alcohol excise . ' '
school ALL Full ; @card@ EU kid in UK class by @card@ Brexit say influx will cost brit £29bn up to @card@ extra EU kid could enter UK school by @card@ if the nation vote to Remain , Brexit boss warn last night . Jobs Minister Priti Patel predict an explosion in super-size classroom in a damn attack on the eve of the Referendum . in comment that will infuriate Downing Street , she also warn the huge demand for new place could end up cost taxpayer £29billion . uncontrolled immigration mean record number of brit be already miss out on their firstchoice school , the minister say . and she storm : ` ` with more country wait to join the EU , this problem can only get bad . ' ' an investigation by the Brexit campaign claim that @card@ additional schoolage European citizen would be in the UK school system by @card@ . but that could hit @card@ if Albania , Macedonia , Montenegro , Serbia and Turkey also join in the near future , ` ` as currently planned ' ' . PM David Cameron admit in an immigration speech two year ago the pressure for some community be ` ` far high than our school and hospital can cope with ' ' . that be back by Vote leave , which say the rise in EU migration over the past decade have push school to breaking point . it say there be already @card@ infant now educate in class over the legal limit of @card@ pupil - up eight per cent in just a year . almost @card@ per cent of child now fail to get into their parent ' firstchoice primary school - with Ms Patel blame sky-high immigration . an estimated @card@ EU migrant of school age come to Britain between @card@ and @card@ . but the annual average have almost triple from @card@ from between @card@ and @card@ to @card@ between @card@ and @card@ . vote leave chief Matthew Elliott say : ` ` parent be face the problem of packed classroom , which mean their kid be not get the education they deserve . ` ` too many have find their kid be miss out on a place in their firstchoice of school . it ' s the government ' s y -ty do f nsn ge ng-duty to ensure a good quality of education for all the nation ' S child . at the moment hundred of thousand of child be n't get that . just imagine how much bad this be go to get if migration continue at the level we be see . ' ' Ms Patel warn the extra burden could cost up to £29billion - include £21.7billion of funding . an extra £7.3billion in ` ` capital cost ' ' would also be need to build new school .
Jez White FLAG Man ; Sun TALKS SHOWDOWN BoJo : we ' ll stay in EU if Labour win power Boris Johnson last night accuse Labour of bottle Brexit and want to keep Britain in the EU . in a fierce Sun talk debate , the Foreign Secretary say Jeremy Corbyn ' S vow not to walk away from Brussels talk if offer a bad deal ` ` scared ' ' him . he tell Labour ' S Shadow Foreign Secretary Emily Thornberry : ` ` Labour have an agenda to frustrate the will of the people and stay in the EU . ' ' he also have a dig at her peacenik defence policy . refer to Ms Thornberry ' S controversial tweet mock White Van Man Dan Ware in @card@ , he roar : ` ` you slag off chap in white van - and you run up the white flag . ' ' the debate at Sun HQ feature Lib Dem Sir Vince Cable , Patrick O'Flynn for Ukip and be host by talkRADIO ' S Julia Hartley-Brewer . Mr Johnson insist Brexit would allow £350million a week to come back to the UK . but Ms Thornberry warn a bad Brexit would wreck the economy and cost job . she insist Labour be popularity by the she add they would renew the Trident nuclear system despite Mr Corbyn be oppose . Mr O'Flynn say : ` ` you could drive a coach and horse through the difference in the Shadow Cabinet . ' ' Sir Vince reiterate for a second EU referendum . steve.hawkes @ www.the-sun.co.uk £350M a week could come back to Britain after Brexit
I Have N'T jack it in Over INDYREF2 ; 1SM LOAD of BALLOTS NATS 1SM Sunday , May @card@ , @card@ Leader BOWLS ' EM over ; lNic still commit to new poll lScots must have Brexit voice Nicola Sturgeon come out swing yesterday to insist she have not backtrack on plan for another indy vote . the First Minister blast PM Theresa May and reaffirm her pledge to hold a second referendum as she play bowl on a campaign trail stop-off . her move come after opponent claim the Nat chief have sideline her key vow during the Westminster election campaign - instead fight on Brexit negotiation . but she say : ` ` my position have n't change and the Scottish Parliament have back that position . ` ` there be a priority now in this election and an opportunity in this election to strengthen Scotland ' s hand in the Brexit negotiation . ` ` because Theresa May be not just pursue Brexit , she ' S pursue an extreme form of Brexit that will put thousand of Scottish job on the line . when we have clarity on the deal , and I be work on the timetable that Theresa May be talk about here , then Scotland should have a choice . ' ' Ms Sturgeon look like she might be get off on the wrong foot as she march on to the delicate turf wear her trademark high heel . despite the fashion faux pa she prove a knockout with voter include player John Thorburn on her visit to Edinburgh ' s Liberton bowling club . meanwhile , Ruth Davidson reinforce her rally cry to back the Union yesterday as she unveil an antiindy billboard in the city . the defiant Tory leader beam as she present the massive poster plaster with referendum headline and the slogan ` ` enough ' ' stamp across the middle . she say : ` ` people have have enough of constant discussion about the constitution . but there be a way to stop this . ` ` if we can lead the fightback against the SNP at this election , we can stop it for good . ` ` so help us at this General Election , send a message to the SNP that we ' ve have enough of this constitutional division . ' ' Ms Sturgeon renew her promise yesterday two month after she announce plan to stage another independence poll between autumn next year and spring @card@ . she have accuse No10 of snub her plea to secure a special Brexit deal for Scotland . the SNP leader - who already meet Kirk dignitary on the first day of their General Assembly - also slam planned pension change . she say : ` ` the Tories ca n't be trust to care for our old people . ' ' she hit out follow confirmation that Mrs May want to end the triple lock on pension after @card@ - which guarantee an increase every year by inflation , average earnings or a minimum of @card@ per cent . the Prime Minister also plan to restrict winter fuel payment to the poor pensioner in England and Wales and shake up social care handout south of the border , leave many fork out more of their home help . ' fuel cut will hit all but very poor ' Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` remove the triple lock , slash the winter fuel allowance and push more care cost on to our elderly people when they have pay tax all their life be a disgrace . ` ` the SNP be commit to the triple lock to ensure pension increase in line with the rise cost of living . ` ` Cutting the allowance wo n't just hit wealthy pensioner . it will hit all but the very poor of our elderly people at a time when energy price be rise , and remove the triple lock when Brexit be push up inflation leave our old people at risk . ' ' the Nat also say they ' ll extend the eligibility of winter fuel payment to family with ` ` severely disabled child ' ' . and while the handout , worth up to £300 , be to be means-tested in England and Wales , the Scottish Tories have promise to preserve it for all pensioner north of the border . it be one of a number of benefit to be devolve to Scotland by April @card@ . social care be already a matter for Holyrood minister . Ms Sturgeon say : ` ` we will fight to protect the winter fuel allowance at Westminster and protect it when it transfer to Scotland , and we will always argue for fair pension for all . ' ' she reveal her key pledge ahead of the party ' s manifesto launch on Tuesday . the Nat will oppose move to increase the state pension age beyond @card@ and support so-called ' WASPI woman ' bear in the 1950s , who will lose out from the planned equalisation of age . the party ' S pension spokesman Ian Blackford say it be not clear whether the Tory be back the universal winter fuel payment for Scottish pensioner with cash from UK government coffer . he blast : ` ` when you look at what they be do with the winter fuel allowance , they be all over the place - and say different thing to different people in different part of the UK . ` ` the question be where will the funding come from ? last year , that cost £158million in Scotland . ` ` we need to make sure , if the conservative be say that winter fuel payment be go to be protect , that the funding for that come from the Westminster government in order that we can do that . ` ` this will become a devolve competency over the course of the lifetime of this parliament so we need to make sure that people in Scotland be not go to be short-change by the conservative . ' '
Lloyds ' # BREXCUSES for AXING @card@ BANK Jobs Lloyds Bank be slam yesterday as it axe @card@ job , blame Brexit ` ` uncertainty ' ' . the cut , which will shut @card@ branch , see the hashtag # Brexcuses trend on Twitter . union blast the late ` ` body blow ' ' , which mean more than @card@ will have lose their t job at the bank since its @card@ bailout by the government . just two year ago it announce the closure of @card@ branch - with @card@ staff be make redundant . the bank , still nine per cent own by the taxpayer , yesterday reveal profit in the past three month be £2.5billion . that be twice what they be in the same period last year . the bank say of Brexit : ` ` give the uncertainty , performance may be somewhat low in future year than previously guide . ' ' Chief executive Antonio Horta-Osorio say the UK ' s vote to quit the EU mean ` ` deceleration of growth seem likely ' ' . Lloyds want to save £1.4billion by the end of the year . Rob MacGregor , of the Unite union , accuse the bank of ` ` cut too far too fast ' ' . the LTU ' S Mark Brown say : ` ` the constant threat of redundancy be like a form of organisational water board for staff . ' ' Lloyds ' official line yesterday be Brexit be not to blame . a message on the bank ' s Twitter account insist : ` ` the decision to close these branch be make before the Brexit vote and be not link to the result . ' '
country have right to know Queen ' s view on Europe AS Britain ' S monarch , the Queen ' s opinion about a vital issue such as Brexit should be make public . Royal protocol insist that she remain politically neutral but whether or not we remain in the EU be n't just a minor everyday issue . this be one of the most important decision this nation have face for some decade . Debbie Fleck Newcastle-upon-Tyne why should n't the view of our Queen on the EU be know to her people ? after a lifetime deal with and talk to all the world ' S leader , she should know what the world be all about . I would rather listen to her Majesty ' s input than take the view of some of our so-called intelligent politician who have be around for five minute and think they know it all . Neil BLATCHFORD Steeple Claydon , Bucks Whether the Queen have express her view or not about the EU surely she have that right to do so as a British citizen - regardless of her status . she have probably realise what a total mess we be in due to be in the EU . she must also be wonder why we be much bad off than when we be an independent country . if it be true she support Brexit , she be only think what the majority already know . Mary Allison Knottingley , West Yorks Well do to her majesty . I be glad to hear she be back Brexit like many million behind her . it ' s time to save the many million it be cost the UK and spend it in our hospital . hooray to the Queen . Susan White Doncaster , South York the Brexit vote be a matter of the sovereignty of the Queen ' S realm and I believe she have the right to defend it from foreign influence - even if royal protocol state she should be neutral . Barry Carroll Woolwich , South East London the governor of the Bank of England , Mark Carney , have do a great job during testing time . but the Canadian - just like the German boss of BMW and French president Francois Hollande - be do exactly what the British public be sick of . he be try to tell us how to think and what to do . leave the EU be not just about financial issue but about get our country back . for too long , serious concern of the British people have be ignore . we ' ve be label lazy and even racist in our own country . Steve PRIDDLE Redditch , Worcs I WAS interested in the article about how much it cost the NHS to treat teenager and child who suffer transgender issue . the £2.7million be a mere drop in the ocean compare with the eyewatering £6.1billion the NHS spend on obesity and the £3.5billion to treat alcohol misuse . Chrissy Bradshaw Plymstock , Devon I APPLAUD International Women ' S day , but surely the cost of event hold to mark it would be put to well use to help fund a refuge for both man and woman who suffer domestic abuse ? jane Gregory Poplar , East London AIRLINES and airport need to stop think of their profit and ban the sale of alcohol or someone be either go to get hurt or an aircraft be go to get into serious trouble . why should holidaymakers or nervous flyer suffer drunken behaviour on a plane ? Alan Rhodes Dowlais , Merthyr Tydfil TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply SURELY if ex-British Chambers of Commerce boss John Longworth have have to resign for not remain neutral on the EU , should this not apply to the governor of the Bank of England ? CT , Notts if Prince William and Kate want a normal life , I suggest they put their kid into a nursery , Wills work 12-hour shift in a factory and Kate get a job in a shop . they will soon see normal life be not luxury holiday and nanny . Marie , Carlisle , Cumbria David Cameron , the Queen herself have seemingly approve of an EU exit . be you go to sack her as well as the rest who do n't agree with you ? jimmy , Wigan if we leave Europe can we leave the Eurovision Song Contest - PLEASE ? rob Wellingborough , Northants Email , fax , write or comment online Wepay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
inside the Cabinet Brexit ding-dong ` ` a SCORE draw ' ' be how one senior minister sum up the first , proper Cabinet discussion on the Brexit deal the UK should aim for . for month minister have be itch to discuss this . but Theresa May have tell them to wait , insist they need to get phase one do first . but with the EU declare the UK have make ` ` sufficient progress ' ' to move on to trade and transition , the Cabinet have begin to thrash out a position . Tuesday ' S meeting be , at time , a heated affair . I be tell Michael Gove , one of the lead champion of Brexit , wait until late in the meeting to speak then turn in an intellectually aggressive performance , take various prediction to task . strikingly , Gove do n't just argue with those on the other side of the debate . he also lambaste the new Defence Secretary , Gavin Williamson , for suggest the UK ' s commitment to European security should be link to the outcome of these talk . in a sign of how high the stake be , Amber Rudd , who favour a soft Brexit , have keep her card close to her chest , wait until Gove have speak so that she could have the last word before the Prime Minister ' s sum up . once Gove have finish , she leap in to try to rebut some of his point . after the meeting , one Secretary of State admit to me there be , ` ` clearly no agreement on some fundamental thing ' ' , and that be before the Cabinet even get into the nittygritty of the government ' s negotiate position . ` ` the fundamental split , ' ' one of those present warn be , ` ` be we worry about the downside risk or look at the opportunity ? ' ' Those whose big concern be the risk want to hug the EU close . while those excite by the opportunity want as much freedom for the UK to do its own thing as possible . there be another , more political , element to the argument , too . I understand two new Cabinet face , the Immigration Minister Brandon Lewis and Development Secretary Penny Mordaunt , make the case that the Tories could n't have Britain leave the EU and have everything look and feel the same . May promise minister they would have another discussion on Brexit as soon as they come back from their Christmas break . this be take as a sign she will not give her next speech on what kind of trade deal the UK want until after that . but there be some hint as to where May be go . one of those who know her good say she be take by Liam Fox ' s point that more and more trade standard be be set at a global level . a minister who have sit around the Cabinet table with her for year , tell me : ` ` by the end of the meeting , she have get everyone where she want them . ' ' this minister predict that May ' S speech will basically be : ` ` we be diverge but in a slightly fudgey-style way . ' ' tellingly , in her sum up , May talk about how the economy be change and that the government have to think about where thing will be in @card@ to @card@ year . the logic of that position take you to the UK go its own way , so it can choose how to regulate the industry of the future such as artificial intelligence , gene edit and financial technology . lJames Forsyth be political editor of the Spectator . global level
Nic ' S ' in Dark ' ON EU Nicola Sturgeon claim Westminster have leave the devolve administration ` ` in the dark ' ' on key Brexit talk . the First Minister call for the UK Government to give Holyrood a ` ` genuine role ' ' . ahead of a British Irish Council g y g meeting she say : ` ` despite reassurance devolve administration will be consult on the withdrawal negotiation , we ' re substantially in the dark . y ` ` this be not an abstract debate about process . leave the EU will have an enormous impact on Scottish job , our economy and our relationship with the world . ` ` the clock be tick on Brexit and it ' S essential the UK Government live up to its promise to give devolve nation a genuine genug role on what be by far the most important issue face these island . ' ' Ms Sturgeon , leave , say there ' s only be one meeting of the Joint Ministerial Council since June over EU negotiation . g Cou cil w she ' ll attend the Council meeting in Jersey with Brexit Minister Mike Russell and external affair chief Fiona Hyslop . a Westminster spokesman say : ` ` there ' s be unprecedented level of engagement . we ' re commit to secure a deal that work for the entire UK . ' ' the Sun say - Page Eight
just butt out of EU talk , Mr Blair ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter what an underhanded , devious and delusional fantasist Tony Blair be by want to curb EU migration in order to prevent Brexit - both undermine the will of the people and democracy . that also sum up the Labour Party . they never respect the electorate . do Mr Blair listen to the people when they voice their concern on mass migration into Britain ? no . do he ever , or do he , listen to the people ? no . as for Labour , they have not change . Richard Mikula by Email Tony Blair have to be one of the most divisive politician in recent history . he seem to have his own view of history and even believe his view matter . now he claim we need EU migration control to stop Brexit . the people vote for Brexit . Blair , butt out . Simone Lafayette Edinburgh the country stop listen to Tony Blair many year ago . now can he please go away and spend his million somewhere else . jack Black Glasgow Blair be right . the EU muck up by not offer David Cameron a good deal on migration , but he forget that he open the door in the first place . and even the EU be n't prepare to go as far as he go . Eddie Fraser Aberdeen why ca n't Tony Blair accept that we , the electorate , vote to leave the EU ? his pathetic argument that we can do this or that to stay within the EU be idiotic and unworkable . Margot Darby by Email So Coleen Rooney reckon Everton should give bad-boy hubby Wayne time off so they can sort their marriage . what planet be she live on ? when he retire , she will have plenty of time to talk this through . Benji Thompson Paisley why do Nicola Sturgeon insist on bring IndyRef2 back into the debate ? she have the government over devolve power , then ruin it by make it an independence issue . we have vote on that . it be over . Paul Seymour East Kilbride Paul Hollywood dress as a German character from ' Allo ' Allo ! back in @card@ be not a statement , it be fun . I doubt he be a Nazi or far-right nut . it ' s funny how the uniform he wear , picture , can inflame people when we have to tolerate so many true outrage in this world . Barry Johnson by Email Chris Froome be an amazing athlete . his record in the Tour de France be stun enough but to add the Vuelta a Espana in the same year show he be an outstanding sportsman . show in for BBC Sports Personality of the year ? LASSI HIRVONEN Edinburgh
prince ' BACKS BREXIT ' ; Optimist Andrew Prince Andrew get behind Brexit yesterday , tell firm to see a ` ` half-full glass ' ' . in the first public royal comment since last year ' s leave vote , he be optimistic for business , say : ` ` the world be your oyster . ' ' he say : ` ` you can either look at it as a glass halfempty , which be , ' oh my God , why have we do this ? ' ' ` ` or you could look at it as a glass half-full , ' OK , that ' S where we be . there be opportunity ' . you may lose one thing , but you may gain something else . ' ' Andrew build on the Queen ' s private criticism of the EU , exclusively reveal by the Sun in March last year . speak at a conference in Singapore , he admit there would be ` ` upheaval ' ' in the next few year . but he urge firm to ` ` look over the garden fence ' ' at non-EU nation . he say : ` ` in my experience , business have go , ' hmm , ( the ) grass be not quite as dark and unforgive as you might expect ' . ` ` actually , there might be fresh grass out there . ' ' the remark be far more positive than those he make last November . then , he be accuse of meddle after privately suggest the combination of Brexit and Donald Trump could ` ` tear thing apart ' ' .
back brave May in June OUR PM be full of surprise - but this late one top the lot . call for a general election in June be a very brave move by Theresa May with Brexit negotiation at such an early stage . her confidence on get the vote of the nation must be sky high . Jeremy Corbyn state he welcome this election . personally I think it will be the toll of the bell that mark the end for JC and see Theresa may go on to be one of the most determined leader Britain have have . Sandra Queen by Email Well do , Theresa May . now we can give her the mandate to carry out the will of the people , as oppose to the traitor in the Tory party , the Lib Dems , SNP and Labour who think they can ignore the majority . with a large work majority we can negotiate a proper Brexit . come on , folk , back the PM . Barry Harbert Shanklin , Isle of Wight it be a very shrewd decision to call a snap general election . now we will see where the other party really stand on Brexit . any pledge should be write into law . how many time over many , many year have we see party U-turn ? well do , Theresa May . jimmy Smith Cumbria Can Theresa may be any more surprising ? what a great and brave move to go to the country . her reason outline in her speech outside No10 be outstanding and very eloquently put . more Queen Elizabeth than Margaret Thatcher . this country vote for Brexit . Parliament need to unite and support the choice the majority of the UK make at the referendum . that be how a democracy work . Nicola Sturgeon , take note . Nikki Duhan Lancaster NOW that Theresa May have call for a general election , let all of us put an end to this backstabbing and give her our endorsement to carry out successful negotiation with the EU . J Holden Barnsley Many be critical of Trump and his policy but he have it right with North Korea . for decade political leader of the world have be coward on deal with the mad Kim family . Kim Jong-un must not be allow to develop his missile system . if China will not step in then the West , lead by the US , must launch a pre-emptive war . it will cost many life but far more will be save . it ' S the lesser of two evil . Natasha Carr Wakefield , W York Even if the US be not responsible for North Korea ' S fail nuclear test rocket , the failure must be very unsettling for Kim Jong-un . President Trump ' s hard line and aggressive foreign policy be reap dividend . a strong America be surely good news for the free world . MIA DUNLOP Wallsend , Tyne & Wear what be the US government up to , with all the sabre-rattling against North Korea ? maybe they should remember the US , France , Australia and Great Britain test and store nuclear weapon in the Fifties and Sixties . yet , when North Korea test a rocket or two , the US government act like hysterical child , shout and scream that they be a rogue state , and ` ` appropriate action must be take ' ' . Edward Mitchell Bridgwater , Somerset the most pointless , almost insulting , experiment have be carry out by Dr Kang Lee from Toronto university , accuse baby just month old of racism . if people believe this rubbish it can only make real race discrimination bad than it already be . dean Buchanan Nottingham How much longer must we tolerate foreign criminal and fail asylum seeker create havoc with our prison system ? their deportation appeal be expensive , time-consuming and make a mockery of our asylum set-up . Justice Secretary Liz Truss ' s plan for a 28-day limit on appeal be doom to be thwart by greedy lawyer . if they have no right to be here , boot them out - pronto . Steven Smith North Shields , Tyne and Wear TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply I WAS fascinate by the article on kid addict to computer game but it leave me wonder why the parent lose control of their kid . parent should set rule and child obey them . Liz , S Wales great article about £1 & 50p coin which make me look closely at them . when do they stop put ` ` new pence ' ' on coin ? Ian , Southampton MRS May , do you know what you ' re do or say ? you praise Prince Harry yet have a system of benefit sanction for people with mental health issue . Paul Email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
BREXIT wreck it ; EXPERT Warns EU TACTICS a turn-off for YES Backers ; lNic ' s huge poll blow as indy support hit 2yr low lEuro drive for vote No2 ' backfire ' on defiant Nat Nicola Sturgeon be last night warn the SNP ' s pursuit of a second indy referendum on the wing of the Brexit vote have backfire . a shock poll yesterday reveal support for leave the UK fall below @card@ per cent for the first time since the historic @card@ ballot . the YouGov survey record a Yes/No split of @card@ , with back for independence dwindle over the last few month . the result come after month of the Nat leader strive to grow support for a UK split follow Britain ' s bombshell decision in June to leave the EU . polling guru Professor John Curtice yesterday warn the First Minister ' S tactic seem to have be an own goal . the Strathclyde University academic say : ` ` the poll suggest that instead of boost support for independence , the SNP ' s decision to link the possibility of a second independence referendum to retain Scotland ' s membership of the EU have erode support for leave the Union . ' ' Ms Sturgeon will this month reveal her plan for a separate Scots Brexit deal if the UK can not guarantee Britain stays in the single market . if Downing Street knock it back , she aim to go for a second independence vote before we quit the EU . but the poll finding make grim reading for the SNP and Ms Sturgeon , with her personal approval rating plunge nine point since August . despite a boom in indy support in the day after the Brexit vote , Yes backing slump to @card@ per cent , with no on @card@ and the other @card@ per cent say they do n't know or will not vote . with the undecided and nonvoter exclude , the split be @card@ for Yes and @card@ for no . the survey also reveal a grow majority oppose Ms Sturgeon ' s plan to hold a second indy vote during two year of EU divorce talk - due to start by the end of March . with ' do n't know ' remove , @card@ per cent oppose and @card@ per cent back a re-run of the @card@ vote while the Article @card@ negotiation be ongoing . that gap have widen from @card@ in March . and in a further blow , one in five loyal Nat reckon the party should not campaign for a UK split over the next two year . ' stop disrespect the majority of Scotland ' Prof Curtice say Yes backing appear to be slide among previous indy voter who go on to back leave this year - include a third of Nat supporter . he say : ` ` only about three quarter of those who vote Yes two year ago say they would do so again . it be among these Yes-Leavers that support for independence now seem to have fall away . ` ` in YouGov ' s poll in August , support for independence among Yes-Leavers stand at @card@ per cent . now it have fall to @card@ per cent . ' ' Voters also cast major doubt on Ms Sturgeon ' s idea that a non-independent Scotland could stay in the EU if the rest of the UK leave . Sixty-two per cent of Scot say a separate deal would ` ` probably not be possible ' ' while @card@ per cent say it would ` ` probably be possible ' ' . among the sceptic be @card@ per cent of SNP supporter with @card@ per cent feel it be a realistic chance . No10 have already say it be pursue a single deal for the whole of the UK . Tory leader Ruth Davidson - whose popularity be outstrip Ms Sturgeon - urge the First Minister to focus on the day job . she say yesterday : ` ` my message to Nicola Sturgeon be clear . we vote on independence two year ago . move on . stop disrespect the majority of the people of Scotland by continue to push your divisive and unwanted second referendum . ` ` get on with the job you be elect to do . ' ' the poll give Ms Davidson an approval rating of +25 - up four point on August - while Ms Sturgeon be on +11 , down nine point . PM Theresa May and Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and Kezia Dugdale all record dismal negative rating . Nat say stat sho- wing @card@ per cent Scots support for Remain compare to @card@ per cent in June ' s EU vote prove they be on the right track . Finance Secretary Derek Mackay also highlight result in the poll show backing for the Nat continue at Holyrood , despite the EU row . it put them on @card@ per cent for the parly constituency vote - down four point on August - compare to the Tory on @card@ per cent - up four - and Labour on @card@ per cent , down one . he say : ` ` people be rally around the SNP ' s commitment to protect Scotland ' s place in Europe - they do n't want to see us take out against our will by the Tories . ' ' Labour leader Ms Dugdale say : ` ` a substantial majority of people in Scotland do n't want to go through the division and argument all over again . we be divide enough . ' ' Lib Dem chief Willie Rennie say : ` ` Fewer people support independence and even more be feed up with the SNP go on and on about it . ' ' last month , it emerge former SNP cabinet minister Alex Neil be among top Nat figure who secretly vote leave in June . he also claim several of his fellow party MSPs have vote the same way .
pm : I Lie AWAKE ; May ' s sleepless night over deliver Brexit Theresa May have admit sleepless night as she worry about make a success of Brexit . the PM reveal she often lie awake wrestling with the ` ` really complex issue ' ' . she admit change have become a big cause of anxiety in her life since she enter No10 . sleepless night ... Mrs May but she be eager to take Britain out of the EU as soon as possible and insist she just want to ` ` get on with the deal ' ' . Mrs May speak frankly of her disturbed sleep pattern in a Sunday Times interview . when ask : ` ` what be your big anxiety ? what keep you awake at night ? ' ' she say the ` ` moment of change ' ' when she take charge be ` ` a hugely challenging time ' ' . she admit the Brexit talk have her work long into the night and add : ` ` in this job you do n't get much time to sleep . ' ' Mrs May be on a collision course with Bank of England governor Mark Carney , who want a slow split from Brussels . he be keen for full access to the single market for two year after Britain leave the EU to cushion the economy . he also want us to be subject to the European Court of Justice until @card@ , five year after the leave vote . the move will give Mrs May a fresh headache as she work on plan to trigger Article @card@ , which begin the two-year exit process , by the end of next March . May also admit hubby Philip pick her clothes and handbag when she go shopping and love his new job as her consort .
March of May could foil veto ambush clot TWO thing be now clear after Britain ' s sensational vote to leave the EU . first , we can kiss goodbye to any trade deal with Brussels unless we accept open border and carry on pay into EU coffer . second , thanks to those bitter Remoaners who refuse to accept the verdict of the British people , we be face the threat of yet another election . the Prime Minister insist she want Parliament to run its full five-year term and probably mean it . a fresh contest barely two year after David Cameron ' s outright Tory victory would be a distraction just as she need to focus all her time and energy on Brexit . but her hand be be force . the Supreme Court be be ask to overrule the PM and give Parliament a veto before she fire the start gun for Brexit next March . and in a blatant bid to reverse the June @card@ referendum result , the two most useless party leader in modern British politics have open a second front . ` ` Red Ed ' ' Miliband and clueless Nick Clegg - cast into oblivion by the great British public - be plot a Commons ambush which could bring down the government . meanwhile , grumpy Chancellor Philip Hammond be apparently threaten to quit the Treasury . Remoaners should be careful what they wish for . Theresa May have notch up astonishing approval rating as the most popular Tory leader since Margaret Thatcher . her party have a 17-point lead over Labour , which can only increase when Jeremy Corbyn ' S pro-Kremlin Loony Tunes be put to the test in a real campaign . and she have strong card to play over the come week , include an autumn minibudget , which will aim to reassure voter that Britain be in safe hand - whoever be Chancellor . it will be follow by a March Budget set Britain ' s course for Brexit , at the same time as she trigger Article @card@ to quit the EU . event might overtake her . revolting Tory could support the Miliband/Clegg plot , trigger a vote of no confidence and plunge us into an election . she could lose the argument in the Supreme Court . and she could be sabotage by EU leader who want to punish Britain for put democracy first . but all these possibility should be weigh against the likely outcome . Theresa May be popular across the political spectrum - include many Labour voter . there be every prospect she would sweep the country , boost her majority and destroy Jeremy Corbyn and his Labour Party Trots . in that event , the Remain camp be dead in the water . Brexit will have win twice . so a Commons revolt be not a foregone conclusion . those favour a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit have respectable argument . but hardliner such as ex-ministers Anna Soubry and Nicky Morgan be begin to look like bulgingeyed fanatic . many who vote Remain out of loyalty to David Cameron be privately pro-Brexit . other have embrace it as the will of the people . voter see Mrs May as a ` ` breath of fresh air ' ' . Jezza , by contrast , be mad , bad and dangerous to know . above all , career-conscious Tories know which side their bread be butter . they be aware this PM do not forgive and forget - as scaremongering George Osborne and other have find to their cost . with their seat up for grab in the new boundary review , will they risk a comfy life in Westminster for the chill wind of the real world outside ? lMET chief Bernard Hogan-Howe have be absolve of all blame for smear public figure with unfounded allegation of child abuse . Sir Bernard , perhaps the most discredited police commissioner ever to hold the post , have choose to quit with a huge pension just as the muck hit the fan . instead , his officer will carry the can for smear innocent public figure such as ex-MP Harvey Proctor and former Home Secretary Lord Brittan , who die without know he have be clear . Hogan-Howe cover his back last week with a socalled ` ` apology ' ' to blameless war hero and former Defence supremo Lord Bramall . the scathing report into the Yard ' s blunder crime investigation under his leadership will not be publish in full . he ' s mad , bad and dangerous
Tories MUTINY ; @card@ MP in Osborne axe threat over ' Brexit Budget ' George Osborne ' S future hang in the balance last night after @card@ Tory MP warn him to ditch his Brexit Budget plan . in an unprecedented revolt , livid pro-Leave backbencher threaten to kick out the Chancellor if he go ahead with £30billion of tax rise and cut announce yesterday . Mr Osborne claim the squeeze would be necessary to fill an economic black hole after Brexit . he say : ` ` rather than find out the consequence for the nation ' s budget after we quit the EU , the public should know what they be before take that choice . ' ' but the move trigger Tory uproar as a fifth of the party ' s MP , include seven ex-Cabinet minister , vow to vote it down in the Commons . in a joint statement , they call the Chancellor ' S position ` ` untenable ' ' if he publish the Budget . Nadine Dorries call on Mr Osborne to ` ` resign now ' ' if he believe it would be a good idea . and Former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith , leave , claim he be ` ` talk the economy down deliberately ' ' to trigger ` ` panic in the market ' ' . he also accuse Mr Osborne of be ` ` irresponsible ' ' . last night Alex Salmond say pro-Brexit Tory be plan to oust both the PM and Chancellor . the ex-First Minister accuse Boris Johnson , Michael Gove and Mr Duncan Smith of plan ` ` a very British coup ' ' .
put YOUR Hans UP ; German call for UK ' s ' total surrender ' on EU BREXIT Shock @card@ Germany want Britain ' s unconditional surrender over Brexit talk . German official Hans-Olaf Henkel warn that Chancellor Angela Merkel expect Theresa May to cave in over our EU divorce bill and trade term . the MEP , a former head of Germany ' s large trade body , say : ` ` if I be to use a military term , what they want be unconditional surrender . ' ' his incendiary comment come hour before Brexit Secretary David Davis arrive in Berlin to blast the Germans for put ` ` politics before prosperity ' ' . Mr Davis say he think it ` ` very unlikely ' ' Britain and the EU would fail to strike a deal . but he signal Britain would remain under the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice during any interim deal . Mr Davis yesterday urge German business leader to help secure a ` ` transitional ' ' period between Brexit in @card@ and a new future trade agreement . he say : ` ` when it come to an implementation period , you be not detach observer . ' '
Britain ' S £65BN BREXIT Bonanza ; EXIT ' S ' tax CUTS & Growth Boom ' Britain be set for a £65billion Brexit boost of tax cut and spending splurge , economist predict . leave the EU will trigger a boom big enough to raise NHS funding and slash the national debt , they say . and the benefit could be feel by million of family within just five year . the upbeat forecast be reveal yesterday in a report by a group of @card@ expert know as the economist for Free Trade . it say Brexit will bring gain as we stop pay our £10billion sub and be free from EU red tape that cost business £120billion a year . the report say price will fall when we scrap EU tariff on good from the rest of the world , with UK firm enjoy an export boom . this will push up growth to nearly three per cent a year , leave a surplus of £40billion by @card@ , and £65billion five year later . it would give Chancellor Philip Hammond enough headroom to pay off the debt and also give away £25billion a year . almost half of that could be use to soak up a 2p cut on both corporation tax and high rate income tax . that would leave £13billion - enough to pump £250million a week into the NHS . the group ' S chairman Prof Patrick Minford say the Treasury have be negative about post-Brexit Britain and urge Mr Hammond to show ambition in next week ' S budget .
a Grand EU Tour WITHOUT THE MAP Britain have trigger Article @card@ to depart the European Union - without a real clue about how it ' s go to go about it . Ireland be horribly expose to the fallout but Taoiseach Enda Kenny ' S strategy be still non-existent . Enda , above , be expect shortly to outline a list of priority . but we know what those priority be : we do n't want a hard border with the North and we want some form of free movement of good , service and people between the Republic and Britain . what we do n't really know be the strategy Enda will employ to good achieve these Brexit priority . in recent month , he have travel all over Europe , visit Germany , Poland , Malta several time , Spain , Brussels , also multiple time , and Britain . at no point have he outline what this i dti expensive and timeconsuming tour have achieve . Enda claim it be all about gain support for Ireland ' S position . how can he be lobby other member state to back an Irish strategy which simply do not exist ? Ireland have only two option : Brexit be about @card@ member state versus the UK , Ireland be part of the 27-member bloc and it must either join it by impose the tough , harsh Brexit on the UK to ensure no one ever leave again , or it lobby on behalf of British interest in order to secure a special case for Ireland . the Taoiseach have use Brexit to bolster his effort to hold on to office . it ' s time he make it clear what the Irish strategy be , rather than outline a wishlist with no explanation on how to achieve it .
peer visit for probe on Brexit Members of the House of Lords will visit Scotland next week to look at how Brexit could hit the devolve nation . the chamber ' S EU Committee will meet politician and academic to discuss how the UK Government should represent Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland in talk . chairman of the group Lord Boswell say they would be investigate which of the power come back from Brussels should be devolve . he add : ` ` we want to get to the bottom of the effect of Brexit on the devolution and how different view can all be fairly represent . ' ' the Scottish and Welsh Governments have both argue for stay inside the EU single market - something firmly rule out by Theresa May . the Prime Minister will hold Brexit talk with colleague from devolve government in Cardiff next week .
I wish Parly would grow up and stop the hysteria I Know we have only just dismantle the Christmas tree and tangle the fairy light into an inextricable knot for another year , but I ' ve already decide what I ' m put in my next letter to Santa Claus . you might think of it as a New Year ' S resolution , I see it more as an impossible dream but , this year , I ' d like to see a tiny bit less excitability in Scottish politics . I think it would be lovely if we could all just calm down a wee bit . we might even try to develop an attention span , keep our eye open and remember what happen yesterday , the day before or even ten minute ago . as an example let ' s take last week ' s stramash-ette over the First Minister and her comment on a second independence referendum . Great be the excitement when Ms Sturgeon go on the wireless and announce that she be ` ` willing to put aside my preferred option of independence in the EU to see if we can explore a consensus and compromise option . ' ' incredible ! unbelievable ! Nicola Sturgeon be publicly back-pedal on her scary threat of Scottish independence . she be actually say that she might not hold another referendum if the UK can avoid a hard Brexit for Scotland . so thrill be this admission that Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson be require to go on UK wide news broadcast to comment on these development . and , as you might imagine , Ruth do not hold back . this be the live proof , she say , that SNP attempt to use the Brexit lash-up to build support for independence have fail dismally . the First Minister be blow hot and cold on a new referendum because she know it could not be win . Ooooh uncertainty . Ooooh damaging . also other stuff . naturally this all go down very well with colleague in England and , indeed with colleague in Scotland . there ' S just one teeny tiny problem . the First Minister have not change her position even in the slight . on the day of the Brexit vote Nicola Sturgeon announce her plan for another referendum on independence but she stress that it be less important than sort out an EU deal for Scotland . she say it again at the SNP conference in October . she have say it constantly , almost every day , in the past six month . she say it over and over when she present her list of demand for a separate Scottish EU deal just before the Christmas recess . indeed , she repeat it during last week ' s radio interview when she say : ` ` we ' ve put forward how we think this can be do - of keep Scotland in the single market while continue to protect free trade across the rest of the UK - and say very clearly , of course , that would require additional power for the Scottish Parliament . ' ' she add : ` ` I ' m never go to stop argue for independence . I think Scotland will become independent and I think that ' s the direction of travel but we ' re talk at the moment in the context of the Brexit vote . we ' re talk here in the particular context and timescale of Brexit . ' ' only yesterday the First Minister say it again in another interview on the Andrew Marr Show . Ms Sturgeon insist she be not ` ` bluff ' ' on the promise of a second independence referendum if Scotland be ` ` drive off a hard Brexit cliff ' ' . now , if I have reliable power of prediction , I ' d be spend my day fill out betting slip in my local bookie and cash in on the National Lottery instead of sit with bleed finger hunch over a hot word processor . but I be willing to bet that yesterday ' S interview will prove just as controversial as last week ' S interview and Ruth Davidson will be just as outrage by those comment rut as she be by the last one . there will be more weep and wail and gnash of tooth , more talk of U-turn and damaging uncertainty ... blah , blah , blah . in fact , all that have happen be that Nicola Sturgeon have continue to say what she have be say for six month - if anybody have be listen . listen to what she say : if Westminster help Scotland to get a deal with Europe , a soft Brexit which would let us keep our trade link with the EU open , then there will be no new Indy vote . but that ' S not go to happen . half a year after the Brexit vote Nicola Sturgeon be still the only politician in Britain who have come up with even a shadow of an outline of a sketch of what to do , but Theresa May be not go to allow it . there be no way the Prime Minister be go to give Holyrood another huge basket of power - the power Ms Sturgeon say would be e need to make a separate EU deal for Scotland work . control over immigration ? control over employment law ? the First Minister might as well demand control over unicorn farm . it ai n't happen . of course , Nicola Sturgeon know that . nobody get everything they want from any negotiation but a little bit of compromise would be nice . it would be nice if Theresa May do what she say she be go to do and hold off from press the button on Brexit until there be an agreed UK position . an agree position . not an impose position . so we ' re back at square one , exactly the same place we be back in June when the First Minister say an independence referendum must be in place to give the Scottish people a choice . if that parachute be not there it ' s an admission that Westminster can decide whatever it like for Scotland , the good Brexit deal or the bad Brexit deal , and the two third of Scot who vote to remain will just have to suck that ' s what Ruth Davidson want for us . in her view - and it ' S a respectable view - there be nothing that Westminster could ever do that ' S bad than independence . at least Nicola Sturgeon think we should have a choice . ' Nicola Sturgeon be still the only politician in Britain who have come up with a plan ' First Minister have n't change her position
NATS : ..Oh yes there be the Nat be to demand Holyrood be give the legal right to stop Scotland leave the EU . Brexit Minister Mike Russell say the government will decide within day whether to send our top prosecutor to help fight Theresa May ' s appeal at the UK Supreme Court . the MSP also claim Westminster must accept the role of devolve parliament before the PM start the process of cut tie with Brussels . he insist : ` ` we have to consider the benefit of have the Scottish Government represent . ' ' Mr Russell say it ` ` have never be more clear ' ' that Holyrood must give permission for change in its power and responsibility - and this could be an issue for the court . he say : ` ` there should be a role for all the parliament - they ca n't be shove to one side . ` ` Theresa May ' s determination to plough on with a plan she do n't have be very foolish . ` ` we must be involve in anything that alter the competency of Holyrood . Theresa May ca n't ignore that . ' ' he go on : ` ` the people of Scotland would draw their own conclusion from a situation where there be a contempt for our legislative process and view . ' ' we tell last week how High Court judge in London order Mrs May to get permission from Westminster before she can formally trigger Brexit . the SNP threaten to send Lord Advocate James Wolffe QC and lawyer to fight her appeal at the Supreme Court . meanwhile , ex-Scots Secretary Lord Forsyth of Plean , below , insist the House of Lords will not try to stall Brexit . he say : ` ` for an unelected peer to try to overturn the outcome of the referendum be just foolish . ` ` the Lords have a long standing commitment that we do not oppose matter in the manifesto . ` ` the question be just whether we push the starter button , whether we say ' we want a divorce ' . ` ` the Commons would look ridiculous if it prevent the government take the first step towards leave and the Lords understand its constitutional position . ' '
role model Many voter do n't take kindly to celebrity foist their political view on the public . sermon about independence from expat Scot star can fare even bad . Ewan McGregor have live in Los Angeles for much of the past decade . he be n't eligible to vote in @card@ , and wo n't be if there ' s an indyref2 . unless he move back here , of course . but the actor be quiz on Brexit and indy by the BBC ' S Andrew Marr yesterday and you ca n't fault him for his frank response , which perfectly sum up the feeling of a huge number of Scot . in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit bombshell , poll show a huge surge towards independence , with even harden no backer from @card@ switching to Yes . McGregor be one of these people . opinion have now settle back to an anti-indy majority , high than polling day two year ago . but the Union be far from safe . many Scot have be leave uncertain , even afraid , and - as McGregor put it - totally confuse . we do n't yet have a clue what Brexit will mean for our fortune within the United Kingdom . we ' ve hear little more than empty rhetoric come out of Downing Street . No10 ' S priority appear to be curb immigration rather than stay in the single market - all while try to paint the SNP as the rabid nationalist of the piece . meanwhile , as each day pass , the SNP government be edge Scotland closer to a second indy vote , despite have no clear economic plan to avoid us be saddle with a £15billion annual spending shortfall . Brexit have leave us up to our eyeball in muddle . while we do n't want to start a trend of look to celebs for political guidance , McGregor do seem to be on the ball - especially for a guy who live @card@ mile away . maybe we should make the Star Wars actor a one-man focus group . when he ' S make up his mind , at least we ' ll know we ' re get somewhere . as Princess Leia might say : ` ` help us , Obi Wan Kenobi . you ' re our only hope . ' '
£ in ROBOFLOP ; ' Panicking ' computer spark @card@ % dive in @card@ min a flash crash trigger by a ` ` panick ' ' computer wipe six per cent off the pound ' s value in two minute yesterday . the fall be blame on an automated trading system tell to scan the news for negative Brexit story and sell sterling if it find any . when a report emerge of French president Francois Hollande call for ` ` tough Brexit ' ' talk , the computer overreact , make other sell too . analyst say the sudden drop could also have be down to a ` ` fat finger ' ' trade , where a trader accidentally press the wrong button . the pound plunge from $ @card@ to as low as $ @card@ before rebound to $ @card@ . last night it be also worth @card@ euros . the Bank of England be probe the fall , which happen as market open in Asia . the drop be the big since the June @card@ Brexit vote when sterling drop ten per cent against the dollar . expert Connor Campbell say : ` ` if the pound be a prizefighter , the referee would have already ring the bell , the currency bloody and bruise beyond belief . ' ' another say : ` ` Sterling be drink ... go completely mad ' ' and need to ' sleep it off ' . ' ' such drop be relatively common and in most case the system correct quickly . Kathleen Brooks , of City Index , say : ` ` apparently it be a rogue algorithm that pick up Mr Hollande say the European Union will get hard on Brexit . ` ` these day some algos trade on the back of news site , and what be trend on social medium . ` ` once the pound start move low , then more technical algos could have follow suit . ' ' Chancellor Philip Hammond urge calm .
a Kick in the GIBLETS ; Turkey price rise shopper be be stuff by soar turkey price just in time for Christmas , a report reveal yesterday . EU wholesale bill for the traditional meat have rise from £1.71 per kilo a year ago to £1.82 now . expert blame the increase on an outbreak of avian flu that see million of bird in Asia and Eastern Europe cull during the summer . Brexit uncertainty have also lead to a shortage of turkey plucker . trade mag the Grocer say : ` ` British turkey might have escape bird flu but Brexit mean shopper will pay more . ` ` last year , price war keep cost for consumer down turkey could be significantly more expensive this year . ' ' the British Poultry Council ' Shraddha Kaul say : ` ` inflation have hit in the wake of Brexit , devalue the pound and cause issue secure overseas labour for seasonal pluck and production . ' ' but Paul Kelly , of the British Turkey Federation , svvy shopper be buy full bird ' S . crown . cost and wastage in a crown mean its price be now similar to a full bird ' S .
regret ? he ' S Had A FEW. . ; BOOZY Juncker BLASTS BREXIT SAYS UK Will Be ' SORRY'FOR QUITTING ... Then UNVEILS NEW Power GRABS ! arrogant Euro chief Jean-Claude Juncker yesterday declare Britain will regret Brexit - then unveil his nightmarish vision of a Brussels-controlled EU super-state . the Commission President , dog by persistent rumour over his booze , admit member state would feel the consequence of the UK leave the European Union . but the bureaucrat signal it be nothing compare with the pain come Britain ' S way , say : ` ` you will regret it as well soon , if I might say . ' ' Cognac-loving Mr Juncker then leave MEPs open mouth as he spell out plan for an unprecedented power grab to ` ` unite ' ' Europe . he signal Brussels should seize great control over corporation tax and VAT , create a European FBI and an EU army by @card@ . Mr Juncker add that he want more member state to adopt the Euro , and the passportfree Schengen zone to be expand to include Romania and Bulgaria . he speak of his desire for the EU to expand beyond @card@ country post-Brexit by welcome in western Balkan state such as Serbia . make his state of the Union address in Strasbourg , he say : ` ` Europe be not make to stand still . it must never do . ' ' the bureaucrat detailed plan for a summit on March @card@ @card@ in Romania - the day after Brexit - to confirm plan to ` ` move on ' ' and map out the future of the bloc . Name-checking France ' S Jacques Delors - the godfather of the European project - he add : ` ` Jacques Delors teach me that Europe only move forward when it be bold . ` ` now be the time to build a more united , strong and more democratic Europe for @card@ . ' ' the speech delighted Europhiles but Dutch PM Mark Rutte joke he always think people want vision should go to the optometrist . Brexiteers say the ` ` Juncker Blueprint ' ' be proof that all the warning make by the Vote leave campaign for last year ' S EU Referendum be true . former Cabinet minister Iain Duncan Smith tell the Sun : ` ` this tell you why the vote last year make sense . ` ` Jean-Claude Juncker ' s bar room utterance have give the game away . it ' s the future of the EU - the march of the super-state . Juncker ' S plan be a step-by-step move towards a European superstate . ' ' Nigel Farage add : ` ` all I can say be , ' thank God we ' re leaving ! ' ` ` it ' S truly the most worrying speech I ' ve hear in all my year . ` ` more Europe in every single direction , and all of it to be do without the consent of the people . ' ' Tory MEP Syed Kamall say : ` ` Anyone that hear this speech now know what direction he be sail in - towards a United States of Europe . ' ' Austrian MEP Harald Vilimsky actually storm out of the Parliament building . he say : ` ` the European Union be not Europe and Europe be not the European Union . ` ` the European Union be nothing more than an association . ` ` what Mr Juncker want de facto be to force the European union into a single state - and we know the Euro be not a success story . ' ' the speech come with negotiation between Britain and the EU over the Brexit divorce and future trade deal in deadlock . Mr Juncker steer clear of the talk , but pointedly reveal the EU be make a trade deal with Australia and New Zealand - two country keen for a relationship with Brexit Britain - a priority . meanwhile , Chancellor Philip Hammond warn Brussels a ' no deal ' on Brexit would damage their financial capital and push up fix rate borrowing cost for homeowner across the continent . he urge sceptical UK business leader to side with the government and make the case for an outcome that protect job on both side of the Channel . he say : ` ` this have to be a team effort . ' ' Hartley-Brewer
jobless RATE Falls To @card@ % ; Economy ON THE UP ; 60k more in work by year end unemployment will fall below six per cent by the end of the year and the economy will continue to grow , say a new report . Ibec , the group that represent Irish business , also say the country be ` ` weather ' ' the Brexit storm rage in the UK . in its late quarterly economic outlook , publish yesterday , the employer ' group be predict the creation of almost @card@ job throughout the country this year . the group add that employment growth be on pace to exceed three per cent for the first time since @card@ . Ibec be predict economic growth of @card@ per cent this year , and @card@ per cent in @card@ . Ibec ' S Gerard Brady say : ` ` the Irish economy be now in a strong position with forecast show the pace of employment growth will run above three per cent this year for the first time since @card@ . ` ` all indicator suggest that the labour market be tighten rapidly and weather any Brexit uncertainty well . ' ' the continued growth in Ireland be likely to be drive by a strong domestic economy . but the group be warn that the UK leave the EU still pose significant risk to exporter , hit regional economy and job hardest . Brady add : ` ` no matter what the outcome , Brexit will hurt both our indigenous exporter and rural region disproportionately . ` ` Budget @card@ must include measure to protect these vulnerable sector . ' ' accord to the late report , an estimated @card@ worker in sector such as agri-food and beverage , tourism and transport be expose to economic shock as a result of Brexit . the county with the high exposure to Ibec expert ... a hard Brexit be Cavan , Monaghan , Kerry and Longford with over one in five worker in those area employ in exposed sector . the low exposed area include Cork and Galway city along with the four Dublin local authority and their surround county . despite the risk , Brady find positive in Ireland ' S position and call on the government to act in the upcoming budget . he say : ` ` Budget @card@ must ensure decisive policy action to improve competitiveness and adopt measure to prepare our indigenous enterprise base . ` ` we should also be make sure a clear pipeline of infrastructure project be ready to support regional competitiveness . Dublin will also need adequate support infrastructure ... to take full advantage of any investment opportunity arise from Brexit . ' '
Remainiac lead us into a disaster watch out , Theresa ! while you be enjoy a dangerously long holiday in the Swiss Alps , treacherous Philip Hammond be lead your Cabinet by the nose into a Brexit trap . the Remainiac Chancellor ' s beguil call for a three-year glide path out of the European Union be in fact a devious plot to keep us in , for ever . he would hand EU leader the power to hobble negotiation , block trade deal and punish Britain for dare to leave in the first place . dismiss any idea of a friendly divorce . this be a fight for the EU ' s very survival . Brussels can not afford to give a centimetre , let alone an inch . any gain for Britain be a loss for the creak EU . indeed , Europe ' S declare aim be to make Britain WORSE off . the nightmare of an ex-member state flourish outside its border be intolerable . other will want what we ' re have . so be the loss of our £12bn a year membership fee , cripple EU finance . if they ca n't stop us from leave , Brussels will use any ` ` transition ' ' to damage Britain ' S economy , steal our financial market and divert a post-Brexit flood of foreign investment away from our shore . cheerleader for Europe , head by the BBC , be dismay by the huge vote of confidence in the UK from global titan like Google , Amazon and Apple ... ` ` despite Brexit ' ' , as they weasily insist . they have be throw off balance by a boom in export and the failure of every single Project fear prediction to come true . the London-based £12bn Diageo drink giant put its money where its mouth be last week , predict Britain will thrive ` ` with or without a deal ' ' with Brussels . respected ex-Bank of England governor Mervyn King say we will look back at growth figure in year to come and be unable to spot where Brexit take place . yet all these upbeat prospect be at risk thanks to the highhanded meddling of Philip Hammond and the prophet of doom . never-end talk would wash up against the @card@ general election - if the embattled government can survive that long . blame for all routine economic turbulence will be lay on Brexit . then there be the American election . Donald Trump ' s big offer of a trade deal could be wipe out by a new President , put us at the ` ` back of the queue ' ' again . far from us leap free , Hammond ' S plot would see Britain bog down in a bureaucratic quagmire , half-in , half-out . we would still have to pay billion into EU coffer , accept mass immigration and remain under the control of ECJ judge . we could even forfeit the crucial right to set our own competitive tax rate . you only need to observe the response from whooping Remainers to see the trap . Ex-Blair aide Jonathan Powell , a lead Remainer , give the game away . ` ` the debate be move towards stay in the single market , at least for a transitional period - and maybe that period will become indefinite , ' ' he gloat . the only beneficiary from this chaos would be Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn , salivate at the prospect of lead Britain ' s first Marxist regime . the Chancellor claim the Cabinet back his plan to kick Brexit into the long grass . this be rubbish . Brexit chief David Davis , Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and trade supremo Liam Fox be furious . Bo-Jo ' s ex-economic guru Gerard Lyons warn an openended transition will turn into stalemate . ` ` let ' s not forget the ' Norway option ' be temporary and that be decade ago , ' ' he say yesterday . Remainers do n't care about evidence that Britain , one of the world ' s large economy , will thrive outside EU shackle . they ignore plea from German car manufacturer , lead by BMW , builder of Britain ' S electric Mini , for Brussels to stop punish Britain . they believe the EU Grand Project be an unequivocally ` ` good thing ' ' . more than 17m people disagree last year in the big vote on any issue in the history of this country . their wish can not be overturn by a maverick Chancellor on a freelance sabotage mission while the Prime Minister ' S back be turn . we would still have to pay billion to EU Britain will thrive outside EU shackle
how dare Juncker blame a racist murder on Brexit BREXIT shame be the last refuge of the resentful Remainers . they lose the referendum . their dark warning about economic collapse prove to be unfounded . World War Three do not start . there be every indication that our country will have a happy , prosperous future outside the crumble EU . so all they have leave be Brexit shame . all the little European loser have leave be smear those of us who vote to leave as stupid , racist , gullible bigot . Brexit shame run from Brussels to the BBC . as it become clear that there will be no second referendum , it become more shrill , hysterical and vicious . Jean-Claude Juncker , inset , President of the European Commission , claim 17million naive British moron vote to leave because we swallow ` ` @card@ year of lie ' ' . Unforgivably , Juncker even blame the horrible murder of Arkadiusz Jozwik in Harlow on the British vote to leave . ` ` Europe can never accept Polish worker be harass , beat up or even murder in the street of Essex , ' ' say Juncker , to rapturous applause in the chamber . how dare this boozesoaked bureaucrat imply that those of us who vote for our independence from his corrupt , jobdestroying EU be somehow less appall by the murder of an innocent man ? you would never guess that there be a long list of EU national who have commit horrible crime in this country . Pole Damien Pankiewicz be sentence to @card@ year for beat then drag a stranger into the road in front of an oncoming double decker bus . Lithuanian Victor Akulic , who be jail for life for a violent rape . Romanian Ciprian Stanescu be jail for eight year after rape a woman who have be strand at London ' S Victoria Station . but most EU immigrant have not break the law - just as the majority of them have not suffer racist attack . yet you would never know it from a Brexit-shaming celebration on BBC Radio @card@ about the impact of Brexit on Poles live in the UK , where the Guardian hack present take great delight in find graffito urge , ` ` Vote out EU - get the c**** out . ' ' it ' S not pleasant . but it be hardly Nazi Germany . it be not even Merkel ' s Germany , where neo-Nazi yob last week fight run battle with drunken migrant youth in Bautzen , between Dresden and the Polish border . defy doom-mongers Migrant centre be not be burn in the UK . they be torch in France and Germany . vote to leave the European union do not change the nature of the British people . we be a proud , confident , independent nation . give the chance to take back control of our border , to restore our national sovereignty , to create our own destiny , we be always go to grab it with both hand . but leave the EU be not hate anyone . it be about love our country - and want it back . that do not make us , Britain , a nation of stupid , racist bigot . I be proud that more than 17million of my countryman defy all the doom-mongers and vote to leave the EU . the Brexit shamers should look in the mirror and reflect on the poisonous contempt they feel for the will of all those British people . because that be exactly why they lose . a chorus of voice on the Left assure us that there be no prospect of the European Union ever start its own army . ` ` a fantasy ! ' ' chortle Nick Clegg . now come news of the EU form a ` ` joint military force ' ' to stand up to the Russians . Vladimir Putin must be quak in his boot . with laughter . peach , the UK ' s most destructive dog , be send a clear message to her owner : ` ` never ever even think about leave me home alone ! ' '
may : the Future ' S Bright Theresa May have promise Britain will come out of Brexit with a ` ` good , bright future ' ' . and the Home Secretary , battle alongside Andrea Leadsom to be prime minister , say : ` ` Politics could do with some bloody difficult woman . ' ' despite campaign to remain in the EU , Mrs May , leave , now confirm she be ` ` very clear that Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . she say : ` ` if I be prime minister , we will come out of the European union and part of that will be control of free movement . ` ` but alongside that , it ' S important to show how we can come through what will be , I think , some difficult time with a good , bright future . ' ' she have ask the party to drop the term ` ` Brexiteers and Remainers ' ' , be all leaver now ' ' . Mrs May add : ` ` we have a job to do in make the good deal we can in come out of the EU and I be very clear that I will deliver Brexit . ' ' she say a female leader will bring ` ` honesty ' ' and ` ` delivery ' ' but insist that she be not the new Margaret Thatcher , whom she describe as ` ` absolutely unique ' ' .
EUR All DOOMED ; IMF blast for ' scaremongering ' claim over Brexit THE International Monetary Fund last night warn that a Brexit could trigger ` ` severe ' ' global economic damage . it say there be a ` ` real possibility ' ' the UK could leave the EU after the June @card@ referendum . furious member of the Out campaign accuse the IMF of scaremongering . they highlight that just two year ago the IMF be force to apologise for underestimate the UK recovery . Ex-Tory Chancellor Lord Lamont say : ` ` they be wrong then and they be wrong now . ' ' Ukip leader Nigel Farage add : ` ` the IMF ' s be hijack by the architect of fail EU project . ' ' IMF chief economist Maurice Obstfeld say an Out vote could unleash a period of huge uncertainty as trade deal be rip up . he say fear of a Brexit be one reason why forecast for UK growth this year be be cut from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent . yesterday ' S downgrade mirror a similar one issue by the government ' s fiscal watchdog the Office for Budget Responsibility . Chancellor George Osborne leap on the IMF ' S warning and say it prove Britain must stay in the EU . IMF chief Christine Lagarde , a close pal of Mr Osborne , be expect to repeat the concern in Washington DC tomorrow . the row come as the IMF issue a bleak warning over the health of the global economy , say it be close to stall . it admit that in @card@ the UK be still likely grow much faster than other EU nation .
Dodds be the REAL DEALER who should be do the Brexit negotiation ? the DUP ' S Nigel Dodds . that ' s the answer , at least , from the man who negotiate the government ' S confidence and supply deal with them , new Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson . in a speech to the Hampstead & Kilburn Conservatives , Williamson jokingly say the DUP ' s Westminster leader , above , should be make Brexit Secretary , as he really know how to negotiate . Williamson recall how after the election , he tell Theresa May he need three thing from her - the good adviser she have on the constitution , her good adviser on Northern Ireland and a flight to Belfast so he could talk with the DUP . but perhaps the line that raise most eyebrow be when Williamson , who have be promote that morning , tell the room the Tories ` ` can not and must not tolerate selfpromotion ' ' . in a normal political week , the story would be that the Cabinet have discuss its preparation for a ` ` no deal ' ' Brexit . I be tell the meeting be ` ` much more constructive ' ' than most Cabinet conversation on the issue . however , the fact the meeting over-ran mean the most contentious part of the discussion - how much be really be spend on ` ` no deal ' ' planning - be conveniently cut short .
the Sun SAYS one direction Theresa May set out Britain ' s Brexit plan in her Lancaster House speech in January . it be clear , comprehensive and convincing . despite the Remainers ' attempt to portray everything about Brexit as chaotic , the government have stick to the plan ever since and it have form the basis of our negotiation with Brussels . and you can be pretty sure that , come our departure from the EU in @card@ , it will form the basis of any agreement . today ' s position paper on custom after Brexit provide some detail to flesh out that plan . even this be really just confirmation of what we already know - that there should be a limited transition period while new arrangement be set up . it ' S not that difficult . and it ' S as much in Brussels ' interest as it be our own - which be why an agreement be far more likely than not . there be a lot of hot air around the mechanic of Brexit . ignore it all .
chancellor BREX-WRECKER of THE ; May and Tories turn on gloomy Hammond Theresa May slap down Philip Hammond yesterday as senior Tory accuse the Chancellor of ` ` talk down Britain ' ' . the PM ' S spokesman say the government be not seek an ` ` off-theshelf ' ' transition deal with the EU in contrast to Mr Hammond ' S report claim to business chief . he also say it would be ` ` wrong ' ' to suggest free movement will continue when we leave the EU in March @card@ , just day after the Chancellor anger Brexit -backers when he say ` ` literally nobody ' ' want an immediate fall in migration after we quit . the spokesman say the PM have make it clear the UK would not be ` ` stick in some kind of political purgatory ' ' during transition . top Tories have already blast Mr Hammond after he tell French newspaper Le Monde that Britain ' S economy would be ` ` recognisably European ' ' after Brexit . he have also say little in the UK ' s relationship with the EU be likely to change until transition end in @card@ . one senior conservative tell the Sun : ` ` it have to stop . ` ` Philip Hammond be talk down Britain . we need to compete and he should put a sock in it . ' ' the leave Means leave group brand Mr Hammond traitorous and urge Mrs May to ` ` sack the saboteur ' ' . former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith say Cabinet feuding threaten the chance of a strong Brexit deal . he say : ` ` it ' s time for them all to zip it and put their petty personal ambition on one side in the good interest of our country . ' ' Labour face fresh Brexit chaos when Jeremy Corbyn ' s closet ally , Shadow Foreign Secretary Emily Thornberry , become the late frontbencher to claim the party be ` ` take nothing off the table ' ' . it contradict her boss who say the UK must quit the single market and custom union when we leave .
Nicola : EU-TURN ON BREXIT More LIKELY ; UK ' may revoke ' Article @card@ Nicola Sturgeon have claim it ' S now more likely the UK could axe Brexit . the First Minister suggest that the chance of PM Theresa May withdraw her Article @card@ letter to Brustalks sels have become less ` ` hypothetical ' ' than it be before . the barb follow SNP Brexit Minister Mike Russell ' s claim to be ` ` less than @card@ per cent ' ' convince Britain will quit the EU after the Tories ' General Election humble in June . Ms Sturgeon tweet : ` ` be the legal question of whether or not Article @card@ could be revoke become more pertinent ? still hypothetical - but perhaps less so ? ' ' in another swipe she say : ` ` UK Gov still as if it can decide term of Brexit unilaterally . a more realistic approach urgently need . ' ' it come after Boris Johnson spark a storm by say the EU could ` ` go whistle ' ' if they make ` ` extortionate ' ' demand over Britain ' s divorce bill . Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn blast the Foreign Secretary ' S comment , add : ` ` what kind of response do he expect to get ? ' '
never MIND THE POLLOCKS ; UK QUITS fish union ; Brits ' Irish trawler ban be blast Britain ' S move to stop our trawler from fishing near its shore have be slam by Marine Minister Michael Creed . our near neighbour have announce it be leave the London Fisheries Convention , sign in @card@ . the agreement allow vessel from Ireland , France , Belgium , Germany and the Netherlands to catch fish within six and @card@ nautical mile of the UK coastline . in return , British fisherman can do likewise around the signed-up country ' shore . but now they have announce they be leave the agreement , which be sign before Ireland and the UK join the EU . it ' s see as a signal that Britain will strive for a hard Brexit deal on the future of the EU Common Fisheries Policy , which allow all member state access to @card@ nautical mile off each shore and set catch quota . Minister Creed say : ` ` Today ' s announcement by the UK government be unwelcome and unhelpful . ` ` it be a part of Brexit and will be consider by the EU @card@ member state when the negotiation commence . ` ` the announcement will have no immediate effect as the withdrawal process from the Convention will take two year and will form part of the Brexit negotiation . ` ` these access right be incorporate into the EU Common Fisheries Policy when we join the EU . Brexit pose very serious challenge to the seafood sector . ' ' Fianna Fail also hit at out at the move . fishery Spokesman Pat ' The Cope ' Gallagher say : ` ` the Irish government must insist the issue be discuss as part of the overall trade negotiation . ' ' he add : ` ` Minister Creed must ensure Irish fisherman do not lose out . ' ' @ IrishSunOnline
Varadkar : real fear for Brexit border TAOISEACH Leo Varadkar have say it will be practically and legally ` ` extremely difficult ' ' to find way to maintain an open border with the North after Brexit . he tell a conference at Dublin Castle yesterday : ` ` from my meeting in Brussels , there be a real understanding of the issue that be unique to Ireland , a sympathy for us and a lot of goodwill . ` ` but turn those into practical solution that will be write in law be go to be extremely difficult . the Irish issue , include avoid an economic border , will not be easy to solve . ' ' he add : ` ` we will make a strong case at EU level that Ireland will require support that recognise Brexit as a serious disturbance to our economy , once we have a good understanding of what that disturbance be go to be . ' '
EU ' S a rotten egg ... we be crack on Vicar ' S daughter Theresa May use her Easter message yesterday to urge both side of the Brexit row to bury the hatchet and let our ` ` shared value bring us together ' ' . ` ` after a period of intense debate , there be a sense that people be come together and unite behind the opportunity that lie ahead , ' ' say the PM . she might be disappoint . if the poll be anything to go by , Mrs May be in tune with voter . support for Brexit have grow , from @card@ per cent last June to @card@ per cent today . Remainers who blame racism for the Out vote might also be please by a steep fall in immigration as the voter ' top priority , replace by concern about free trade . ` ` the British public be slowly become more comfortable with the idea of Brexit , ' ' say pollster Orb International . but as we will discover at a Sun and TalkRadio debate on Wednesday evening , the battle line between the two side be as deep and bitter as ever . Brexiteers will never find a good word to say about undemocratic and unaccountable Brussel . and Remainers who see Brexit voter as ignorant racist believe all the good economic news since the June @card@ referendum will be blow away once we wave goodbye to Mother Europe . yet disillusionment with Brussels be not just a British disease . the presidential election campaign now under way in France suggest feeling be as raw across the Channel as in Britain . the French be keenly aware of the price they be pay today in job and prosperity for the remorseless drive towards ever-closer political and economic union . job miracle along with the Dane and the Irish , they remember how EU chief arrogantly refuse to take No for an answer in referendum after referendum . so whoever win on Sunday , the real loser will be Brussels , as million vote for candidate hostile to the European Union . the worry for EU leader be that 450million citizen encourage by Britain ' s post-Brexit boom may be think : ` ` we want what they be have . ' ' far from the economic meltdown predict by Project Fear , Britain have be do rather well . our ` ` job miracle ' ' roll on and friendly nation be queue to sign trade deal . for the first time in decade , the UK trade gap be close and our growth be the good in the West . small business , the backbone of the economy , be booming . respect former Bank of England Governor Mervyn King predict we will look back in @card@ year and be unable to spot the impact of Brexit . meanwhile , the EU be fight for its life . leader attend its 100th birthday party last month be shock when Pope Francis warn their day may be number . ` ` when a body lose its sense of direction and be no longer able to look ahead , it risk die , ' ' say the Pontiff . the rot be already cause havoc in bankrupt Greece and Cyprus . Spain and Portugal be struggle . yet the Remainers who want us back in the EU at any cost be totally silent about its great failure - the single currency , mass immigration and a debt crisis which threaten to beggar the EU . understandably perhaps , sulky Remainers be silent over Britain ' s rebound economy . but their refusal to acknowledge the catastrophe inflict on poor European state by their we-know-best master in Brussels be baffle . have your say nearly one in ten European be out of work - Double the UK rate . tragically , a quarter of under-25s be jobless in France and almost twice as many in Greece . do you ever hear Tony Blair , Ken Clarke , Michael Heseltine or Peter Mandelson talk about that ? no , because they think it ' s a price worth pay . this leave plenty for the rest of us to talk about . if you ' d like to have your say , there be still seat available for Wednesday evening ' s debate feature TalkRadio ' S Julia Hartley-Brewer , Tory MP Anna Soubry and Dominic Raab , comedian and broadcaster Matt Forde and yours truly . this be where to look : http : // bit.ly/2ogpBWe .
Brexiting hit food & drink biz for ( Euro ) 570m BREXIT cost the Irish food and drink export industry more than ( Euro ) 570million last year , a new report have reveal . Bord Bia yesterday announce the value of Irish agri-food and drink export rocket to more than ( Euro ) 11billion for the first time ever in @card@ . despite the bumper year for the Irish food and drink export industry , trade with the UK fall by eight per cent after Britain vote to leave the EU . speak about the impact of Brexit , Food and Agriculture Minister Michael Creed warn the uncertainty surround the result will pose significant challenge to Ireland in the near future . he say : ` ` the UK will continue to be a critically important market for Irish agri-food product . the trigger of Article @card@ and the continued uncertainty around Brexit will present significant challenge for the sector . ` ` however , the @card@ export figure illustrate clearly the importance of collaborative action by Government , its agency and the industry , and the potential for pro-active effort on international market to mitigate the risk associate with these challenge . ' ' Bord Bia Chairman Michael Carey say : ` ` despite difficult trading condition , it be encourage to see this industry continue to grow business and extend its global footprint to more than @card@ market around the world . ' '
EU : @card@ MONTHS To Seal BREXIT Deal ; ' keep calm ' taunt THE EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator try to heap pressure on Theresa May yesterday by insist she have @card@ month to do a deal . Michel Barnier tease Britain with our World War Two motto by say : ` ` we be ready . keep calm and negotiate . ' ' see it as provocation , senior demand . . Barnier Tories round on the French ex-foreign minister , accuse him of grandstand . Mr Barnier insist the whole Brexit package must be wrap up by October @card@ to allow six month for parliament to rubber-stamp it . under EU rule , Article @card@ exit talk already have a twoyear deadline . give his first press conference in Brussels , Mr Barnier say : ` ` Time will be short . it be clear the period of actual negotiation will be short than two year . ' ' he say there would be no ` ` cherry picking ' ' of the EU ' S four freedom - movement , good , service and capital . and he say Britain ' s exit deal must be bad than the current set up . he say : ` ` third country can never have the same right and benefit . ' ' Commons Treasury Committee boss Andrew Tyrie dub it as ` ` calculate to raise the political temperature when he should be lower it ' ' . Mr Tyrie add : ` ` he should have the economic well-being of Europe and its citizen as his overriding objective , not grandstand to Brussels . ' ' Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson insist the timetable Mrs May lay out be ` ` absolutely adequate ' ' . even a one line new law to authorise Brexit will be leap on by MP who will add ` ` complication ' ' , government lawyer James Eadie QC tell the Supreme Court yesterday . he say give MP the right to sign off exit talk would create chaos . minister want to overturn the High Court ' s decision that Parliament must authorise the article @card@ negotiation .
FF Chief HITS Out AT ' SHAMBOLIC ' BREXIT Micheal Martin have launch a furious attack on the ` ` shambolic ' ' British Brexit leader . the Fianna Fail leader say he want Ireland to become less dependent on the UK for trade . he say there be also a need for immediate support for those hit hardest by the dramatic fall in the value of sterling , namely Irish exporter and those living in border community , while the EU have to ` ` allow and to support direct aid ' ' to help the Irish economy weather the impact of the UK exit . deliver his party ' s annual commemorative address at the burial site of Irish republican Wolfe Tone , Mr Martin be wither in his assessment of the UK government ' s handling of the Brexit situation . in the speech at Bodenstown , Co Kildare , he say : ` ` none of the people who argue for Brexit prepared plan for actually achieve the result - other than the arrogant belief that the world , include Europe , would rush to trade with Britain . ' ' Cork South-Central TD Mr Martin add : ` ` if Ireland be to prosper and deliver a decent standard of live for all of its people it must be open to the world , it must trade . ` ` in these circumstance where a major market have decide to leave the security of the European Union and be face long-term currency volatility we have to respond . ` ` it would be naive and foolish of us to think that we will be able to simply just carry on . ' '
BREXIT EXIT To ; Nic take hol at last after rollercoaster year Nicola Sturgeon be finally jet off on holiday after delay her summer jaunt amid the Brexit chaos . the First Minister and hubby Peter Murrell will head to Portugal . she be expect to fly out midweek to a resort in the Algarve where Nat chief exec Mr Murrell ' S parent have a pad . insider say she ' s clear her diary for seven day but will not be tune out from event at home . a source reveal : ` ` the First Minister be a workaholic and will be keep a close eye on what ' s happen here . ' ' Ms Sturgeon be due to go away after the EU referendum follow month of campaigning - first for May ' s Holyrood election , then for June ' s Europe vote . but the fallout from the shock Brexit result spark a constitutional crisis . it leave the First Minister threaten a second indy vote and fly to Brussel for talk with European leader . yesterday a Scottish government spokeswoman say : ` ` the First Minister be go to Portugal for a few day from the middle of next week . the Deputy First Minister be in Scotland and will deputise while she be away . ' ' when Ms Sturgeon and Mr Murrell , both left , fly to the same resort this time last year , it be her first break for two year follow the @card@ independence referendum , her selection as First Minister and the @card@ General Election .
it ' S Boris Day ; @card@ MP BACKING HIM for PM BoJo storm ahead in race for leadership Boris Day of Joy Boris Johnson surge ahead in the race for No10 yesterday as senior Tory rush to back him - and at least @card@ MP be expect to follow their lead . Environment Secretary Liz Truss and Culture Secretary John Whittingdale pledge support for the Brexit mastermind . Justice Minister Dominic Raab and Farming Minister George Eustice also throw their weight behind the ex-Mayor of London . and it emerge that Sir Lynton Crosby - the strategy guru behind the Tories ' @card@ General Election victory - be work on Boris ' S campaign . it mean that @card@ hour before nomination for the Tory leadership be due to close , Boris be in pole position to succeed David Cameron in September . he still face fierce competition from Home Secretary Theresa May and Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb - who yesterday become the first to officially confirm that he be run . but Boris ' S team be confident it will have the support of more than @card@ Commons colleague . one senior MP say : ` ` it can only be Boris now - it ' s his contest to lose . ' ' the Boris bounce come during another dramatic day in both Westminster and Brussels as the political fallout from Britain ' s Brexit vote gather pace . David Cameron tell EU leader that Britain vote out because he lose the argument on immigration . Business Secretary Sajid Javid reveal Australia and South Korea both want new trade deal with post-Brexit Britain . Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon ' s campaign to stay in the EU suffer a major setback as European Council president Donald Tusk reject her call for talk . Ukip ' S Nigel Farage tell the European Parliament that the EU be ` ` in denial ' ' over Brexit . Jeremy Corbyn lose a vote of no confidence among Labour MP by @card@ to @card@ over his lacklustre Remain campaign - but insist he will not be resign . Pro-EU protester gather in Trafalgar Square then march on Parliament shout : ` ` F*** you , Boris ' ' Mr Crabb will outline his vision for the future of the Tory Party at a press conference in Westminster today , alongside his run mate Mr Javid . former Defence Secretary Liam Fox be also set to stand . source say Education Secretary Nicky Morgan and Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt be still make up their mind . employment minister Priti Patel , one of the Tory star of the Brexit campaign , be also think of throw her hat into the ring . friend be say to be encourage her to enter the race . full BREXIT Coverage : page @card@ , @card@ , @card@ , @card@ , @card@ & @card@
damage LIMITATION BREXERCISE ; NATS in ' Cliff Edge ' Warning Nic demand Euro trade deal Tells May to protect economy Nicola Sturgeon have call on Theresa May to negotiate a Brexit deal that ` ` limit the damage as much as possible ' ' . the First Minister say the PM must agree a transition period that keep us in the single market and custom union . and the Nat leader warn that ` ` warm word ' ' be not enough when people ' S job could be hit by the outcome of EU talk . Ms Sturgeon say she remain ` ` firmly opposed ' ' to Britain leave the EU and describe Brexit as ` ` a monumental act of social , economic and diplomatic harm ' ' . but she add : ` ` if Brexit be to happen , then it must happen in a way that limit the damage as much as possible ' ' . she go on : ` ` the Prime Minister need to come away from the EU summit with a clear agreement to move into trade talk and a clear statement that transition will mean remain in the single market and the custom union - nothing less . ` ` Warm word and cryptic soundbites will not suffice when company be begin to make real decision that will impact on people ' S job . ` ` and that transition must not be simply a two year postponement of fall over a Brexit cliff edge . it be an opportunity to recognise a good way forward . ' ' write in the Guardian newspaper , the First Minister also call on the EU and UK Government to confirm citizen ' right even if the next ten day of talk fail to make significant progress . and she say Holyrood will publish update analysis in the new year set out the impact of not be in the single market . she add : ` ` the single market protect worker and environmental right ; allow us to work , study , and live in other country ; bring investment ; and solve the challenge on Ireland . it be without a doubt still the good way forward . ` ` Scotland do not vote to leave the EU . the decision be one that many in Scotland have not reconcile ourselves to , and can not . it ' s time to banish the language that characterise the EU as our enemy , and instead approach the next phase of talk in a spirit of cooperation . ' ' European Council president Donald Tusk have give Mrs May until tomorrow to come forward with an improve Brexit offer . an EU spokesman say : ` ` Minimising disruption and provide certainty for people be key principle . ' ' scottish-
Anti-Brexit fact be there for all to ; AFTER WE Reveal EU Guest Bias ... SO now we know . the BBC hate Brexit so much it have four time more pro-EU guest on its flagship politics show than those who vote leave . unsurprisingly , this important piece of research - publish yesterday in the Sun - trigger a hissy fit by our publicly fund national broadcaster . one newspaper reporter who ask its press office for a statement be even threaten with ` ` Twitter bomb ' ' - a form of online attack - if she dare to quote the Sun ' S statistic . its aggression suggest it have something to hide . yet the fact be there for all to see , and they only confirm what most fair-minded people have long suspect - the BBC be run by a pro-EU metropolitan elite which be out of tune with the majority who , let ' s not forget , vote for Brexit . free drink let ' s look at the evidence . I recently ask the Corporation for a list of every guest it invite to the prom this summer . the answer be very revealing . boss spend £19,020 entertaining dozen of luvvies and politician . and guess what ? the vast majority of those treat to free drink and a night at the Royal Albert Hall - courtesy of TV licence payer - be vocal defender of the EU and prominent critic of Brexit . they include Bank of England Governor Mark Carney , London Mayor Sadiq Khan , David Attenborough , Judi Dench , Tory politician Lord Patten , Financial Times editor Lionel Barber , Guardian editor Katharine Viner and ex-Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg . Theresa May , Chancellor Philip Hammond and Labour ' S Jeremy Corbyn - who all back Remain - also accept a free ticket and be host on separate night in a private box by £450,000-a-year BBC director-general Lord Hall . by contrast , I count just two prominent pro-Brexiteers among the invitees , one of whom be Transport Secretary Chris Grayling . the BBC may argue it do not deliberately exclude Brexiteers from the guest list , but that be beside the point . here be the proof that its executive routinely rub shoulder in private with those who share their view . they just ca n't help it . another example relate to Nigel Farage . last month he make a formal complaint to the BBC after it broadcast a story link him to the violent death of a Polish man shortly after the Brexit vote . the corporation air the very serious charge - make by a member of the public with the apparent encouragement of a BBC journalist - that Farage have ` ` blood on his hand ' ' for the fatal attack on Arkadiusz Jozwik because of his role in the EU referendum campaign . a court case a few week ago prove this be nonsense . Farage then reveal this allegation have cause him and his family ` ` more misery than any other in my @card@ year in politics ' ' , with people regularly abuse him in the street . yet despite the BBC ' S highly questionable coverage , it have refuse to publicly apologise . it can not bear to admit it be wrong - or to say sorry to a man whose view it despise . compare its treatment of Farage with its adulation of Nick Clegg . he have be give free rein this week to plug his new book , unsubtly title how to stop Brexit , on BBC TV and radio . Clegg ' s pro-EU view help cost him his Sheffield seat at the last election after the city vote for Brexit in the referendum . but in the cosy bubble inhabit by the BBC , such consideration be apparently irrelevant . this delusional politician have be welcome with open arm to use the BBC ' S platform to spout his anti-democratic ideology . it be as though the 17.4million vote cast in favour of leave the EU do not count . in July , a cross-party group of @card@ MP write to the BBC complain it be heavily ` ` in favour of those who wish to water down or even reverse the referendum decision ' ' . their letter follow research painstakingly compile over month by the pressure group News-Watch , which claim that Radio @card@ ' s coverage of Brexit be bias , with listener two-and-a-half time more likely to hear a pro-EU speaker than an anti-EU one . but BBC head of news James Harding reject their call for new anti-bias guideline to be draw up . he tell them the BBC ' S job be not to be ` ` push or pull by one political interest or another ' ' . and , laughably , he say it be ` ` impartial ' ' on the EU . regular payment yet amazingly , its pro-EU tentacle have even get a grip on a programme like Countryfile on BBC1 . earlier this year an edition of the agriculture show interview strawberry farmer Anthony Snell , who say that his business would fail ` ` catastrophically ' ' without migrant worker . many viewer be outrage at this one-sided , pro-EU view , but the BBC see nothing wrong with it . but then again , should we be surprise ? a few year ago I discover that the BBC receive regular payment from the EU via a littleknown scheme call the EU Framework Programme for Research and Development . between @card@ and @card@ it accept £2.7million . the most recent grant , during the last financial year , be for £1.35million . this money be not use for editorial purpose , but you have to ask why the BBC , which receive a guarantee £3.5billion a year from the public , be tap the EU for yet more cash . you also have to wonder - how impartial and objective can the BBC be when it come to the EU , give it be on its payroll ?
' BREXIT HATING ' BEEB be BIASED ; MP ' Fury ; @card@ time pro-EU guest the BBC have four time more pro-Europe guest than Brexit fan on its top political show , a Sun probe reveal . BBC1 ' S Andrew Marr have have @card@ Remainers since last year ' S referendum , compare with just @card@ Leavers . and its Sunday Politics show have @card@ pro-EU campaigner but only @card@ Brexiteers . the bias have get bad since @card@ cross-party politician write to complain to BBC Director-General Tony Hall in March . now senior MP be call for action by watchdog Ofcom . Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg call the figure proof of ` ` deep-seated bias ' ' . he say : ` ` fortunately the public prefer the view of the Sun to the BBC . Long may that remain true . ' ' before the March complaint , @card@ per cent of Marr ' S guest be leave supporter , and @card@ pro-EU . the figure have now become @card@ per cent and @card@ . Tory MP David Davies say : ` ` the BBC be punt out Brussels-supporting propaganda . ' ' Ofcom say : ` ` all UK broadcaster must abide by our strict rule require impartiality . ' '
give veteran a good deal in @card@ Earby Town Council grant all our local World War Two veteran the freedom of the town in recognition of their service to the country . gesture like this make these war hero feel a big part of our community . it should happen all over the nation . we be let down all our veteran - unlike the French , who give their war hero the high military honour . we must do the same before it be too late . James Spence Earby , Lancs THANK you , Jane Moore , for your work in aid of our hero . last week ' s column about our treatment of veteran be hardhitting and tell it like it be . we be afraid of the political correctness in our public action instead of take a leaf out of the US ' S book . Leslie Palmer Staines , Surrey it be not only veteran from the first Gulf War who have be physically and mentally injure by their experience . I serve during that war but also in the Falkland in @card@ . I have PTSD but be lucky as so many of my brother in arm commit suicide due to the fighting they undertake or the thing they witness . I could n't agree more that the government need to do more for veteran . terry BEDDOES Skelmersdale , West Lancs SQUADDIES have always need counsel , not just in the last @card@ year . I be in northern Ireland @card@ year ago and lose mate and be shoot at . we just have to get on with it . I be so glad it ' s not like that now . Julie Root Ipswich I WAS please to read reader Craig Wells ' comment about pupil respect . as an ex-teacher , I recall many parent complain about my dealings with pupil who need a good attitude . my effort be doubly thwart . name and ADDRESS SUPPLIED Pole Arek Jozwik ' S death be the tragic result of a boozefuelled late-night argument yet people who ought to know well shamelessly capitalise on it , call it a Brexit crime . Remainers and EU bureaucrat use the same underhand tactic as George Osborne with his absurd project fear . to use the death of a man for some kind of political gain be disgusting . but let ' s not forget we ' re talk about desperate Remainers traumatise that voter have the nerve to vote for Brexit . carol Davies Stannington , Northumberland Boris Johnson ' S Brexit manifesto be the perfect reply to Jean-Claude Juncker ' s ` ` vision ' ' of a United States of Europe . Juncker expose the real nature of the EU and why we be right to leave it . for more than a year , the anti-Brexit brigade have try to thwart our exit . at last , we now have a positive vision of what Brexit can be . the British people do not vote for a ` ` soft ' ' Brexit or for huge payment to the EU to continue . as Boris say , let them ` ` go whistle ' ' for it . Boris for PM ! Philip Roberts Tanyfron , Wrexham what an idiotic idea - that hospital should provide spa-like facility , facial and Zumba class while ill patient fret over get life-saving medication or even a basic bed . the NHS be almost on its knee yet Public Health England boss Duncan Selbie come up with a crackpot idea like that . Steve Smith Seaton Delaval , Northumberland the reason there be so many overweight child at school these day be because they do n't walk or cycle to and from school . Ian Daffern Blackburn it be a disgrace that a couple on the Isle of Wight have be vilify for take their kid out of school because of their worry about its promotion of gender exploration . child as young as six do not know their own body or mind . the government need to look at what be cause people to think they be in the wrong body . john Murphy Coventry TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply MY public sector salary have be freeze for eight year . I can be instruct to work any @card@ shift pattern . the private sector be on fix hour and day . R Hayes if parent be charge £1 a minute for late pick-up at school , the same must apply to let them out on time . I ' ve see mum have to wait outside with young kid in tow . Richard Parris , Devon THERE be no reason why foreign aid ca n't be use to help the victim of Hurricane Irma . our politician be spineless . anon email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
border FARCE ; BREXIT TALKS FALLOUT business fear aftermath brit ' do n't see ' local issue Britain ' S top Brexit negotiator have repeat PM Theresa May ' s warning of security issue if talk do n't go their way . she say the UK could withdraw international co-operaton on terrorism and border issue . and yesterday , Brexit Minister David Davis say : ` ` this be not a threat ... it be a statement of the fact that this will be harmful for both of us ... if we do n't get a deal . ' ' he make his comment as he launch the great repeal bill in the British parliament set out how British law will change . he also tell BBC Radio @card@ : the UK want ` ` to deal with the Northern Ireland border situation early as well ' ' . that would be good news for local in the town of Bridgend , who do n't usually pay too much attention to the coming and going in Westminster . the town on the Inishowen peninsula straddle Derry and Donegal and people here cross the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic daily . mother take their child to and from school , employee travel to work , friend meet for lunch , couple do their weekly shopping and patient attend medical appointment . the only indication that you ' ve cross the border be the change of the roadside speed sign from mile to kilometre . Charles Murray , a Remain voter , say : ` ` I live just a few mile away in Derry and cross the border here for my shopping in Buncrana as it be cheap . ` ` this be a fluid border and I be very concern about the damage Brexit will do to this area . ' ' Toni Forrester , chief executive of Letterkenny Chamber of Commerce in Co Donegal , live in Derry and travel across the border to work every day . she say : ` ` it be a very busy crossing . you have people bring kid to school , shopping , worker go both way . there be a lot of thing we do as a matter of course on the border . ` ` there ' s no northern Irish government at the moment , no voice for the North West . ` ` the British government be focus on mainland Britain . I do n't think they be see the issue here . ' ' Sinead McLaughlin , chief executive of Londonderry Chamber of Commerce , warn that any disruption to cross border trade will have a significant impact on the region . she say : ` ` we have get a really integrated cross border market , particularly in agri food and manufacture . ` ` it ' S difficult to see how any type of border would help support business on both side . ` ` I think there be go to be a number of stumble block and Ireland be a particularly difficult one . ' '
expert : UK be in Danger of Split A Top ` ` Brexpert ' ' have tell how quit the EU will heap pressure on the Good Friday Agreement - but he be also sure the Brexit will never happen . Dr Jo Murkens say the referendum be effectively ` ` a draw ' ' , with two UK nation vote Remain and two for leave . Dr Murkens , a UK constitution expert at the London School of Economics , say : ` ` Brexit campaigner want the country back , but there would be no country leave if we leave the EU . I see no way in which the UK can leave the EU and survive . ` ` I can see no Prime Minister who would want to preside over the break-up of the UK . ' ' Ahead of last week ' S referendum , some expert point out that victory for leave campaigner would not necessarily lead to a Brexit . PM David Cameron have since concede defeat and tell how he will resign - but he have decline to trigger Article @card@ . and it be that move , the formal beginning of a two-year withdrawal process , which Dr Murkens reckon be a huge responsibility for any PM . he say that constitutionally , the UK be not a ` ` centralise ' ' state and , while Westminster be sovereign , it could not hope to unilaterally pull Scotland and Northern Ireland out of the EU without consequence . he add that for Northern Ireland , Brexit would mean ` ` unpick ' ' the good Friday Agreement - which be the source of Stormont ' S power .
Davis be set for an EXIT ; BREXIT Exclusive Minister David Davis plan to quit in @card@ month ' time and leave Boris Johnson the tricky task of make any deal he negotiate work . despite Theresa May ' S plan for a twoyear transition after March @card@ , Mr Davis have signal he have no wish to see the next phase through , say : ` ` someone else can do that , Boris can do that . ' ' his threat to throw in the towel will add further fuel to bitter Tory Brexit row and infuriate anti-BoJo leadership rival . hint at his EU opposite number Michel Barnier ' s future career ambition he say : ` ` I ' m retire after this , he ' S not . ' ' it be widely think that if Mr Barnier hammer out a successful divorce he will attempt to succeed Jean-Claude Juncker as President of the European Commission . the Sun understand Mr Davis believe his entire Department for Exiting the EU would become defunct as soon as he have negotiate a settlement with Brussels . last night a source close to Mr Davis say he see this as his legacy and his ` ` last big job in politics ' ' , but suggest he be be ` ` tongue in cheek ' ' about Boris . the annual Tory gathering in Manchester have be dominate by Brexit war after Mr Johnson demand that any transition phase last ` ` not a second more ' ' than two year after exit day in @card@ . meanwhile ex-Deputy Brexit Minister David Jones say if Mr Barnier refuse to talk trade it should be make ` ` absolutely clear we will terminate negotiation ' ' .
Bojo ' S get the Brexit Mojo Boris Johnson be to the Tories what Jeremy Corbyn be to Labour . what a good interview on the four red line for Brexit . Theresa May should stand behind her Foreign Secretary and echo those sentiment . it would send out the emphatic message to the EU that we will not succumb to their bully and blackmail and would also regain the initiative from Corbyn . ray Walter St Leonard on Sea , E Sussex Brutus Johnson be treachery in motion . his opinion should be air at Cabinet level . he have no stature , nor competence as we see again by his embarrassing gaffe in Myanmar , where he recite the colonial poem Mandalay . all one hear from Johnson be his undermine of Mrs May and the Brexit negotiator - easy to do when one have no responsibility to deliver . Mrs May , please sack him immediately . Klaus Wagner Holywood , Co Down Theresa May be let Brussels bureaucrat walk all over her so no wonder Boris Johnson have break rank to hold her foot to the fire . a big problem for her be Ukip . they have finally find a credible leader and with Brexit in disarray they could easily win back the million of vote they lose at the last election . this would see the PM join the grow list of Tory leader destroy by the spectre of Europe . Neil Smith Bristol THE PM have promise to defend mainland Europe against aggressor even after Brexit . she also promise to share British spy ' expertise to tackle cyber attack against our European neighbour and offer @card@ EU citizen the right to remain in the UK permanently . and what do Brussel offer us in return ? nothing . thank God for Boris Johnson who seem to be the only Tory prepare to make a stand . he ' s rise from the ash to once again be a serious player in the battle to be Tory leader . Brian Alden Bristol Well do Boris Johnson for urge Theresa May to raise the wage of five million public sector staff . Boris be very popular , even with his gaffe . perhaps he think the Prime Minister need a nudge and what ' s wrong with that ? time be run out with Brexit , Corbyn and Co be threaten this country with their power-grabbing idea , and Jean-Claude Juncker and Michel Barnier be snigger in the wing . if the job be too big , give it to someone else to do . Jackie Lewis Pattingham , Staffs Boris be right . the minimum wage should be raise quicker . if it be increase to £8 now , the government would save money in benefit payout and rake in tax . trouble be , it ' S not the Tory way . Chris TORODE Catterick , N Yorks I BELIEVE the ` ` Hang the Tories ' ' banner on the bridge in Salford display exactly what have become of the Labour Party I use to vote for . it be now run by fascist . I be not vote for that . holocaust denial , brick throw through the office window of leadership challenger , the threaten of BBC reporter ... perhaps these be example of what Jeremy Corbyn call ` ` a gentle , kind politics ' ' . I do hope his adviser do n't tell him to ` ` get nasty ' ' . Phil North Brigg , N Lincs the traveller who have set up camp outside a crematorium at Howe Bridge , Gtr Manchester , should be ashamed of their comment to bereave family . why do it take so much paperwork to move on these traveller ? mike HOTTER West Hallam , Derby Major bank and building society be withdraw cheap mortgage deal and in some case increase mortgage rate , all because Bank of England governor Mark Carney hint rate could rise as early as next month . will they also raise interest rate straight away for saver ? I doubt it . talk about have your cake and eat it . tom MCCUDDEN Barnsley , S York email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
outrage at ' racist ' slur over border a Jeremy Corbyn ally spark fury by claim those want curb on EU migration be drive by racism . Ex-Shadow Defence Minister Clive Lewis deepen Labour ' s civil war over Brexit with a defence of Brussels ' free movement rule . he then aim a slur at left-winger oppose to open border . Mr Lewis say : ` ` I believe in freedom of movement . you talk about manage migration . it always come back to something the left have difficulty with , which be that it be ultimately about racism . ' ' his comment infuriate Labour MP who back Brexit . veteran Frank Field say : ` ` I want to be judge on issue , not name-calling . ' ' around @card@ per cent of Labour voter back Brexit .
pm plea to speed up talk on Brexit Theresa May yesterday call on the EU to agree to non-stop talk to end the Brexit stalemate . the PM want face-toface Brussels negotiation to move from one week a month to roll weekly session until the deadlock be break . it also emerge last night that the next round of talk , set to start on September @card@ , could be delay a week so Mrs May can lobby key EU leader on the margin of a UN summit in New York that week . talk to quit the EU have stall over EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier ' s refusal to open trade deal until Brexit Secretary David Davis agree to a divorce bill of up to £80billion . meanwhile , a research note from economist Morgan Stanley yesterday predict Cabinet Brexit split will force a General Election next year .
BREXING Bad ; Europe SHOWDOWN : day @card@ ; lPeer-bid Tory drop clanger ; lHe want Nic in EU split talk peer-A Tory embroil in a peerage storm blunder yesterday by back the SNP to get a seat at the Brexit talk . failed MP candidate Ian Duncan blatantly buck government policy on the day he be due to be make a Lord and parachute in as a Scotland Office Minister . but his controversial new job - say to be a ` ` do deal ' ' before he put his foot in it - have still not be confirm last night after his comment stun senior Tory . ask in a radio interview if First Minister Nicola Sturgeon or her Brexit Secretary Mike Russell should have a seat in Brussels talk , he reply : ` ` Yep , I have no problem with that . ` ` I think that should be a common approach to all the home nation so they can see exactly what ' s go on . ` ` more importantly , they need to have a seat at the discussion point in London when these position be be hammer out . that ' S where the detail will be determine , not actually inside the room . ' ' Mr Duncan , above , make the remark despite the UK Government repeatedly rule out the idea of Holyrood representative join Westminster Brexit Minister David Davis ' team in the EU exit negotiation . last night , a senior Tory source confirm that position have not change , add : ` ` Nicola Sturgeon have a vested interest in talk fail . ` ` she want a referendum to choose between independence and the UK at the end of Brexit talk . ` ` as we see last month when she disclose detail of a private chat with Kezia Dugdale , she also can not be trust not to breach confidence for political gain . ' ' Tories , include Scottish leader Ruth Davidson , right - who recommend Mr Duncan as Scotland land Secretary David Mundell ' s No2 - have repeatedly rule out Ms Sturgeon ' s call for a role in the talk . during General Election campaign , Ms Davidson say : ` ` which side of the table do she want to be sit on ? ' ' Mr Duncan , elect as an MEP @card@ , lose out to the SNP ' S Pete Wishart by @card@ vote in the knife-edge battle become Perth and North Perthshire MP . Tory chief ' plan to get him in government as an unelected peer infuriate Ms Sturgeon , below . she say : ` ` Rejected by the voter but install government anyway , via the unelected House of Lords . ' ' ` ` Scottish Labour boss Dugdale add : ` ` Handing a peerage to Ian Duncan would be an affront democracy . ' ' ` ` last night , the Scotland Office wouldcomment on his planned appointment . chris.musson @ the-sun.co.The Sun say - Page
REMAINERS in Divide & Rule ; @card@ new BREXIT Battles ; lRevolt on final say lCourt threat back Theresa May face a double assault to force her to give Parliament a full veto on the outcome of her Brexit talk . twenty rebel Tory have threaten to join Labour to say MP and Lords must have the final say on the shape of our EU withdrawal . and financier Gina Miller say yesterday she be ready to go back to court to make the PM agree to the same demand if their challenge fail . a cross-party alliance of peer last night table a new amendment to the Article @card@ bill . as well as enshrine Mrs May ' s verbal promise of a vote , it would halt her from a ` ` hard Brexit ' ' walk away from Brussels without a deal if negotiation fail . Labour and Lib Dem lord be ` ` very confident ' ' of pass it during a vote on Tuesday . it will then go back to the commons the follow week . but a lead Tory rebel MP say : ` ` the government split us in the first vote . they wo n't do that again . ' ' No10 source admit they be very worry by the vote . millionaire hedge fund manager Ms Miller , @card@ , say she be ready to fund another legal challenge . she win a Supreme Court fight in January to force the PM to seek Parliament ' s approval to trigger Brexit . three top QCs warn yesterday the government will be in breach of the Supreme Court ruling unless it pass Mrs May ' s deal as a new act of parliament .
firm NAME US No1 BREXIT Pick ; Minister REVEALS TALKS Ireland be the top choice for firm consider relocate due to Brexit . Minister of State Eoghan Murphy have have ` ` countless meeting ' ' with company from the UK and further afield who see Ireland as an ideal ` ` gateway ' ' to the rest of Europe . he be in Asia this week to meet with more business consider set up base here due to the uncertainty cause by Britain ' s decision to leave the EU . the Fine Gael TD have brief the Cabinet on the ` ` financial service action plan ' ' to lure foreign company to Ireland . he be pitch particularly for firm to move their fintech operation - the computer programme use to support financial service - here . and Murphy believe we be perfectly place to reap the reward in term of job . the Financial Services Minister tell the Irish Sun on Sunday : ` ` what we be try to do in our five-year strategy be position ourselves as the global location of choice when it come to specialisation and innovation in financial service . ` ` so when I be in Asia - I be in Hong Kong tomorrow and then on to Beijing - we be say to company : ' if you want a gateway into the European single market , and you can no longer use the UK because of uncertainty , Ireland be the natural location choice to come to . ' ` ` I have be do that since the Brexit referendum , go to different jurisdiction to talk about the opportunity here if you be interested in financial service . ' ' he add : ` ` I will be do that in Asia and with the European financial forum come up in Dublin Castle . we will have about @card@ delegate from all over the world come to talk about the future of financial service in Europe . ` ` and the reason they be come to talk about it in Dublin be because we see ourselves as the gateway . ` ` we have have a lot of interest and I have have countless number of meeting with company in the UK but also New York , Tokyo , Shanghai and here in Dublin when they come over . ' ' Ireland can exploit its tie to the EU and London post-Brexit , he believe . the minister say : ` ` London will always be a global financial hub and that be important to us . we complement London in many way - and compete in many way too . ` ` when we talk to company we be there or thereabouts in term of what they might do . ` ` now it depend on what happen with Brexit . if they keep the passporting right into the Single market we be n't go to see the kind of massive relocation that be be speculate about . ` ` but if they do n't have passporting right then there be go to be firm and bank , fund and everything else , who want and need to have access to the Single Market . ` ` we will be here to provide that . they will need to make a decision to go somewhere . ` ` so we have make a decision to take an approach that recognise the importance of London to the European continent , whether the UK be in or outside the EU , as a financial service hub . ' ' Mr Murphy last week unveil his plan to tackle the rip-off price of motor insurance . back our give us a Brake campaign , he insist Ireland will no longer be an ` ` outlier ' ' for high compensation payout for injury such as whiplash . he say : ` ` where premium increase by @card@ or @card@ per cent or more - and where driver behaviour have n't change and there be no new penalty point - be outrageous . ` ` as these measure work through the system we be not go to see that volatility again . ' ' @ IRISHSUNONLINE
' let it go ' blast at moaner Trade Secretary Liam Fox have tell gloom and doom merchant they be dream if they think they can halt Brexit . he say that record employment and foreign investment have prove those predict catastrophe after the vote to leave be wrong . speak in the US , Mr Fox say : ` ` where be this dreadful economic Armageddon ? ` ` Those intent on try to thwart the process , hope something will magically appear , they be dream . ' ' his comment come despite the International Monetary Fund cut UK growth forecast for @card@ from two per cent to @card@ per cent . it predict Brexit would be a ` ` mild negative ' ' for the economy . the assessment be a far cry from ex-IMF chief Christine Lagarde ' s warning before the vote that Brexit would trigger a devastating recession . but Lib Dem leader Sir Vince Cable warn : ` ` the IMF have downgrade its growth forecast for Britain more than for any advanced economy . ' '
Brexit talk be in a sorry state ; Scottish Sun the page where you tell Scotland what you think letter Chancellor Philip Hammond and his Remoaners should shut up now about transition . when we vote in June @card@ to leave the EU by March @card@ , they would have have nearly three year to sort it out . if he really want a riot in the country let him go against the will of the people . the good thing be for Mrs May to sack him and put a Leaver in charge of the economy to remind her of her pledge that ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' . Ricky HARY by Email Chief EU negotiator , Michel Barnier , picture , have be accuse by a German MEP , Hans-Olaf Henkel , of want a punishment Brexit to discourage other EU member from leave . if this be find to be true Barnier must be replace immediately . someone with that mindset can not be rely upon to deliver a mutually beneficial outcome . Barry Flavell by email it be really disappointing that while we vote to leave the EU there be no real progress and a lack of leadership show that no one seem to be able to put forward any solution to maintain our right or get a decent outcome . will this PM actually get on with the job or step aside and let someone else at least try please ? Hugh Campbell Coatbridge THE SNP ' s official response to your report that Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn will spend a week campaigning in Scotland this summer be predictably crude , sour and sarcastic . also predictable will be Jezza ' S response - none . some politician never learn but the Tories - especially BoJo with his eccentric ` ` mugwump ' ' jibe during the election - have eventually realise that personal attack on a man of Jezza ' s quality be just water off a duck ' S back . the man be uniquely decent , honest , sincere and true to his principle - as more than one Labour leader have find . as a trade unionist for more than @card@ year , I hope to hear more of Corbyn ' s vision of hope for the future . if voter do n't take the opportunity to elect him Prime Minister , we ' ll regret it for a generation . john Cunningham Dunfermline why should n't Vince Cable change his view ? the fact of Brexit be different to what be portray at the referendum . Vince have sensibly adapt to this reality . chico KHAN-GANDAPUR by email
WAR EXPERT ' S BREXIT Battle ; it ' S THE BREXTERMINATOR ; Negotiator hire to get Britain out of EU an expert in hostile negotiation have be bring in to advise British civil servant on how to handle the Brexit talk . William Ury be ask to help after play a crucial role in end the 52-year war in Colombia , South America . the American specialise in work with hostile and emotional conflict and advise on turn the other side ' s anger against them . a source tell the Scottish Sun on Sunday last night : ` ` it ' S astonishing give the negotiation have n't even start yet . ` ` already the government seem to have press the nuclear button by bring in a war negotiator . ' ' it come in the week the row over Brexit explode between Theresa May and her EU counterpart . the Department for Exiting the European Union last night confirm its official have hold a meeting with Mr Ury . however , it decline to say if he be pay . a spokeswoman say : ` ` he be not employ by the government . ' ' Mr Ury , @card@ , work in the former Soviet Union , the Balkans and the Middle East before mediate in Colombia last year . he say the key to negotiation be ` ` not to react impulsively because , as the old saying go , ' when angry you will make the good speech you will ever regret ' ' ' .
MP in Final BREXIT Veto ; Climbdown plan minister be plan to give Parliament a veto on the PM ' S final Brexit deal - in a climbdown aim to fend off a fresh court fight . secret talk be under way to allow MP and peer a vote on the shape of EU exit - even if it be a negotiation walk-out without any agreement . the move be spark by warning from senior legal figure that Theresa May ' S 137-word Article @card@ Bill be not enough to satisfy a Supreme Court ruling . last month it say that only Parliament can sign the final term . one Cabinet minister tell the Sun : ` ` at the end of the day , Parliament be sovereign . we have to take MP with us on Brexit . ` ` if we do n't , either they will force us or the court will . that be now become clear . ' ' Ex-Supreme Court deputy president Lord Hope reinforce the legal warning when the Lords begin debate the bill on Monday after it be overwhelmingly back by MP . he say : ` ` only Parliament have the constitutional authority to authorise , by legislation , the conclude of an agreement with the EU or the act of withdrawal . ` ` no @card@ be also desperate to avoid a defeat in the Lords over a Labour-backed amendment .
quit EU ' To THE Letter ' for the first time since Theresa May ' s Tory conference speech on Brexit , Tory Eurosceptics be make a concerted push to toughen her negotiate position . I understand that in the come day , a letter will be publish emphasise that Brexit mean leave both the EU single market and the custom union . the letter , which be be organise by Tory MP Steve Baker ( who be key to get far more Tory MP than expect to back leave ahead of the referendum ) will be sign by score of backbencher . I understand that the four most prominent Tory Brexiteers not in the government - Michael Gove , Theresa Villiers , John Whittingdale and Dominic Raab - have all lend their name to it . one of those who have sign emphasise that the letter be not mean as a hostile act : ` ` we ' re not push at a closed door , but try to reinforce the direction of travel . ' ' they point out leave the single market be ` ` the logic of what she say on free movement and ECJ jurisdiction ' ' at conference . while the Department for International Trade that she have set up will be redundant if Britain remain inside the custom union , as we wo n't be able to do our own free trade deal . the hope be that the letter will offset some of the pressure come from Remainers . but it be also a reminder to May that there be lot of Tory determine to see that Brexit really mean Brexit .
why it ' s brilliant in Brexit Britain ; MEP ON How Project Fear ' S Lies WERE EXPOSED Guess which of the world ' s major economy will grow fast this year . Japan ? America ? Nope . despite everything we ' ve be hear on TV , it will be Britain , nudge in front of Germany and well ahead of France and Italy . how can that be ? be n't we tell that vote to leave the EU would crash the economy ? do n't George Osborne assure us that house price would tumble by @card@ per cent ? do n't Mark Carney , the Governor of the Bank of England , warn about ` ` a technical recession ' ' this year ? they ' re not alone in have get it wrong . the fact that Britain will outgrow the other big economy come from an economic think-tank , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation & Development ( OECD ) , a partly EU-funded international body . before the referendum , the OECD try to claim that a leave vote would cause ` ` global turmoil ' ' . now , like so many Europhile institution , it be eat its word . indeed , word be be gobble and guzzle everywhere . Merrill Lynch , Barclays , Morgan Stanley , Citigroup , JP Morgan - all have uprated their growth forecast since the referendum . today , exactly three month on from the vote , it be clear that Remain ' s Project fear merchant be talk hogwash . so , more seriously , be the Treasury , the Bank of England and many Europhile financial institution . ` ` ah , but we have n't actually leave yet , ' ' say Remainers . sorry , guy , but that be n't what you say at the time . during the campaign , you tell us that the possibility of Brexit be cause a downturn . now Brexit be certain , but the only downturn we see be in part of the eurozone . just after the vote , the Office for National Statistics be forecast that unemployment would rise by @card@ in July . instead it fall by @card@ . the only people who will lose their job from Brexit be Eurocrats like me . though , give their record , one or two analyst should be sack , too . a poll of City economist in July find @card@ per cent predict a recession this year . now , almost no one expect that to happen . have Remainers own up to their mistake ? have they say , ` ` OK , we get this wrong ' ' ? no . the same people who in June be say ` ` Brexit have trash our economy ' ' be now , without a blush , say : ` ` Brexit have n't happen yet . ' ' when it do happen , they ' ll say : ` ` just wait for the effect to sink in . ' ' and , if they wait long enough , they ' ll eventually get the recession they want , because economy naturally rise and fall . and then they ' ll say : ` ` you see ? we tell you so ! ' ' sorry , guy , but it wo n't wash . the only thing you get right be that the pound would fall - and , frankly , not before time , since the euro crisis be give us too high an exchange rate . every other prediction you make be bunkum . you tell us there would be emergency tax rise . now the talk be of tax cut . you say France would expel our immigration officer from Calais . now France say they can stay . Germany ' s finance minister warn us that ` ` out mean out ' ' and that we ' d be treat like a non-European country . now he say George Osborne ask him to use those word and speak warmly of a special relationship with Britain . you bring Barack Obama over to tell us we ' d be at the back of the queue for a trade deal . now it ' s clear that a UK-US deal will happen long before an EU-US one , and @card@ country from Australia to Uruguay be line up to sign agreement with us . you tell us Brexit would cost each of us £4,300 a year - a figure no one any longer defend . you tell us our Stock Exchange would collapse . British stock be the bestperforming in Europe . you tell us no one would invest here . since the vote , we have see massive investment by , among other , the pharma giant AstraZeneca and GSK , both of whom have warn against Brexit . the American megabank Wells Fargo have just spend £300million on its new European HQ - in London . Tata Steel , which have announce that it be pull out of South Wales , be now reconsider . more start-up have be launch since the vote than before it , retail sale be rise and manufacture output be up . yet Remoaners cling to their grievance . on Wednesday night , the economics editor of the Financial Times , which have be especially mopey since the vote , say that good news ` ` be , paradoxically , bad news ' ' because it will make us more arrogant , less prepared to think we depend on Europe , blah blah . for heaven ' S sake , you gloomsters , pull yourselves together . it ' s fair enough that you get it wrong - we all get thing wrong . it ' s fair enough that you try to justify yourselves for a while - we all sometimes do that , too . but actively hope for Britain to fail so that you can say ` ` I tell you so ' ' ? that must feel pretty miserable inside . it certainly look miserable from the outside . l Daniel Hannan be MEP for South East www.England.UK stock buoyant huge corporate investment retail sale rise prediction be bunkum
block on LOW-SKILLED Britain will block lowskilled EU worker from come here by @card@ after a Brexit , Tories Boris Johnson , Michael Gove and Priti Patel pledge today . blast their own government ' s ` ` corrosive ' ' failing on immigration , the trio promise voting out will lead to the introduction of an Aussie-style point system at border . they pledge to rip up EU free movement rule and slash immigration , by only allow people into the UK ` ` on the basis of their skill ' ' and ability to speak English . the Aussie award point base on age , skill and qualification . the Brexit -backing Tory say that by take back control from Brussels , minister will also be able to deport criminal and ` ` terrorist sympathiser ' ' . the astonishing move mark the second concrete Brexit proposal that run directly against current government policy - follow the call to scrap VAT on energy bill . here , Employment Minister Priti Patel explain the move .
MULTI Euro BIZ DEALS Risk if BRITS QUIT EU Irish business be worry about Britain leave the EU . the United Kingdom be hold a referendum on the issue on June @card@ . and even though prime minister David Cameron will be appeal for people to vote ' Yes ' and stay in the Union , there be a groundswell of opinion that they should leave . London mayor Boris Johnson be among those campaigning for a Brexit . of the @card@ firm quiz by Dublin Chamber of Commerce , @card@ per cent say it would have a negative impact and ten per cent believe it would be very negative . but @card@ per cent anticipate a Brexit have a neutral affect , while one in @card@ say it would be positive or very positive . of the @card@ per cent of respondent who do no business in the UK , one third say they still expect a Brexit to be bad for them . just five per cent of company with no direct exposure to the UK anticipate a positive impact , while @card@ per cent predict no change . Gina Quin , CEO of the DCC , say : ` ` Finance minister from the world ' s lead economy have warn of a ' shock ' to the global economy if the UK leave the EU . Ireland be likely to feel the wave of any such shock give the amount of trade our company do with the UK . ` ` the UK market be particularly important for Irish exporter and trade between Ireland and Britain have soar over the past @card@ year . ' ' @ IRISHSUNONLINE
yob will ruin World Cup ;
nuke reality be lay bare the consequence of a nuclear attack on London be depict quite brilliantly by the Sun yesterday . not enough people remember or be aware of how two Japanese city and thousand of its people be obliterate . North Korea ' S Kim Jong-un be see as a cartoon figure by most of the west with his rhetoric and army of funny marcher . but he be very real and have improve his nuclear capability . quite rightly he be be take seriously by the US and we should be shoulder to shoulder in opposition to this despot . harry Hodge Preston why would anyone wish to invent a weapon that could cause as much death , destruction , carnage and misery as the bomb North Korea be test ? to read that Kim Jong-un have at his disposal a bomb ten time more powerful than the A-bomb that cause huge suffering to the people of Hiroshima during World War Two be very frightening indeed . troy Webster Taunton , Somerset People power could solve the crisis with North Korea . China be the only country in the world that can stop the idiot try to cause a war . we could all stop buy anything from China until they act . if the whole of the Western world do this , how would the Chinese economy cope ? Mick Flint Leicester While Kim Jong-un be obviously a borderline psycho he surely be n't completely insane . he must be aware that a missile launch at the US would be know within minute and soon after North Korea would cease to exist . Hughie SCORGIE Eastbourne , E Sussex what be happen between America and North Korea be frightening . President Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un be two of the most unstable leader in the world and could bring about the end of mankind . the rest of the world need to start put pressure on both nation - nobody will win if there be a Third World War . Alan Bustin Clacton-on-Sea , Essex I AGREE with the Sun that it ' S time far more urgency be inject into the Brexit talk . it must be our top priority . it be so important this country deliver it and make a success of Brexit . it will then pave the way for other country to follow - which I believe they will . they be just wait to see how Brexit play out in the UK . our official be work at too slow a pace . there have n't be sufficient progress make to advance talk to the next phase . the more time drag on , the less likely we be to make it happen . jenny HAWARDEN Rhuthin , Mold AS the most important bill in my lifetime - the Brexit repeal bill - be about to be debate and vote upon in Parliament , it would be nice for all MP to support the government rather than follow their own agenda . I do not vote for Brexit but MP , as representative of the people , should abide by their wish and support it . Stephen Wheeler Martham , Norfolk it ' S clear the Brexit talk be be stall by EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier and even some of our own MP . so , let ' s stop the talking and tell the EU we be out - www.now.No further payment will be make . instead we should do deal with country who want to trade with us , even one in the EU . then , these Eurocrats may finally realise be in the EU be not what it be mean to be - a common market . David Roberts Market Rasen , Lincs it ' S time Britain take a tough approach to Brexit . negotiation with Barnier can be simplify by state that the UK will impose an import tax on a different model of EU car every week until the EU drop its ` ` divorce payment ' ' threat and enter into meaningful talk . the EU car manufacturer will demand Barnier be sack . Clark Cross Linlithgow , West Lothian TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply THOSE who judge the Rooneys should look at their own life . surely love will win the day . Tim PITTWAY , Manchester THE mope thief certainly get his just desert when tackle by a brave builder , well do that man ! he should be honour for his courage . Alan , Cambridge UNLESS you have more than four face , do not apply to be an MP . why do they always desert their leader when the go get tough ? as an ex-soldier , I would n't want them watch my back . victor Saxby email , fax , write or comment online we pay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
migrant can flock to UK still TENS of thousand more EU migrant will be able to come to Britain over the next two year and stay for good , Theresa May signal . Downing Street delay give a cut-off date for permanent residency right for new arrival . it say the UK would ` ` honour our obligation and commitment ' ' as a member state until Brexit complete . Chancellor Philip Hammond have all but confirm there would be no ` ` cut-off ' ' . he tell the BBC : ` ` we remain full member of the EU for the next two year subject to all the rule . ' ' ` ` and last night the PM refuse to guaranteeg antee that immigration would even fall significantly after Brexit . she tell the Beeb any change to free movement could be phase in slowly . challenge whether immigration would be significantly low , she reply : ` ` we will see a difference . ' ' we last month reveal Brussels want to push back the Brexit cut-off , spark fear of a rush of Romanian and Bulgarian try to beat the deadline . Tory MP want residency entitlement limit to migrant already here when the referendum be hold . a separate option be the date Article @card@ be trigger . figure last month show new arrival from Romania and Bulgaria have hit a record @card@ a year . there be an estimated 2.3million EU-born national work in Britain . @card@ new Romanian and Bulgarian 2.3MEU-born worker now in Britain
BREXIT : the Blair SWITCH Project ; REMAIN PLOTTERS ON March ' Hated ' ex-PM return to defy voter over EU Tony Blair have vow that Brexit could still be ` ` stop ' ' - amid rumour he be plan a new political party . but the ex-PM be slam as ` ` delusional ' ' for think voter should get a second chance . Mr Blair say : ` ` it can be stop if the British people decide that , have see what it mean , the pain-gain cost analysis do n't stack up . ' ' his comment be reject by no @card@ , who say Prime Minister Theresa May be ` ` very clear ' ' that Britain be leave Europe . the call for a second referendum come as Mr Blair claim he be hate too much for a return to politics . but Westminster insider be convince Mr Blair , who quit as a Middle East peace envoy last year and wind up his business empire in September , be plot a new party . he tell magazine New Statesman he want to build a ` ` platform ' ' , that he be ` ` dismayed ' ' by the state of Western politics but ` ` also incredibly motivated ' ' . Mr Blair say : ` ` I think the absolute essence be to revive the centre . ' ' he have already hold private talk with former Deputy PM Nick Clegg about a new anti-Brexit movement . and on Wednesday night , Mr Blair ' s close ally meet with top Remain backer at London ' S River Cafe restaurant . ex spin doctor Alastair Campbell urge the guest , include Labour grandee Lord Mandelson and ex-MI6 boss John Sawers , to ` ` fight back ' ' on Brexit . Tory MP Bernard Jenkin say : ` ` the idea that Tony Blair be more in touch with the British people be to use his word ' extremely delusional ' . he lack any political authority . ' '
forget it ; NATS ' BREXIT Blow ; no special Scots deal ' on EU lNo10 : plan must be for UK Downing Street have knock back Nicola Sturgeon ' s demand for a special Scottish Brexit deal . the First Minister want control over immigration , treaty-making power for Holyrood and a guarantee spot in the single market . but despite a pledge by the UK Government to look at proposal from SNP chief , an insider last night insist they have ` ` next to no chance ' ' of get their wish list of condition . the source add : ` ` the First Minister want to get control of immigration for Scotland by invent a new system of work permit . ` ` there be next to no chance that Downing Street will ever allow that because they do n't believe they can make immigrant stay north of the border . ` ` Nicola Sturgeon know all that before she set out her shopping list . ' ' the SNP leader will meet Prime Minister Theresa May next week for the late round of Brexit talk . a No10 spokeswoman say : ` ` there be a very clear delineation between the issue that be reserve and issue that be devolve . what we should be focus on be how we work together to get the good deal for the UK as we leave the EU . ' ' the Nat will this week publish a bill for a second independence referendum and Ms Sturgeon predict it be ` ` highly likely ' ' another vote will go ahead . SNP Westminster leader Angus Robertson claim it could be prevent if the UK Government offer a special Brexit deal - although he admit he be not hopeful . he add : ` ` if the UK deliver on the priority that the Scottish Government be go to be set out in the next week , that be go to be the focus of our continuing and renewed relationship in a European context . if the Scottish government be satisfy , then I do n't see how it would pursue a further independence referendum . ' ' he insist it be right to consult on the bill ` ` just in case the UK Government do not deliver ' ' .
stick it up YOUR Juncker ! ; EU LEADERS ' Final ASSAULT ON BREXIT ; as Euro bigwig warn there ' s no 2nd chance if UK vote out , we say. . European Union boss Jean-Claude Juncker risk infuriate British voter last night by threaten to isolate us if we vote to leave the EU today . the European Commission president be join by other leader to insist that there would be no second deal on offer to the UK if it choose Brexit . every time a member country have vote down a new EU treaty or plan in the past , it have always be offer good term . but the UK would not be , Mr Juncker declare , say instead : ` ` Out be out . ' ' in another explosive outburst , the federalist chief Eurocrat also ques-tioned whether it be right to hold referendum at all . Senior Tory slam the explosive statement on the eve of the poll as ` ` unbelievable conceit ' ' . but Mr Juncker also appear to close the door on any further reform to the EU ' s free movement rule - pledge by the PM to Sun reader on Tuesday - even if the UK vote to remain in . the commission boss say David Cameron have already ` ` get the maximum ' ' with his renegotiation in February , pan by Conservative MP as ` ` thin gruel ' ' . former Luxembourg PM Mr Juncker insist : ` ` British voter have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation . ` ` we have conclude a deal with the Prime Minister , he get the maximum he could receive , we give the maximum we could give . ' ' continue his Brussels rant , arrogant Mr Juncker also slam the mere idea of give people a say . admit he be ` ` basically not a big fan of referendum ' ' , Mr Juncker add : ` ` Voters can be easily mislead by sideshow . ` ` you always get the sweat when someone dare to ask the people for its opinion . ' ' he also admit Brexit would ` ` damage ' ' the EU project , add : ` ` the British need the EU and the EU need British pragmatism . ' ' France ' S President Hollande back up the rant yesterday by also insist there would be no second deal if voter back Brexit . he claim ` ` the future of the European Union be at stake ' ' . the Socialist leader dub today ' s landmark referendum ` ` irreversible ' ' , parrot Mr Cameron ' s campaign mantra . issue a new veiled threat , Mr Hollande also say Brexit would put Britain at ` ` very serious risk ' ' of lose access to the European Union bloc ' s single market . while reinforce Mr Cameron ' S message , the stern last-minute warning could also backfire on the Remain campaign if they encourage voter across the country to rebel against the EU ' S elite . leave campaigner seize on the threat to insist the Prime Minister be wrong to offer British voter false hope of more EU reform . Brexit campaign boss and Justice Secretary Michael Gove say : ` ` if you vote to stay , there be no prospect of get any reform from the EU ever again . ` ` the Prime Minister try to get reform earlier this year but the EU do not listen . ' ' Mr Gove add : ` ` the EU can not and will not give the British people the change that they want . ' ' Furious Boris Johnson weigh in , say : ` ` the president of the European Commission have basically just tell David Cameron to bog off . ` ` we ' ve already be give the maximum we ' re go to get ? this be unbelievable , the conceit of these people , what give him the right ? ` ` this be n't a head of state , this be n't the head of an elect government . ' ' the former London Mayor add : ` ` who in the holy asterisk asterisk asterisk asterisk elect Jean Claude Juncker to anything ? ` ` he use to run Luxembourg , it ' S a lovely place but about the same size as Wolverhampton . ' ' German leader Angela Merkel hold back from an eleventh hour threat after a plea from Downing Street to stay out of the fight four week ago . instead Mrs Merkel issue a plea to voter to back Remain , say : ` ` of course I want Britain to stay in the EU but the decision be with British citizen . ' ' on Tuesday , Mr Cameron urge Sun reader to back Britain stay in the EU so he could reform it from within . the Prime Minister claim : ` ` if we stay in , that be not the end of reform . Britain will be in a very enhanced position . ' '
the BARNIER ULTIMATUM ; UK ' must set Brexit payment in 2wks ' THE EU ' s Brexit chief Michel Barnier yesterday give Britain a twoweek ultimatum on its divorce payment . as the late round of talk end without breakthrough , he warn failure would delay trade deal talk by more than three month . but Tories insist Theresa May have already concede too much ground by commit to pay £18billion - and urge her not to buckle to ` ` Brussels bully ' ' . lead Brexit campaigner Jacob Rees-Mogg tell the PM : ` ` do n't panic - show some titanium plating . ' ' he add : ` ` we ' ve already offer more than I think we need to at this stage . if we do it again they ' ll think we ' ll always just roll over . ' ' Brussels want £53billion and EU leader will decide at a summit on December @card@ and @card@ if ` ` sufficient progress ' ' i Th ill d B it have be make on this key issue . they will need Britain ' S proposal well before , to give the @card@ member state time to consult . ask if this mean Britain must present their proposal by November @card@ , Mr Barnier say : ` ` my answer be yes . ' ' last night leave campaigner and ex-Cabinet minister John Whittingdale warn : ` ` their definition of sufficient progress be when we have concede everything they want . ' '
all time High ; More Bad News for REMOANERS FTSE @card@ boost by rate rise the stock market close at a record high yesterday in the wake of this week ' s interest rate cut . the rise defy gloomy post-Brexit forecast that Britain ' S economy would nosedive outside the EU . it also give a huge boost to pension fund and Isa saving account . the FTSE @card@ index of blue-chip company rise by @card@ point to @card@ , a few point ahead of the previous high of @card@ just three week ago on October @card@ . a weak pound after the @card@ Brexit vote have boost manufacturing , export and tourism , and increase confidence in the City . the trend be push on by the Bank of England ' s decision to raise the base rate from @card@ per cent to @card@ per cent on Thursday - the first hike for a decade . the weak pound also boost FTSE @card@ firm as many be multinational who report their figure in US dollar . Sterling have rally on the back of a strongly perform service sector but fall back as the dollar rise on good news over US job . the record high confound pessimist ' prediction that anything other than a soft Brexit would wreck the economy . IG market analyst Joshua Mahony say FTSE ' S surge ` ` have much to do ' ' with stall talk as ` ` the chance of a hard Brexit ' ' grow . Laith Khalaf , senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown , say : ` ` the FTSE have climb on the back of a fall pound . good result from Shell and BP do n't do any harm either . ' ' the FTSE @card@ index - which include more firm base solely in Britain - also close at a record high , up @card@ point to @card@ . the Sun say - Page ten
may BREXIT Deal BOOST Theresa May be boost last night as it emerge her DUP ally will support the PM ' s Brexit negotiating plan . the ten Ulster MP will side with her to snub any bid to stay in the Customs Union and single market . a Tory source say Mrs May be now ` ` confident ' ' she will have an effective majority when MP vote on her government ' s agenda in the Queen ' s Speech . the PM have earlier decide to press ahead with Wednesday ' S speech - despite not yet agree a final deal with the unionist she be now rely on to prop up her minority government . Mrs May make the high-stakes move after the DUP agree ` ` four broad principle ' ' - deliver Brexit ; fight terrorism ; strengthen the Union ; and spread prosperity across the UK . it come as Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams threaten to block the alliance - claim it undermine the Northern Ireland Peace Process . speak outside No10 after talk with Mrs May , Mr Adams , right , say he ` ` tell her very directly she be in breach of the Good Friday Agreement ' ' . but he signal Sinn Fein could still back the Tory/DUP pact if it include a major cash injection for Northern Ireland . last night the PM say ` ` real progress ' ' have be make and predict a deal could also restore power-sharing in Belfast , a claim echo by DUP No2 Nigel Dodds . the state opening and Queen ' S Speech will take place with ` ` reduce ceremonial element ' ' . her majesty wo n't wear her Imperial State Crown or robe and will travel to Parliament by car rather than by horse-drawn carriage .
Brexit bill blocker ' enemy of voter ' Rebel Labour MP behind a motion to throw out the Brexit bill have be brand ` ` enemy of democracy ' ' . former shadow health secretary Heidi Alexander say she have the support of @card@ backbencher who be refuse to support trigger Article @card@ . Ms Alexander say that she feel like she be ` ` watch a slow motion car crash and I have to do something about it ' ' . Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn ' s demand that his party support the bill have already lead to the resignation of front-bencher Jo Stevens and Tulip Siddiq . Ex-Ukip leader Nigel Farage tweet : ` ` the @card@ Labour MP oppose Article @card@ be enemy of democracy and should be make to pay the price at the ballot box . ' ' Labour ' S candidate in the Copeland by-election want foreign citizenship after the Brexit vote . Gillian Troughton , fight the Cumbria seat next month , tweet that she might be entitle to an Irish passport .
after THOUGHT ; Holyrood will have say on Brexit ... once deal be do MSPs will have a say on abolish EU law after Brexit - but only once the deal be do , David Mundell say yesterday . the Scotland Secretary reveal a key bill to transfer legislative power to the UK can not go ahead without the nod from Holyrood . and he warn of ` ` serious consequence ' ' if he fail to persuade Nat to accept the UK government ' s planned change . the top Tory , leave , say : ` ` European law will be incorporate into domestic law when Britain leave the EU . the Great repeal Bill will bring that into effect but there be a lot of complexity . it present really big issue and whether we have a hole in our law as a bit of EU law have n't be adopt . ` ` give it will impact on the responsibility of Scottish minister , it be fair to anticipate it would be subject to the legislative consent process . ` ` not agree to the Bill would have very serious consequence . ` ` my focus will be work with party to get agreement . ' ' the SNP ' S Brexit Minister Michael Russell dismiss Mr Mundell ' S assurance . he say : ` ` there be no guarantee even that current devolve power , presently exercise through EU membership , will be come back to Scotland . Time be run out for them to show they be serious about engage with the Scottish government . ' ' the row come two day after the Supreme Court reject the Nat ' call for Holyrood to be consult over Brexit .
May call for Brexit patience Theresa May will today warn Angela Merkel to be patient over Brexit as preparation will ` ` take some time ' ' . the new PM make her first foreign trip to have dinner with the German Chancellor in Berlin . she say be able to talk ` ` frankly and openly about the issue we face ' ' will be an important part of successful negotiation . in a phone call last night , EU Council boss Donald Tusk tell Mrs May Brexit should be a ` ` velvet divorce ' ' that be calm and orderly . but the government ' S lawyer yesterday say the PM will not trigger Article @card@ - start the twoyear break-up process - until @card@ at the early . QC Jason Coppel ' S comment come at the opening of the first legal challenge to the Brexit process at the High Court . nick Clegg will return to frontline politics by become the Lib Dems ' spokesman on the EU .
@card@ Days LATER ; POST-BREXIT Britain have FEELING of Country ON Brink of Change ; Tories select a brand new team ; Labour lose all UK credibility ; Sturgeon ready for tough talk THERE have be a political earthquake in the three short week since we go to the poll in the historic Brexit vote . in Westminster it be an extinction event that rank alongside the day the giant asteroid land on all those unsuspecting dinosaur . David Cameron hand in his notice within hour of the result . Nigel Farage , who light the fuse on the Brexit explosion , stay just long enough to enjoy the firework and stalk off . Boris Johnson , once Mayor of London , bet his political life on Brexit because it be a fast track to leadership of the Tory Party and the key of no . @card@ Downing Street . he be set to be a footnote in the history book , knife in the back by his lieutenant , Michael Gove , but have return as Foreign Secretary . Mr Gove survive the assassination by about quarter of an hour before he too be brush aside by Andrea Leadsom - a woman nobody have ever hear of before . and Mrs Leadsom struggle on for a weekend before throw in the towel after a newspaper interview . she could n't stand the pressure , she say . if give an interview be too hard for her , she probably be n't the person to be in charge of the nuclear launch code . h woM r nin p be re Labour Party be in death throe the last woman standing be Theresa Prime Minister . ' ' charge of run she fight to at the same these past three have see the Party enter its throe . oman May , now the and firmly in ng the Brexit it prevent . me time , e week Labour death ts entire ench f in nced they e of rnas e be off vint ce ve gn almost the Labour front bench have walk disgust , convince at last that have no chance form a government as long as Jeremy Corbyn the leader . be ven to ottish Secretary give the job to who also coveland . he ca n't even find anybody be Shadow Scottish so he have to an English MP , cover Northern Ireland . Ev ycog P , ire in nge arp der the chaos deep that Angela Owen Smith be to unite the separate leadership challenge . Labour be so Ela Eagle and re each try party behind rship challose , when they lose , Jeremy Corbyn leader , nobody what will happen . and be still know en . l ynype e and in the midst Nyshow Nicola see and h in . only who for of all this , Sturgeon have an opportunity decide to cash she be the party leader have a plan Brexit . theato ters uld r a d nt ge ort cou or endence l if Long before the vote she send a strong message her supporter that Brexit could be the cue for second independence vote - but only Scotland be to be drag out of Europe against its will . the plan would Days only work if Scotland vote to Remain and England vote out . and the plan work spectacularly well . every single council area in Scotland vote to stay and , overall , Scotland vote almost two to one to stay in Europe . the line on the map could hardly be more stark , a deep division between Scotland and England run the length of the Tweed . in these past three week , the First Minister - and the whole SNP machine - have go to work to keep Scotland in the EU . on day one the First Minister hold a press conference respond to Brexit and vow to protect Scotland ' s European interest . ` ` Brexit mean Brexit ' ' as Prime Minister May keep say . but for FM Sturgeon , Scotland ' s vote trump that . ` ` Remain mean Remain , ' ' she say . she have already begin preparation for another Referendum Bill . whether you choose to believe her or not , she ' S stress that another independence vote be not her start point but more of a safety net , something to have in place if all else fail . Sturgeon warmly embrace in Europe she secure a Holyrood vote endorse her effort to protect Scotland ' s interest in Europe and she get it back by all party - except for the Tories , of course . in Europe , MEP Alyn Smith clear the way for the First Minister with a speech that bring a standing ovation from round the European Parliament chamber . ` ` Please remember this : Scotland do not let you down . Chers colleague , please , I beg you , do not let Scotland down now . ' ' h on slyp un o er , w hour of that , Sturgeon be on her the flesh in warmly embrace by Commission president Jean Juncker . it be only two year ago , remember , the Eurocrats warning Scotland independence leave the country out in the now they be cuddle up . dt ryN line and within Nicola Sturgeo way to press Europe , warml Co C mmission Claude Ju on o ly tw re r membe be land would count cold . cudd the ter ' S have c let send EU Scott ment assur be w it fact all g indep endu come Sh Gove Bank postshe Co tte First Minister ' s PR campaign continue . letter have be out to every national the Scottish government can reach , assure them they welcome . underline the that they will a vote in the independence referendum - if it come . ti trin we ut get pe um es e ern k-Bh ul mrmin ha G altt an fo the p n fo tab s no . her Co k i she have meet the Governor of the of England for post-Brexit talk , she have host EU consul to assure of Scotland ' s determination to Europe and have chat with Government of Gibraltar , who also to stay in the and also face force out . consu them deter stay sh she h the Gibra want EU be all t be in Sturgeon meet the t Mrs to N h these thing will play when Ms and Mrs May for a card on table discussion . May go in @card@ pledge commitment to keep Scotland in the Union . when Nicola go into no . @card@ , she probably wo n't .
Ex-Prez : Brexit be harm aid crisis by Ed Carty UN envoy Mary Robinson accuse the international community of be preoccupy by Brexit - as million of Ethiopian suffer the bad drought in half a century . Robinson meet Ethiopian Foreign Minister Tedros Adhanom in Addis Ababa as the country seek ( Euro ) 580million in aid . more than ten million Ethiopian do not have enough food or be at risk of malnutrition after harvest fail and there ' S concern it could spiral into the bad food emergency in the region since the mid-1980 . Mrs Robinson say : ` ` the problem be real and we have to do everything to address it before it be too late . I hope the special envoy make this problem more visible at a time when there be preoccupation on migrant in Europe , with Brexit , and conflict situation - there be a lot of distracting issue . ' '
BOJO stick the wife in ; Lawyer SLAMS Euro COURT ; Marina in back for hard Brexit Boris Johnson ' S wife throw her support behind a hard Brexit by demand Britain take back sovereignty from Euro judge . the Foreign Secretary spark a Tory Party civil war last week after go behind the PM ' S back and publish his own vision for EU withdrawal . BoJo ' S wife Marina Wheeler QC have now wade in as Theresa May be set for a showdown with him ahead of her Brexit speech in Italy next week . write in the Spectator , the human right lawyer blast European judge for poke their nose into issue of national security . she slam a European Court of Justice bid to force Britain into the bulk collection of communication datum . Ms Wheeler write : ` ` reclaim sovereignty allow the nation to decide for itself how to balance the need of security with the requirement of privacy and keep its citizen ( and visitor ) safe . ` ` co-operate with other to improve security plainly make sense . give up the right to decide do not . ' ' the PM last night order BoJo to fly home from the UN assembly in New York on her RAF flight , spark suspicion she want to give him a milehigh rollocking . BoJo be due to return this afternoon . he want the PM to slash payment to the EU post-Brexit and invest in the NHS . she be set to offer to pay almost £20billion in exchange for access to the single market during a transition deal .
time for clarity the only thing that emerge from this week ' s Brexit talk at No10 be a hotline allow instant contact between minister in London and the devolve government around the UK . it ' S not work too well . Nicola Sturgeon say her man be put on hold for @card@ hour . No10 say that ' s ` ` not an accurate version of event ' ' and the Brexit Secretary himself say that he be ask to call on Wednesday morning . he just could n't fit it in until Wednesday evening . would it be so hard to hand out a business card ? maybe with his mobile number on it ? this row prove how tangled the Brexit process be go to be . if politician inside the UK ca n't even agree about a phone call , what be the chance of constructive talk with @card@ government we have just tell to get lose ? and , so far , talking be all we ' ve get . Scotland Secretary David Mundell be gush yesterday when MSPs ask if Scotland will have full access to the single market after Brexit . we will have a ` ` bespoke ' ' deal , tailormade to our need , he say , well than anything else anybody have get . it ' s go to be fabulous . the Norwegians and the Swiss and the Icelander , who all accept freedom of movement for EU citizen and pay handsomely for their trading right with Europe , will look on in disbelief at our deal . it could n't be clear . but , for some reason , Mr Mundell could n't say how many meeting of the Brexit sub-committee he attend . one be fact , the other fantasy . we need clarity .
Let ' s get crack on new trade deal the clear sign of a real Brexit bounce come yesterday as our Aussie mate lead the queue of nation eager to do trade deal once we be free from Brussels . freshly re-elect PM Malcolm Turnbull phone Downing Street , promise to rebuild the tie sever when Britain join the common market in @card@ . ` ` it be very encourage that one of our close international partner be already seek to establish just such a deal , ' ' say Theresa May . ` ` this show we can make Brexit work for Britain . ' ' meanwhile , International Trade minister Liam Fox be busy ` ` scoping ' ' deal with another dozen country , include India , Canada and even the USA - despite threat to send us to the back of the queue . Ex-SAS bruiser David Davis be prepare to toss in a few grenade and Boris Johnson be spread Brexit sunshine wherever he go . interest rate remain low , exporter and holidaymakers have be give a sugar hit by the free-floating pound and the stock market be booming . thousand of EU migrant be leave the sink ship before we cut loose . each story tell us why we be right to ignore scaremonger on June @card@ - and why Theresa May be so thoroughly clean out the Cameron stable . cheerleader of Project Fear not only distort the truth about Britain ' s prospect outside the EU , they also block any move to make Brexit work . in what can only be see as dereliction of duty , David Cameron do precisely zero to prepare this country for life outside . it be an arrogant refusal to contemplate defeat . the task of the Treasury and the Cabinet Office be to draw up plan for almost any foreseeable eventuality . thanks to hapless Cabinet clown Oliver Letwin , we now know the government sit on its hand ahead of the most momentous peacetime convulsion in modern history . neither Letwin nor Cabinet Secretary Jeremy ( ` ` Sir Coverup ' ' ) Heywood lift a finger to plan for the complex disengagement of the UK from a maze of EU law . there be no chart to navigate the still-treacherous water of withdrawal , no key to unpick the regulation bind us into ` ` ever-closer union ' ' . David Cameron ' s failure to spot danger signal until the last moment be characteristic of his year as Prime Minister . play for time be hallmark of EU but his breezy assumption that voter would swallow the EU ' s meaningless concession on mass immigration top them all . it cost him the vote and it kill his premiership . there will be a price to pay for this complacency - not least the six year of hard wrangling predict by Chancellor Phil Hammond before we break free from Brussels . the government have No experienced trade negotiator to build commercial tie with EU state . such skill take year to acquire . the rule may be straightforward but , like chess , it take year to become a Grandmaster . so we be now recruit off-the-peg expert from the City . they will be crucial in protect a financial hub worth billion to this country . but it must not take six year . Brussels move at the pace of its slow member state . why should we wait upon @card@ other parliament to decide individually how we proceed ? play for time be the hallmark of the EU ' s sluggish economy . kick the can down the road be why Greece be sink and why Italy may follow suit . EU trade talk with Canada have fail because Romania be at odd over immigration . negotiation with Morocco be stall because Spain wo n't accept their orange . give a chance , European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker will thwart Britain ' s democratic vote by drag his foot . Theresa May have pick three stalwart Eurosceptics - Boris , Davis and Liam Fox - to lead the process . they will want to proceed as painlessly as possible with a surgical amputation . but if Brussels wo n't help us escape this tangle of bureaucracy in a process of mutual co-operation , we must be ready to wield the axe .
wrong to say EU protect worker ' right PEOPLE who say that the EU protect worker ' right make me wonder where they have be live - certainly not in Hull . what worker be they refer to , and what job ? Alan Johnson make this statement , but in Hull , the city he be suppose to represent , there be job base on zerohour contract and minimum pay . there be also a large number of migrant worker from the EU . the news that people in Hull be among the least likely in the country to vote be surely no mystery when our elect MP seem blind to basic truth . never do I think that a Conservative MP would tell it like it be for the work man . well do , Iain Duncan Smith . the EU do favour the well-off at the expense of the less well-off . Steve Mitchell Hull THROUGHOUT this referendum campaign the Prime Minister appear happy to let has-been Labour politician do his bidding . this be dangerous . with their own party in disarray Labour voter may well smell Tory blood . if the UK vote for Brexit then Cameron and Osborne be finish . what good way to give Labour a fight chance than to decapitate a whole generation of Tory grandee . the bonus prize - British democracy . David Horsley Moldgreen , West Yorks PERHAPS it be no coincidence that the leave group have do all possible to keep Nigel Farage away from television . in the Brexit campaign , there be a mystify failure to address the core issue of sovereignty which be likely to be the real bombshell to hit this country . instead the focus have be on respond to Cameron ' s red herring and to the issue of the NHS and immigration , the debate on which have be bizarre . could there be Remain sympathiser plant within the Brexit fold to neuter the Brexit campaign ? outrageous ? impossible ? really ? I would feel less suspicious be people like David Davis , Liam Fox and Nigel Farage give great prominence . Michael Barringer Fareham , Hants WITH the impending referendum , the two camp should be force to restrict their comment to the truth over the consequence . at @card@ , I have see Britain before and after join Europe . yes , we may struggle initially if we leave , but should we stay then it be apparent that we will be fully absorb into Europe and end up as a puppet of Brussel . les White Welling , Kent it seem to me the conservative should change their trademark blue to a more appropriate yellow . first , there be Cameron ' s grovel to Angela Merkel and now John Whittingdale be frighten off from make proper reform to the BBC . he should be defend the public contempt of the ` ` luvvies ' ' who run and those who exploit our ` ` tax ' ' - sorry , licence money . john Smedley Willenhall , West Mids it beggar belief when people write in to condemn school authority for give child SAT test at a young age . this be to make sure they eventually leave school with a good education . if there be a reward for do them , certain parent would n't think twice about push their child forwards . how many time do we see young child on Britain ' S Got Talent and other similar show break down in tear if they fail to impress ? this be far bad than make child do their schoolwork . mark BANDROWSKI Mattishall , Norfolk TXT US on @card@ @card@ do n't forget to include your name . standard text rate from your provider apply NEXT time Plod do a terrorist attack mock-up exercise just shout , ` ` Alan ' s snack bar ' ' in a Welsh accent ... we ' ll know what they mean . GP So Gordon Brown want us to vote to stay in the EU . the unelected PM want us to keep the unelected eurocrats . Roy Powell , Walsall , West Mids David Cameron be to debate the EU referendum on TV with Nigel Farage . he be too cowardly to take Michael Gove or Boris Johnson on . he be the most spineless politician of his generation . les Griffiths , Pontefract , West York be N'T it about time Mr C & Co start recognise the skill & quality of the British people ? let us show how proud we be to be British ! Dave Email , fax , write or comment online Wepay £50 for our Star Letter of the day : Email
BOJO : I ' M A BREXLICKER ; the Sun GIVE BREXIT Stamp of APPROVAL but post minister brand it ' divisive ' Boris Johnson last night back our crusade for stamp to celebrate our EU exit . BoJo say : ` ` it will be a monumental moment in British history - so let ' s deliver a stamp that show the world we ' ve get Brexit lick . ' ' Fellow Tory MP Andrew Bridgen also swing behind the Sun ' s call for Royal Mail boss to rethink their tribute snub . he say : ` ` we need stamp for this joyous , momentous occasion . ` ` we ' ll have one for Harry and Meghan ' S wedding , wo n't we ? we have commemorative stamp for national event . this be the big for decade . ' ' in a nod to the majority who vote for Brexit , he add : ` ` I know @card@ million people who will buy them . ' ' but Remain-voting Postal Services minister Margot James say it would be ` ` divisive ' ' . quiz on mail chief ' refusal to issue stamp for our @card@ exit despite do so for our @card@ entry , she say : ` ` I do n't think it be such a divisive issue then . ` ` they have no plan to produce them and I ' m not go to interfere . ' ' Ms James claim her role merely involve pass design for the Queen to rule on . she say : ` ` I do n't approve them . ' ' she show her pro-Brussels colour by tweet the day after the Brexit vote : ` ` share your upset . we ' re in for a long period of uncertainty . ' ' last night a Government spokesman say : ` ` all Royal Mail commercial and operational matter , include stamp theme , be independent of Government . ' '
get a March on ; BREXIT Stage TWO BEGINS PM TELLS EU To AGREE Transit Or Lose Cash Theresa May last night warn EU leader her £39billion divorce cheque be off unless they agree a transition deal by March . the PM begin to unveil her key demand for the next stage of negotiation yesterday . she tell MP an agreement on a two-year transition period that start on exit day in @card@ should be seal as early as possible . Mrs May add that mean within ` ` the first quarter ' ' of next year . her timetable to reassure worried business come six month earlier than EU chief negotiator Michel Barnier ' s original plan of September . it also emerge last night that No10 expect the EU to put up a fight over its demand to start register EU citizen live here straight after Brexit . but Brussels be expect to give way on the PM ' s third transition criterion , for Britain to be free to negotiate and agree new trade deal during the period . spell out exactly what she mean by her Brexit talk motto , ` ` nothing be agree until everything be agree ' ' , the PM add : ` ` this offer be on the table in the context of us agree the partnership for the future . ` ` if we do n't agree that partnership , then this offer be off the table . ' ' EU leader start trade talk on Thursday . Jeremy Corbyn say Labour be ready to delay Brexit beyond March @card@ ` ` to get the well possible deal ' ' . Whitehall need thousand more staff for Brexit , civil service chief John Manzoni say . the department have @card@ .
Davis PLOTS David Davis ' S ally have launch a bid to make him PM by try to line up a ` ` dream team ' ' ticket with young Tory star . one of the Brexit Secretary ' s close supporter - former chief whip Andrew Mitchell - be organise drink evening with him and new Tory MP . three high-flier invite last week be Tom Tugendhat and James Cleverly - both tip as future leader - as well as rookie Gillian Keegan . several be tell Mr Davis be ready to run as leader with them . a key ally tell one MP : ` ` Theresa will be go by Christmas . ' ' meanwhile Mr Davis tell MP Brexit could have as big an impact as the @card@ financial crash . quiz by a select committee , he say the government have do no analysis on the effect of leave the EU because economic model fail to predict the financial crisis and Brexit would provoke the same ` ` paradigm change ' ' .
Varadkar : the ball be in London ' S court now TAOISEACH Leo Varadkar have tell Theresa May ` ` the ball be in your court ' ' in term of resolve the Brexit border issue . the Irish PM also warn the DUP agreement over a border deal will be between the EU and the UK Government - not one political party . speak during leader question in the Dail yesterday , Varadkar reiterate his ` ` regret ' ' that the British government have back down from a proposal that Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland should continue to be align after Brexit . the propose agreement be put on hold after the DUP contact Prime Minister May in Brussels when detail of the proposal come to light . without refer specifically to the DUP , Varadkar say : ` ` there be many political party in Northern Ireland and we will listen to and respect all political party and recognise the majority in NI do not vote to leave the European union . ' ' he add : ` ` this be very important , the negotiation be take place between a sovereign government , the UK on one hand and the European union of which we be part . ` ` the negotiation be not involve one or any political party . this agreement , if we come to it , will not be involve one political party to the exclusion of other . ' ' the Taoiseach say have the Stormont power-sharing Executive not collapse in January , Northern Ireland would have have a unite , cross-community voice in term of Brexit . he add that people mistakenly think only one party speak for the region . Varadkar admit relation between Ireland and the UK ` ` have be strain in the last year or two ' ' because of Brexit . he add however that he believe Mrs May and her team be ` ` negotiate in good faith ' ' . Varadkar say : ` ` I look forward to hear from them as to how they think we can proceed . the ball be now in London ' S court . ' ' the next European Council summit be on December @card@ and the Taoiseach say he believe there be time to put the agreement back on track . he say the agreement on Monday have three possible option - an EU-UK free-trade agreement that would allow free trade to continue between Britain and Ireland ; a bespoke arrangement involve technology ; or , if all else fail , an ongoing regulatory alignment between the north and south .
Swiss SOFT Deal Row THE Chancellor and Home Secretary be team up to back a soft Brexit , a leave campaigner furiously claim yesterday . Philip Hammond and Amber Rudd allegedly want to mirror Switzerland ' S tie to the EU . Brexit Secretary David Davis back the plan , ex-Vote leave boss Dominic Cummings allege . he label it a disaster that risk make Jeremy Corbyn the next PM . and he say the Brexit process have so far be shambolic . the move would see the UK closely mirror current tie with the single market and continue to pay large access fee . Britain would also have to shadow EU judge ' ruling and obey regulation for ever . Boris Johnson and Michael Gove instead want tie like Canada ' s loose free trade deal with Brussels . Mr Davis ' ally say it be ` ` b******s ' ' to suggest he side with the Swiss model . they accuse Mr Cummings of ` ` dark art ' ' . a Brexit department source say Mr Davis be the ` ` grown-up working to deliver what British people vote for ' ' . last night Theresa May say say : ` ` I ' ve always say we be not look to take a model off the shelf . ' '
stay AND Bring All THE Family ; PM Offer To 3M EU NATIONALS in UK EVERY EU national living in Britain will be able to bring in their family just day before Brexit and guarantee them full residency , under plan reveal yesterday . Theresa May vow ` ` no family will be split up ' ' as she outline a 15-page document detail the government ' s ` ` fair and serious ' ' offer to Brussel on citizen ' right . she add that any EU national already send child benefit back home to the continent can continue to do so for year to come . expert last night predict a migration surge as ten of thousand look to take advantage of the PM ' S offer . Mrs May yesterday outline the first detail of the proposal to EU leader in Brussels make late last week . speak in the commons , she confirm all three million EU national live in the UK now will be able to gain ` ` settled status ' ' and stay here forever . but she also reveal that any of their close relative , even from outside the EU , can also stay if they arrive before a Brexit cut-off . Mrs May say : ` ` I want to completely reassure people that under these plan no EU citizen currently in the UK lawfully will be ask to leave at the point the UK leave the EU . we want you to stay . ' ' she add : ` ` EU citizen make an invaluable contribution to our United Kingdom , to our economy , our public service , and our everyday life . that ' S why I initially seek an agreement on this before we trigger Article @card@ , and it be why I ' m make it an immediate priority at the beginning of the negotiation . ' ' the PM say even those EU national arrive after a cut-off for eligibility will still get another two year to apply for a work permit in a bid to remain . but the EU ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier immediately brand the offer ` ` unambitious ' ' . he tweet : ` ` more ambition , clarity and guarantee be need than in today ' s UK position . ' ' European Parliament negotiator Guy Verhofstadt claim a number of ` ` limitation remain worrisome ' ' . Opposition MP also warn that the Home Office face an administrative nightmare . under yesterday ' S proposal , EU national will have to apply for a residency document over a twoyear window - an average of @card@ submission a day . they will have to pay around £65 each - generate £195million . the PM insist : ` ` the Home Office be well able to deal with the issue that it will be address . ' ' Brexit Secretary David Davis insist the document be not an ID card as they would not ` ` have to carry it around all the time ' ' . the government ' S offer rely on a reciprocal deal from the EU for the 1.2million brit live on the continent . Mrs May again insist the UK will not accept any say from the hate European Court of Justice - a key demand in the Commission ' S proposal two week ago . she repeat that the cut-off point for an EU national to qualify for settle status could change depend on negotiation with Brussels . it may be the end of March @card@ - the moment we leave the EU . or it could be bring forward to March @card@ , @card@ , the day Mrs May invoke Article @card@ and begin the two-year countdown to Brexit . expert claim the government be almost certain to agree to the @card@ date if the Commission waive its demand on the ECJ . the Migration Watch think-tank say : ` ` there be always a surge when immigration law change . the government be clearly try to avoid that happen now by decide not to commit to the cut-off for now . ' ' Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn yesterday brand the offer as ` ` too little , too late ' ' . his Shadow Brexit Secretary Keir Starmer say : ` ` this be an inadequate and conditional offer that will do nothing to end uncertainty for million of people . ' ' Lib Dem Brexit spokesman Tom Brake add : ` ` Far from be ' fair and serious ' this offer very little and show the government be continue in its callousness . ' ' Jonathan Portes , professor of economics at King ' S College London , say the PM appear to finally ` ` grasp the scale ' ' of the task ahead . but he add that while the offer would have be view as ` ` generous ' ' nine month ago it be now ` ` likely to be see at good as a belated step in the right direction ' ' .
@card@ MIGRANT Target ' S ' All But FINISHED ' ; Exclusive : Tory CONFESSION Ministers ' target of cut net migration to below @card@ be all but dead , senior Tory say last night . the government believe voter be content that Brexit will give us control over border , source tell the Sun . and they say Home Secretary Amber Rudd realise she could not cap number and attract the good worker worldwide . a Cabinet minister say : ` ` no one ' s talk about it any more . there ' s no way @card@ will be in the Immigration Bill . climbdown ` ` I ca n't see it being in the next election manifesto . ` ` net migration remain stubbornly high and be @card@ in the @card@ month to September last year . meanwhile , the British Hospitality Association become the late to warn of a hire crisis if EU migrant be bar after Brexit . a BHA survey show they make up nearly @card@ per cent of its three million hospitality worker . they also account for @card@ per cent of wait staff and @card@ per cent of chef . the @card@ vow be first make by David Cameron ahead of the @card@ election . but EU free movement have see number soar . and Tory also point out that future trade deal with the likes of India will need Theresa May to approve a rise in visa . Brexit Secretary David Davis admit on Monday that immigration may rise and fall after Brexit . . . Rudd Ms May say migration be high ` ` than we would want ' ' and would not guarantee a big drop . but Migration Watch ' S Alp Mehmet believe she will stick to the @card@ goal to focus Whitehall mind . he say : ` ` people doubt her commitment have well tell her . ' ' the Home Office say last night : ` ` there ' s no change . we want net migration to fall to ten of thousand . ' '
carney : UK Can Have Great BREXPECTATIONS BREXIT be no long the big risk to the UK ' S economy , the Bank of England Governor tell MP yesterday . Mark Carney , who have warn of dire consequence before June ' s EU referendum , admit it be a ` ` surprise ' ' to see it do so well . and he even suggest the EU have more to lose if the break-up become chaotic . but Mr Carney deny the Bank have be wrong to highlight risk , and suggest warning have help the UK deal with the impact of the leave vote . ask by MP on the Treasury Select Committee if Brexit remain the big risk to the UK ' s financial stability , Mr Carney say : ` ` Strictly speak the view be no . ' ' he add : ` ` in the run-up to the referendum we say it be the large risk because there be a series of position and possibility in the financial sector , thing that could have happen , that could have have financial stability consequence . ' ' the Governor add of Brexit : ` ` there be great short-term risk on the continent in the transition than there be in the UK . ' ' the Bank make £250billion available to prop up the financial market after the EU vote . Mr Carney say yesterday : ` ` we would like to say this have some success . ` ` we help make the weather - good risk management help ensure a smooth process . ' '
HILLARY : stay in ; NEWU.NEW U.S. MEDDLING ON Europe ; Attack on Brexit by Clinton Hillary Clinton wade into the referendum campaign last night , urge Briton to stay in the EU . the White House hopeful make her view know hour after President Barack Obama spark a row with the same opinion . her intervention be a welcome boost to David Cameron ' S hope of win a Remain vote on June @card@ and a savage blow to the Brexit campaign . in a statement , her senior policy adviser Jake Sullivan say : ` ` Hillary Clinton believe that transatlantic co-operation be essential and that co-operation be strong when Europe be unite . ` ` she have always value a strong United Kingdom in a strong EU . and she value a strong British voice in the EU . ' ' source close to the wannabe President say she be fully behind Mr Obama ' s opposition to Brexit . his warning that a Britain outside the EU would go to the back of the queue for trade deal with the US spark accusation of ` ` blackmail ' ' . former defence secretary Liam Fox , a lead Eurosceptic , say scornfully : ` ` whoever will be at the helm of the US , it will not be Barack Obama . it will be the next President and the next congress in charge of trade arrangement . ' ' meanwhile , Mr Obama be last night accuse of hold a rig question time session during which the EU referendum be never mention . the President ' s speech to @card@ youngster in London be attend by actor Benedict Cumberbatch , his wife Sophie Hunter , and singer Annie Lennox . Ukip leader Nigel Farage blast him for face a hand-selected audience who do not probe him on ` ` the single most important question we face ' ' . g p q
I ' ll be sack ; City Sun THE FTSE @card@ Rose @card@ TO @card@ EDITED By Rhodri Phillips Tel : @card@ @card@ @card@ e-mail :
banish traitor Blair from the Brexit table ; Scottish Sun letter
a measly ( Euro ) @card@ for us , a bumper ( Euro ) @card@ for them ; Cabinet be laugh All Way To BANK THE Government have defend grant salary hike for TD after the @card@ Budget leave worker and welfare recipient just a fiver a week well off . Enda Kenny ' S administration have also come under fire for not do enough to prepare us for Brexit and for not put cash away to scrap Irish Water . as the Irish Sun first reveal a month ago , Ministers be now accept a ( Euro ) @card@ bump in their pay due to a pension-related deduction thanks to the Lansdowne Road deal - after refuse it last year . and they be also in line for pay rise of ( Euro ) @card@ next year and again in @card@ , as part of the deal to restore public servant ' salary . quiz by RTE ' S Sean O'Rourke , Public Expenditure Minister Paschal Donohoe say political salary would be look at again - but refuse to say they would take a pay freeze . he say : ` ` the last thing on my mind at the moment be the welfare and salary of TD I can assure you . ` ` I absolutely understand that perception and I ' m so keenly aware of the hurt and anxiety that ' s be cause to so many people after all that we go through . ` ` Everything be now tie in to how we treat public and civil servant . ` ` there ' s the issue in relation to ministerial salary that we will revisit because I do n't want to be in a situation where people feel in the future that there ' s any kind of unfairness go on . ' ' ' the weak , directionless response be serious ' Michael Noonan , who be also on RTE Radio One , defend the Budget after John McHale , head of the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council , say it be ` ` beyond what be prudent and be set to breach key EU rule ' ' . he also insist enough action have be take to withstand future economic problem cause by Brexit . and he get the backing of the British Irish Chamber of Commerce . John McGrane , director general , say : ` ` Minister Noonan have bring forward an insightful Brexit-proofing Budget and have strengthen the foundation of the government ' s work on prepare Ireland to face the opportunity and challenge pose by Brexit . ` ` the prudent approach to forecast economic growth to @card@ per cent , due to Brexit , show clear pragmatism and a determine approach to mitigate the impact of Brexit . ` ` the rainy day fund of ( Euro ) 1billion be set aside every year from @card@ be a clear signal Ireland be prepare for any potential challenge and will be in a good place to counter and deal with those challenge as they emerge . ' ' but , speak in the Dail , Fianna Fail leader Micheal Martin say : ` ` the weak and directionless response to the Brexit vote be deeply serious . ` ` this Budget should have include a number of specific scenario for the impact of Brexit but instead it be full of repetition of small measure . ` ` the base scenario in this Budget assume an exchange rate for next year of @card@ pence to a euro . ` ` yesterday the exchange rate be @card@ pence to a euro . ` ` give the behaviour of the May government , assume that sterling will strengthen by over six per cent be bad than foolish . the negative impact of Brexit be not hypothetical , it be already hit Irish exporter . the slow and partial response of the government be a direct threat to economic growth . ` ` in infrastructure , research , transport , industrial priority and many other critical area , there be no substance in this Budget or in the government ' s ongoing work . ' ' for its part , Sinn Fein insist there be a ` ` ( Euro ) 129million hole ' ' in the budget because no provision be make for scrap water charge . TD Eoin O Broin say this gap ` ` show that neither Fine Gael nor Fianna Fail have any commitment to scrap this regressive tax ' ' . he add : ` ` the next cost of scrap water charge be ( Euro ) 129m . if water charge be scrap next March , where will the government get this money from ? what service will they cut ? their failure to make provision for this beg the question whether FG and FF be work on a dodgy deal to keep this unjust charge in place . ` ` despite all their bluster , once again it appear FF have no commitment to scrap this regressive tax . ` ` the people have speak . there be no democratic mandate for water charge . they be only be keep alive by FG and FF . ` ` SF have show in our alternative budget how water charge can be scrap while at the same time significantly increase investment in upgrade our water service . it ' s time for the Government act and bring this sorry saga to an end . ' ' Social Justice Ireland also hit out at the government , with director Dr Sean Healy claim : ` ` Budget @card@ yet again ignore the work poor . ' ' he add : ` ` although it contain a number of welcome initiative , the work poor gain the least . ` ` the choice government make in cut the Universal Social Charge and income tax be unfair and provide large gain to those on high income compare to those on low income . ` ` for example , a single person earn ( Euro ) @card@ gain ( Euro ) @card@ per annum , while a single person on ( Euro ) @card@ gain almost three time more ( ( Euro ) @card@ ) . for the same amount of money ( ( Euro ) 383m ) Government could have make tax credit refundable - thus tackle the work poor issue - and give every taxpayer an additional tax credit of ( Euro ) @card@ per annum . ` ` in practice this would have mean that everyone would be ( Euro ) @card@ good off while the work poor would gain a little more . ' ' meanwhile , Taoiseach Kenny hold talk with Europe ' S chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier in Government Buildings yesterday . he say afterwards : ` ` I take the opportunity to emphasise Ireland ' s unique set of priority with regard to Brexit , and the many complex issue relate to Northern Ireland , the Common Travel Area and the depth of our economic and trade relationship with the UK . ` ` Michel and the European Commission will have a critically important role to play in the complex negotiation that we now know will begin next spring . ` ` it be useful therefore to hear his thought about the process and how negotiation might be handle . ` ` we will be work closely with the Commission team in the month ahead , as we all address the particular challenge pose by Brexit . ' ' @ KieranDineen ( Euro ) @card@ Current Minister ' S salary ( Euro ) @card@ boost to pay in @card@ ( Euro ) @card@ add on in @card@ ( Euro ) @card@ extra in wage in @card@
Barny TROUBLE ; Anti-Brit Barnier to lead Brexit talk French plotter set ' alarm bell ringing ' EU boss Jean-Claude Juncker have make an anti-Brit eurocrat his Brexit negotiator . Frenchman Michel Barnier plot for year to weaken the City of London and the move be see as a threat to the UK ' s financial powerhouse . the ex-commissioner lead unsuccessful attempt to enforce a crippling tax on all financial transaction and hit banker with bonus cap . he be also say to have blame Britain for lose his foreign minister job when the French government be defeat in a referendum on the European constitution . even pro-EU former Deputy PM Nick Clegg say ` ` alarm bell will be ring ' ' after the 65-year-old Brussels veteran ' S appointment , add that he be ` ` no friend of the City of London ' ' . but Mr Juncker call him ` ` a skilled negotiator ' ' as he begin to lay down battle line for ultra-tough Brexit talk with PM Theresa May . he add : ` ` I want an experienced politician for this difficult job . ' ' Tory minister see it as the EU Commission boss ' s bid to trump his rival , European Council president Donald Tusk . one Cabinet minister tell the Sun : ` ` Barnier be well like among the EU elite federalist and in the European Parliament . ` ` they will want him to do the talk with us rather than the Council ' S representative now , which give Juncker himself more of a say . ' ' Mr Barnier will go head to head with Brexit Secretary David Davis , in a re-run of clash @card@ year ago when both be Europe minister .
Flippin ' banker ; after Brexit scare story , IMF now say UK ' S OK World banker do a U-turn yesterday by say Britain ' S economy will do OK after all . before the Brexit vote IMF chief warn of a devastating recession if the UK vote out of the EU . yesterday they slash growth forecast for our economy - but admit we would still outperform Germany and France . they predict UK growth in @card@ would be @card@ per cent - a whopping @card@ per cent low than previously expect . but they say the other two big economy in Europe would only grow by @card@ per cent . IMF economist Maury Obstfeld say yesterday : ` ` the financial market have prove resilient in the wake of the referendum . the reaction have be reassure . ' ' IMF chief Christine Lagarde trigger fury in the run-up to the referendum by claim an Out vote would prompt a recession , stock market crash and a run on the housing market . the IMF say that a recession could still happen . but Mr Obstfeld say this would rely on an unlikely ` ` perfect storm ' ' . he still insist : ` ` Brexit have throw a spanner in the work . ' ' Arch Eurosceptic MP Bernard Jenkin tell the Sun : ` ` it ' S commendable that common sense be now prevail . ' ' but Labour Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell blast : ` ` this be another blow for the government and further highlight they have no plan for after a Brexit vote . ' ' the IMF have cut its UK growth forecast for this year from @card@ to @card@ per cent .
Brexit crisis leader talk at Stormont Martin McGuinness and DUP leader Arlene Foster be set to meet in the come day to discuss the Brexit fall-out . the First and Deputy First Ministers be poll apart on the issue , which lead to Sinn Fein call for a border referendum . Sinn Fein Chairman Declan Kearney say yesterday Brexit have leave Northern Ireland with a ` ` very serious situation ' ' . he add : ` ` I ' m confident they ( McGuinness and Foster ) will meet in the early part of the week . ' ' NI Secretary Theresa Villiers have play down concern about a plunge pound , say : ` ` the market will correct itself . ' ' she say the region would end up benefit from a ` ` free trade deal with the European Union ' ' , add : ` ` any short-term instability in the market will correct itself and ultimately reflect the fundamental of the economy which be healthy . ' ' Ms Villiers rule out an Irish border poll - first raise by Sinn Fein on Friday . Fine Gael MEP Brian Hayes urge the Irish government to work with the British government in the week ahead . he say : ` ` it ' S important that Ireland work with David Cameron and indeed with his successor , to see what measure of agreement we can obtain from the European Union . ' ' as Belfast post office begin run out of application for Irish passport , DUP pro-Brexit MP Ian Paisley urge people to get one if they can . he say : ` ` my advice be if you be entitle to a second passport then take one . ' '
out But in ; BREXIT BLUEPRINT Reveal ; we ' ll quit..though no end to migration large number of EU migrant may continue to pour into Britain for year , the government have say . the shock admission come in PM Theresa May ' S White Paper on Brexit negotiation , publish in Parliament yesterday . immigration be the most important issue for many who vote to leave the EU . but official fear any new system would be ` ` complex ' ' . the White Paper say : ` ` there may be a phase process of implementation to prepare for new arrangement . ' ' a more gradual halt to the huge current influx would ` ` give business and individual enough time to plan and prepare for those new arrangement ' ' , it add . official figure show that @card@ EU national come to Britain in the year to June.Net migration , the number of immigrant minus those who have emigrate from the UK , be a record @card@ . the government ' S 75-page White Paper flesh out the PM ' s 12-point divorce plan first outline two week ago . Brexit Secretary David Davis tell MP it propose ` ` a new , positive and constructive ' ' partnership with the remain @card@ member of the EU . and on Britain ' s future prospect , Mr Davis say : ` ` Our good day be yet to come . ' ' the document also lay out just how reliant EU country be on free trade with Britain . Germany export good worth £70billion a year to us . France ' s trade with Britain be worth £38billion , while the Netherlands sell us £37billion of good . but the government face a tough few day before the final vote on the Article @card@ bill next Wednesday . last night Labour and rebel Tory hit out as it emerge they may only get a vote on any Brexit deal once it have be agree by EU leader and the European Parliament . Tory Chloe Smith bring newborn son Alistair along as she vote to back Brexit on Wednesday . the Norfolk MP interrupt her maternity leave to make ` ` a bit of history ' ' .
back BREXIT ; l MP vote for Article @card@ ; l but @card@ in @card@ in scupper bid a massive majority of MP back Brexit last night in a historic first commons showdown - but one in five still attempt to scupper the bid . a total of @card@ vote to give PM Theresa May permission to start Article @card@ exit talk next month , with @card@ against . the result , read out by the Speaker at 7.30pm , be greet with a thunderous cheer by Tories . Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson dub the moment ` ` momentous ' ' but Labour ' S Stephen Pound , a pro-Remainer , shout , ` ` suicide ' ' . the vote follow two day of debate on the landmark bill and follow a plea from Mrs May . she urge MP to respect last year ' s June @card@ referendum vote , tell them : ` ` this House have a very simple decision to make . ` ` we give the right of judgment on this issue to the British people . ` ` they make their choice , they want to leave the EU . the question every member must ask themselves as they go through the lobby tonight be do they trust the people ? ' ' the @card@ Brexit rebel comprise @card@ SNP MP , @card@ Labour , seven Lib Dems , three SDLP , and one green . the only Tory to vote against be veteran Europhile Ken Clarke . but Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn be hit by a major revolt , with a fifth of his MP defy his strict three-line whip to back Brexit . among them be @card@ frontbenchers . three be in the Shadow Cabinet but resign before the vote - include two last night just minute before it be call . they be Shadow Defra Secretary Rachael Maskell and Shadow Equalities Minister Dawn Butler . former Corbyn loyalist and York MP Ms Maskell insist she have swear an oath to represent ` ` the will of her constituent ' ' who vote by a large majority to Remain . the government clear all Commons business to rush through the bill - order by the Supreme Ct Court last week - in order to stick to its timetable . every Tory MP be order to the Commons to ensure the government win . ot there will be a final commons vote next Wednesday when the bill get its third reading before be pass to the Lords . a series of pro-EU Tory MP have threaten to side with Labour to try to stop the PM walk away from the EU with no Brexit deal without Parliament ' s say so . Mrs May reveal during PMQs yesterday that she will fulfil her promise to publish a White Paper blueprint of her negotiation aim in the Commons today . government source say it would be a ` ` substantial ' ' document and base on the @card@ aim spell out in her Lancaster House speech . Lego be build up its UK HQ in a ` ` clear signal ' ' Britain be central to its future growth plan post-Brexit . the Danish group say it would increase the size of its London office by @card@ per cent . its finance chief , John Goodwin , call the city a ` ` great location ' ' . the Sun say - Page ten
Corbyn ' S pro-Brex Labour backlash Jeremy Corbyn be face a huge Labour grassroots backlash over his support for trigger the Article @card@ Brexit process . an open letter organise by Labour Against Brexit have be sign by nearly @card@ member . in it they accuse the leader of a ` ` betrayal ' ' of his socialist value . the turmoil come after frontbenchers Jo Stevens and Tulip Siddiq quit after be order to back the PM . many of those who sign the letter vote for Corbyn in the leadership contest , it be understand . it state : ` ` while we may differ in our belief and feeling with regard to your leadership , we be unite in our belief that you and your leadership team have make the wrong call on the party ' s policy on Brexit . ' ' Labour ' S candidate in the Copeland by-election want foreign citizenship after the Brexit vote . Gillian Troughton , fight the Cumbria seat next month , tweet that she might be entitle to an Irish passport .
' N.I . chaos WO N'T HIT BREXIT ' NORTHERN Ireland Secretary of State James Brokenshire have vow that political chaos in the North will not derail Brexit . with a Stormont election on the card , Brokenshire also warn the party of the danger of run divisive campaign that hamper the power-sharing set-up . a deadline of 5pm today have be set for Sinn Fein to nominate a deputy first minister to replace Martin McGuinness . his resignation be trigger by the Renewable Heat incentive or ' cash for ash ' scandal - a botched eco-scheme set to cost ( Euro ) 570million . Brokenshire say Brexit will not be delay by a potential 25-day Stormont election campaign , polling in late February or early March and a possible three week of negotiation follow that to form a new executive . Brokenshire add : ` ` we still remain absolutely commit to trigger the Article @card@ ( Brexit ) process by the end of March . ' ' and he say a Stormont election be increasingly likely .
the Sun SAYS EU betrayer million of migrant here and British expats abroad now know who to blame for the worrying uncertainty they face about their future : Angela Merkel and the EU . yes , the Brexit vote cause those fear initially . but they could have be quickly allay . vote leave always insist it want migrant legally in Britain to stay with full right . Theresa May would n't guarantee it without get the same assurance for brit abroad - but she have at least push Brussels to agree that speedily , before we serve our Article @card@ notice . so it should . whatever uncertainty Brexit bring , those who have make their life here should not have to fear be kick out . nor should brit abroad . the likelihood of either be tiny - so it be all the more outrageous that Germany ' S Mrs Merkel and EU President Donald Tusk refuse to strike such a deal . they be do so solely to make a political point about Brexit and try to strongarm Britain into trigger Article @card@ before we be ready . they be use the anxiety of million of family as a weapon . such arrogance , and contempt for ordinary citizen , steadily increase the loathing of the EU across the continent .
we all love Gaybo . he ' s [ ... ] ; 1RM Saturday , October @card@ , @card@ ... ... ... ... ... @card@ Rebecca Barker Rebecca.Barker @ the-sun.ie have a penchant for bad hombre . ay , caramba ! lWE all love Gaybo . he ' S a national treasure after all . but sometimes , just sometimes , he come out with some mad stuff . this week , the legendary broadcaster reveal he think Ireland should leave Europe if Brexit go ahead . the 82-year-old former late late show presenter say : ` ` when I first start to give my anti-EU feeling , ten or at least five year ago , I be write off as a noodlehead . ` ` it be hearten to realise that at least half of the population of the country now agree with me and certainly over half of the population of the UK agree with me . so there you be . ' ' Gaybo ' s sweeping statement on an Irish Brexit irk me no end . it ' S all very well for a wealthy octogenarian such as Gaybo - who have live his life to the full and with privilege most of us can only dream of - to slam the EU . but by condone an Irish Brexit , he be condemn generation of our young people to a life of restricted work , travel or study in Europe . the EU be a collective , it ' S progressive , and it ' S an effective advocate for social change . Ireland ' s power on the world stage to help further global peace and democracy be enhance not diminish by be part of the collective . I ' m proud to be in the EU and I , like most Irish people , have no desire to go back to Ireland ' s so-called ` ` good old day ' ' .
dismay ; Tory in BREXIT BUST-UP ; PM rap Davis for say UK may quit single market BREXIT Secretary David Davis have be slap down by Theresa May for risk a Cabinet row on whether to ditch the EU ' s single market . in his first commons outing in the post on Monday , the veteran eurosceptic say Britain be likely to opt out of the free trade area . he add it be ` ` very improbable ' ' we would remain in because it would mean ` ` give up control of our border ' ' . but the Sun have be tell it anger Cabinet minister who campaign for a Remain vote , lead by the Chancellor , Philip Hammond . it also cut across Mrs May ' s Brexit negotiation plan which be to keep all option open . No10 consider Mr Davis ' S intervention be so serious the PM be tell on her RAF jet fly back from the G20 summit in China . her official spokeswoman distance Mrs May , leave , from Mr Davis yesterday , say he be ` ` set out his opinion ' ' , not the government ' S . she add : ` ` it ' S not always the right approach to put all your card on the table . ' ' the episode reveal just how high tension be between Cabinet minister who have widely differ view on what Britain ' S future EU relationship should be . Mr Hammond have call lose access to the single market ` ` catastrophic ' ' for the UK ' S economy . the Brexit camp be lead by Davis along with Liam Fox and Boris Johnson . a survey by Lord Ashcroft on Monday reveal brit want to stay in the single market after Brexit by a large majority .
brit Go BREX Mad in High Street SPREE A POST-Brexit vote bounce see high street sale surge by @card@ per cent last month . the huge year-on-year rise stun City expert . one say yesterday : ` ` Briton react to the Brexit vote with a shopping spree . ' ' another joke : ` ` what Brexit ? ' ' spend last month be up @card@ per cent compare with June , official figure reveal . expert have forecast a paltry @card@ per cent rise . the heatwave spur people out to the shop , and foreign visitor also take advantage of the weak pound . jewellery and watch sale see their big yearly jump since @card@ as they rocket by @card@ per cent . Pre-referendum figure for June show a @card@ per cent month-on-month fall . Neil Wilson of ETX Capital say : ` ` there be no stop the British shopper . ` ` it signal consumer be not rein in their spending in the wake of the Brexit vote . ` ` Warm weather and a deluge of tourist draw by the cheap pound no doubt play their part . but this be clearly a very positive sign for the UK economy . ' ' price fall @card@ per compare with June , and be two per cent less than a year ago . Laith Khalaf , of Hargreaves Lansdown , say : ` ` consumer show the referendum be n't go to damage their spending habit , for the moment at least . ' ' B & Q ' S sale have rise @card@ per cent in the past three month , owner Kingfisher say .
£10bn Brexit windfall can help boost all our plan ; the Sunday Issue Tory VETERAN ON Benefits of Speedy WITHDRAWAL From EU PROSPERITY , not austerity , be what we want now . Theresa May ' s agenda to promote good life for the many be exciting . we need more and better-paid job in many part of the UK . we need more road and railway line and more fast broadband to link our city and rural area in to global opportunity . we need cheap energy to power industrial revival and take people out of fuel poverty . we need more affordable home for people to buy as we rekindle an ownership revolution . ` ` Everyone an owner ' ' be a crucial part of create a more united and prosperous UK . we wish to move away from a world of ` ` have yacht and have not ' ' to a world where own a car and a home of your own be achievable for the many . it be important that Brexit do not hang over us allow critic to dwell on uncertainty and risk . all the time we delay , it remind us of the division the referendum debate cause , set the well-off and privileged , along with Scotland , against the rest of England and Wales . Theresa May be right not to want Brexit to dominate or define her Premiership . send a clear , early signal on Brexit reduce the risk from business uncertainty and speed the benefit gain from exit . far from be an irrelevance or diversion from her central task , Brexit be part of create the right condition for success . Theresa May ' s ambitious plan for the UK need more money to be spend . we have to move on from austerity now the deficit be under good control . stop our large financial contribution to the EU be the easy way of afford a domestic boost to the economy . with the money we save we can hire more nurse and doctor to relieve our NHS . we can promote more affordable housing , cut domestic fuel bill by remove VAT and pay enough to ensure a smooth transition to the new Universal Credit benefit . conservative do not want to cut disability benefit or short-change those seek work in need of financial help . with our £10billion a year back , we do n't have to make these unpopular cut . much of what need doing require good competent government , not more legislation . benefit reform remain a massive task but the crucial legislation be pass . build more road and railway require harness public and private sector for large project and make decision , not more law . the government will be judge by some on how it solve the need for more London airport capacity and how it progress HS2 and Trident . decision will soon be forthcoming , though the result will not be see this decade . more important for our prospect for the next five year will be a whole host of small and quick project to remove road and rail congestion . we must improve current network and service and find extra capacity to reduce the overcrowding we be now experience . we need to build a new generation of gas-fired power station for more reliable and affordable electricity . the government be right to review whether to build a new nuclear power plant at Hinkley Point . but we need either that or the equivalent reliable electricity capacity to keep the light on . there may be a good answer with cheap power . the single most important thing the government could do to reunite our country and progress its agenda of good opportunity and life chance for all be to hit its immigration target . that mean early Brexit to take back control of our border . it need a fair immigration system for the whole world , no longer give unlimited access only to Europeans . for business and education we need to ensure access for student and people with the skill we need . to ease shortage of home , downward pressure on wage and to relieve pressure on hospital and school place we do need to control number well . some say Theresa May ' S agenda be too ambitious give a small Conservative majority and the complexity they see in Brexit . I be all for some ambition , especially when that ambition be gear to improve the life and income of the many . success will come from realise Brexit be central to success and easy to bring about than many so-called expert want you to believe . there be too many highly pay lawyer and consultant who want to make a meal of it . it be , in the end , very simple . we take back control of our border , our money and our law by a very short Act of Parliament . we talk to the rest of the EU under their Article @card@ about what barrier and tariff they want to impose , if any , on their very lucrative trade with us . if they want to self-harm , we trade under global rule with them just like the US and China do . I suspect they will actually want to keep their more favourable access to our market . Let ' s get on with an agenda that bring the country together , spend the EU contribution to help us do so . let us create prosperity for the many , with the UK open for business with the world . Theresa too ambitious ? I ' m all for some ambition
